* 1828569
* MRI: Development of a Scanning 4-Probe Microscope for Discovery and Characterization of Quantum Materials and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Philip Kim, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,073,408.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge in quantum technology
development is to understand the link between the atomic-scale building blocks
or "quanta" of materials (the charges and spins of electrons) and the motion of
these building blocks that give a device its function. This project supports
development of a novel 4-probe microscope to address this challenge. The new
microscope independently scans four switchable probes across a material or
device: individual probes can image static atoms, charges, and spins, while two
or more probes together can detect the motion of these charges and spins from
10s of nanometers to 100s of micrometers in length. The microscope also operates
in a high magnetic field and with samples cooled to liquid helium temperature -
thus allowing access to a new regime of quantum phenomena. Projects enabled by
this microscope include screening of new inhomogeneous materials, mapping the
flow of electrons around single atom defects, developing nanostructured
materials such as braided polymer cables, assembling complex sensors from
individual atoms, and searching for emergent particles that can become the
building blocks of new technologies. The microscope development is carried out
in collaboration between Harvard and a small company; graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers are trained through the microscope development process
and later, in pursuing the launch of a commercial product. The microscope is
housed in Harvard's Center for Nanoscale Systems, a scientific nexus for many
Northeast colleges, universities, and industries. The microscope's dedicated
staff provides technical education to an intellectually and demographically
diverse cadre of users, and in turn serves as a point of connection and
inspiration for cross-disciplinary ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation grant supports
development of a compact and versatile scanning 4-probe microscope (S4PM), to
facilitate the discovery and fabrication of novel quantum materials and devices.
The S4PM meets a critical need to understand the relationship between the static
atomic structure and electronic wave functions of a material at the sub-Angstrom
scale, and the electrical and magnetic transport properties across 10s of
nanometers to 100s of microns that lead to device functionality. The S4PM
employs a novel rotary motion design that reduces instrument size and allows
operation at about 1 Kelvin, up to 5 Tesla of magnetic field, and 10s of
nanometer transport resolution. The S4PM allows flexible in-situ exchange of a
wide variety of complementary probes including scanning tunneling microscopy,
atomic force microscopy, scanning gate, and scanning diamond nitrogen-vacancy.
Research projects enabled by this S4PM include screening the transport
properties of inhomogeneous new materials, mapping electron and spin flow around
single atom defects and constrictions, developing nanostructured materials such
as braided polymer Litz cables, assembling atomic-scale sensors such as a very
small superconducting quantum interference device, and searching for emergent
particles such as Majorana fermions and magnetic
monopoles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.