* 1828470
* MRI: Development of a Wide-Field Infrared Camera for Robotic Surveys of the Dynamic Astronomical Sky
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Mansi Kasliwal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,169,495.00

The US astronomical community has embarked on a systematic effort to monitor the
dynamic sky, leveraging advances in robotic telescope operation, remote-imaging
sensors, large-scale computing and machine learning to find, classify, and
unveil transient cosmic sources. Numerous surveys already operate at visible
wavelengths, but the high cost of conventional sensors has discouraged similar
efforts in the infrared (IR), despite strong scientific motivation. Advances in
material growth driven by the defense and surveillance markets have yielded
lower-cost IR sensors of the semiconductor InGaAs, with sufficiently low noise
to detect faint astronomical sources. The Wide-field Infrared Transient Explorer
(WINTER) will mosaic six High Definition format InGaAs detectors to produce the
world's widest-area IR camera and conduct a deep robotic survey of the dynamic
infrared sky. In addition to its primary science mission, studying how the
heaviest elements of the periodic table are synthesized in colliding neutron
stars identified via gravitational waves, WINTER will devote observing time to
support undergraduate research and laboratory education at the intersection of
Big Data and the physical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WINTER is an infrared
camera with a 1.2 x 1.0 degree field of view that will be installed on a
dedicated 1-meter robotic telescope at Palomar Observatory. A simple prototype
shows that thermo-electrically cooled InGaAs behind an ambient temperature
optical train yields broadband images (at 0.9-1.7 microns) limited by shot noise
from the sky, rather than sensor noise. This removes the requirement for
cryogenic optics and vacuum cryostats, greatly reducing system cost and
complexity relative to traditional IR imagers with HgCdTe sensors. During each
year of a 5-year baseline survey, WINTER will monitor the entire Northern sky to
a depth of J=19.2 (single visit), or J=20 (combined), and release calibrated
images and transient alerts to the public. WINTER is sensitive to emission from
the r-process enhanced ejecta of kilonovae over the full horizon of Advanced
LIGO, and will autonomously interrupt its sky survey to search for the isotropic
infrared counterparts of gravitational-wave events. WINTER's IR capability is
uniquely sensitive to emission from both binary neutron star mergers and neutron
star-black hole mergers independent of viewing angle, opacity, mass ratio and
remnant lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.