* 1828332
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Instrument for a Multi-User Imaging Facility
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Maria Tomassone, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 399,969.00

This project acquires a high-resolution scanner that can obtain detailed 3D
images at the micron or sub-micron level of a broad range of samples (ranging
from biological specimens to biomaterials to 3D printed objects to soil samples)
without destroying or altering the sample. This investment supports some
research communities in natural and biological structures, and advanced multi-
user research in several departments. Projects are being carried out with the
instrument in the areas of biology, chemistry, geology and cybersecurity for 3D
manufacturing. The resources will be shared by researchers from the university
and local small biotech and pharmaceutical industries.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
system replaces a 12-year-old micro Computational Tomography (micro-CT) unit,
which will be relocated to a new facility on the Newark campus of the
university. Investigators from the campus have been using the facility, but are
hindered by the current location in Piscataway, requiring traveling to and from
the facility for the projects that do not require the higher resolution, lower
scanning times, and temperature controlled scanning conditions associated with
the nano-CT to be acquired. The investigators are thus leveraging the purchase
of a SkyScan 1272 nano-CT for Piscataway researchers that require its
capabilities to extend micro-CT imaging resources to the Newark campus. This
multi-user imaging facility will be managed by full-time staff having multimodal
imaging expertise. The nano-CT system will become one of five complementary
imaging modalities available at Rutgers University mult-iuser Molecular Imaging
Center (RUMIC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.