* 1828300
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) for Soft Materials for the Advanced Microscopy and Imaging Center (AMIC)
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Barry Bruce, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 439,938.00

An award is made to the University of Tennessee Knoxville to support the
acquisition of a transmission electron microscope (TEM) for the Advanced
Microscopy and Imaging Center. The new TEM will be equipped for dual-axis
electron tomography, which creates an unprecedented view of the three-
dimensional cellular organization. The system will also be equipped with a high-
resolution camera to provide a shared platform for diverse innovative projects
that depend on advanced imaging capabilities. Most of the research on this
instrument will be carried out by graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
who will gain expertise in modern techniques of high-resolution imaging. The new
system will also be the core instrument for advanced imaging course, where
students receive research training with significant hands-on time on the TEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument will support research projects aimed at
deciphering the formation of cell-cell connections in plants, understanding the
interactions between bacteria and their animal or plant hosts, and how
chromosomes move during different parts of the cell cycle. Other projects will
investigate the molecular mechanism of protein import into different cell
organelles, or analyze the morphology and assembly of viruses. Researchers in
the Chemistry Department will use the instrument to study the nanostructure of
advanced materials with a wide range of potential applications. Results from
these studies will be published in peer-reviewed scientific journals, presented
at scientific meetings, and used in public outreach or education
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.