* 1828078
* MRI: Acquisition of a Single Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer for Structure Determination and Diffuse Scattering on Small Molecules, Macromolecules, and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Kevin Shaughnessy, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 339,587.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Elizabeth Papish from University of
Alabama Tuscaloosa and colleagues Kevin Shaughnessy, Paul Rupar, Jack Dunkle and
Jared Allred have acquired a dual source single crystal diffractometer equipped
with a high resolution detector. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a
molecule, including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information
about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules.
The studies described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of graduate and
undergraduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution.
Students are involved in chemical and protein research. The resource is also
utilized by several neighboring primarily undergraduate institutions and
historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award of the diffractometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels. It especially impacts the characterization of solid materials and new
polymers to harness solar energy and studies of diffuse X-ray scattering to
determine how local changes in structure lead to macroscopic properties. The
instrumentation is also used for studies following the syntheses of monodisperse
small nanomolecules and the design of catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction and
cross-coupling. The diffractometer benefits studies of biological macromolecules
to understand gene expression and antibiotic
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.