* 1828609
* MRI Consortium: Development of Instrumentation for the PICO-500 Bubble Chamber
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Ilan Levine, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 770,521.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. A leading hypothesis is that it is comprised
of Weakly Interacting Massive Particles, or WIMPs, that were produced moments
after the Big Bang. If WIMPs are the dark matter, then their presence in our
galaxy may be detectable via scattering from atomic nuclei in detectors located
deep underground to help reject backgrounds due to cosmic rays. PICO, a merger
of the PICASSO and COUPP collaborations, employs room-temperature super-heated
liquids to search for dark matter particle candidates. Previous efforts by PICO
at SNOLAB have resulted in a world-leading sensitivity to spin-dependent WIMP-
proton couplings. Recent progress in acoustic discrimination against alpha
particles and particulate-induced backgrounds will enable the next-generation of
PICO bubble chambers to also lead in sensitivity to spin-independent couplings
in the WIMP mass range below 10 GeV/c^2. The group has aided the broader
scientific community by fabricating specially designed transducers. Several
astrophysics experiments are now using acoustic particle identification. The
group has also been working with a luthier to develop techniques to measure wood
properties and design jazz arch top guitars with predictable sound. A liquid
xenon bubble chamber experiment was outfitted with cryogenic-safe transducers to
correlate scintillation light with bubble images. The PSU group has developed
novel radiopure piezoceramics with properties suggesting ten times greater
sensitivity than the best current PZT formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award provides funds to enable the Indiana University South Bend (IUSB), North
Eastern Illinois University (NEIU), and Penn State groups to develop hardware
and software components of the ton-scale PICO-500 bubble chamber which will be
the most sensitive detector for a wide variety of dark matter particle
candidates and will serve over 20 research groups around the world. PICO uses
superheated liquids to search for the tiny energy depositions left by nuclei
recoiling due to collisions with dark matter. These depositions cause the liquid
to explosively transform into gas. The IUSB group has designed and fabricated
all of the acoustic transducers for the previous detectors. In 2008 the group
discovered that it is possible to differentiate the sounds of bubbles created by
nuclear recoils from those initiated by alpha decay (the main background). The
NEIU team has worked on improving the control and display software necessary for
operating the detector. The PSU team has been responsible for fabricating
piezoelectric ceramics from radiopure oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.