* 1828993
* NRT: NeuroTech - Bringing Technology to Neuroscience
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Eduardo Chichilnisky, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,000,000.00

Deciphering how the brain works could have untold impacts on medicine,
technology, commerce, and our understanding of ourselves. For example, advances
in neurotechnology could lead to brain-machine interfaces to overcome sensory
impairments and loss of movement due to neurodegenerative disease. Many of the
most important advances in neuroscience have required interaction with technical
fields such as physics, electrical and chemical engineering, bioengineering,
statistics, and computer science, and this will increasingly be the case as the
field advances. However, the path for top students from these disciplines to
enter the field of neuroscience has always been challenging because they lack
the appropriate background and awareness of key questions and technological
limitations in the field. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
(NRT) award to Stanford University will accelerate fundamental developments in
neuroscience by attracting promising young talent from these technical
disciplines to neuroscience and training them to be leaders in the field. The
program will allow students to apply technological developments in diverse
fields to the most important problems in neuroscience today and train a new
generation of neuroscientists who will bring these technologies to fruition in
academia, medicine, and the private sector. The project anticipates training
thirty (30) PhD students, including twelve (12) funded trainees, from physics,
electrical and chemical engineering, bioengineering, materials science, computer
science, and other technical fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This traineeship
program consists of a novel integrated curriculum of coursework, internship and
training experiences, and outreach to achieve its goals. The program will
emphasize training for acquiring and analyzing vast data sets, enabling an
understanding of nervous system circuitry at a scale that was unimaginable just
a few years ago, and connecting the novel data to Stanford's strength in theory,
inference from large data sets, and computational modeling. The program will
introduce a rigorous multi-year curriculum for trainees, building on their home-
discipline training and allowing them to collaborate with each other and with
the members of the Neurosciences PhD program. Training will leverage the highly
successful Stanford ADVANCE program that supports new PhD students with a
special summer program prior to the start of graduate training, and build on it
with several approaches customized to this program. The program will be
specifically designed to optimize trainee preparation for a career in academia
or in a technology industry setting, utilizing internship placements with both
startups and established corporations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.