* 1828521
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Performance Big Data Analysis Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Ayman El-Baz, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 09/30/2020
* USD 478,727.00

This project from the University of Louisville Research Foundation will support
acquisition of a Big Data Analysis Platform (BDAP) with high performance data
storage, networking, and processing capabilities. The platform will support
research in multimedia, biomedicine, metagenomics, and health data analysis. In
addition, the platform will allow general research on efficient management and
analysis of big data. Moreover, strengthening scientific research across the
university, the researchers will engage with K-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance the state-of-the-art in
big data management and analysis by enabling five research thrusts that will use
the BDAP equipment purchased by this award. First, BDAP will provide improvement
over existing big data management techniques by introducing self-optimizing and
energy efficient big data platforms through dynamic data placement, retrieval,
and reorganization algorithms, as well as enabling efficient big data analysis
through novel heterogeneous and multi-source data clustering algorithms. Second,
BDAP will allow experimentation with novel algorithms guided by deep neural
networks to analyze big multimedia data. Third, BDAP will enable experimentation
with new paradigms for integrating big biomedical data from multiple sources
including image, genomic, quantitative, biological, and observational data.
Fourth, BDAP will enable testing of techniques to generate, store, analyze and
integrate large microbiome, health and socioeconomic data sets to determine the
causal relationship between specific microbial profiles and human health via
bioinformatics and data mining approaches. Finally, the project will contribute
to the development of new statistical methods for analyzing high dimensional
data for epigenetic, pharmacogenomics, and genome association studies. This in-
house instrument enables energy consumption measurements and permanent storage
for sensitive data sets of petabyte-range. While advancing engineering
knowledge, the instrumentation supports computational, statistical, and
bioengineering research, that applies engineering principles to several problems
in biology and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.