* 1828744
* MRI: Acquisition of a Magnetic Property Measurement System (MPMS) To Support Research and Education in the State of New Mexico
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Martin Kirk, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 276,436.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs as well as the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Professor Martin Kirk from
University of New Mexico and colleagues Victor Acosta, Daniel Feezell, Francesca
Cavallo and Abdelghani Laraoui have acquired a magnetic property measurement
system (MPMS.) The instrument, also known as a magnetometer, is a very sensitive
device to measure magnetic fields. It is used to measure the magnetic properties
of molecules, molecule-based materials, solid state materials and devices. These
magnetic properties are important in many applications. For example, the
instrument is ideally suited for characterizing background impurity applications
in transistors. This will help improve the performance of higher power and
higher frequency transistors. The instrument serves as a resource for the New
Mexico region beyond UNM's campus. Faculty at four additional Hispanic serving
institutions use the instrument (Western New Mexico University, New Mexico Tech,
New Mexico Highlands, and New Mexico State University). Undergraduate and
graduate research students receive training on this state-of-the-art
instrument.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The award is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. Research is conducted of cell-bound biomarkers with
magnetic nanoparticles to enable their detection non-invasively using
ultrasensitive diamond magnetic microscopy. Studies are underway to quantify
impurity concentrations and differential resistance in wide-band-gap vertical
power transistors, vertical-cavity surface-emitting lasers, and light-emitting
diodes. Investigations are conducted of Groups III-V materials for lasers,
detectors, and transistors, and carrying out magnetic and transport studies for
paramagnetic sensors and superconducting electronics. Nanoscale probing of
condensed matter physics phenomena with magnetometry based on nitrogen-vacancy
centers in diamond is also carried out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.