* 1828167
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Soil Greenhouse Gas Flux Measurement System to Support Research in Coastal Ecology and Sustainable Agriculture
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Alex Chow, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2022
* USD 230,597.00

An award is made to Clemson University to support the acquisition of a soil
greenhouse gas flux measurement system. This system will fill needs for rapid,
accurate, in-situ measures of important greenhouse gas concentrations and
fluxes. The instrument measures concentrations and soil efflux of water vapor,
carbon dioxide, ammonia, and the especially potent greenhouse gases methane and
nitrous oxide. Based at Clemson University's Baruch Institute of Coastal Ecology
and Forest Science, the system will be deployed in field experiments designed to
elucidate the role of sea level rise on coastal wetland ecosystem functioning
and potential for feedbacks to climate. It also will be deployed at agricultural
research stations across South Carolina to augment research on air and water
pollution, fertilizer loss, and sustainable agriculture. This system will allow
researchers to generate datasets and science with greatly improved accuracy,
applicability, and scalability. The system will be used in projects that include
undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers across a
diverse team of researchers including women, first-generation college graduates,
and underrepresented minorities in science. The instrument will also be used in
new graduate classes that cover wetland ecology, coastal ecology, and
biogeochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane and nitrous oxide are powerful
greenhouse gases that exert a significant radiative forcing on Earth's climate.
Wetlands and agricultural systems are major sources globally, but the mechanisms
driving their sources, sinks, and sensitivity to environmental drivers are
poorly understood. This gap can be attributed largely to the difficulty in
measuring these trace gases at the very low concentrations at which they occur
in the environment and by barriers to sampling without artifacts. The
acquisition of this soil gas flux measurement system will overcome these
obstacles by providing excellent sensitivity and time resolution in a field
deployable configuration. An array of multiplexed, automated soil flux chambers
will allow for replicate measures of treatments in situ, thus enhancing
statistical rigor and the strength of conclusions. Initial use of the system
will be to augment ongoing, funded projects that assess the effects of saltwater
intrusion on coastal forested wetlands, the rates and types of nitrogen losses
from agricultural systems, the effects of restoring impounded wetlands and old
rice fields on greenhouse gas emissions, and life cycle analysis of switchgrass
production for biofuels. Data and analyses from these studies will be published
in peer-reviewed scientific journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used
in both educational and public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.