* 1828489
* Disorder and dynamics in quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Thomas Vojta, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 354,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research and education into the quantum properties of materials at
low temperatures. Close to the absolute zero of temperature, the behavior of
materials is usually governed by quantum mechanics. The goal of this project is
to explore how the quantum state of a material is affected by impurities, i.e.
defects and other types of imperfections that can never be completely avoided in
either natural or man-made materials. Specifically, the research aims at
understanding how impurities and defects influence the interplay and/or
competition between different quantum phases of matter, that is, different types
of quantum states such as superconductivity and magnetism, as well as the
transformations, called quantum phase transitions, between these different
phases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the activities will introduce
undergraduate and graduate students as well as early-career scientists to
cutting-edge materials research, improve computational education and research
infrastructure via a publicly accessible web page with instructions on how to
build and maintain a computer cluster for scientific calculations, and
communicate the excitement of scientific discovery by means of yearly "Nobel
Prize Colloquia" that provide elementary introductions into the science behind
the prizes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education into the properties of quantum materials at low
temperatures. The scientific objectives are: i) to understand the dynamics of
systems close to disordered quantum phase transitions, and ii) to explore the
effects of randomness on materials featuring complex intertwined
orders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of disordered quantum many-particle
systems is currently attracting enormous attention with questions ranging from
the very foundations of statistical physics all the way to transport experiments
in novel quantum materials and devices. This project studies the real-time
dynamics and transport properties close to disordered quantum phase transitions,
paying particular attention to collective modes and their localization and
scaling properties. Initially, the focus will be on the Mott glass and Bose
glass phases of disordered bosons, while later the research will broaden to
infinite-randomness phases and transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
materials often feature several different kinds of orders that appear to be
intertwined over large regions of their complex phase diagrams. Impurities and
defects couple differently to different types of order, they can therefore
partially melt a complex order parameter and stabilize novel phases of matter.
This project studies systematically the effects of randomness on the phase
diagram and the phase transitions in such systems. Examples include the
nematicity arising from spin- and charge-density-wave orders as well as the
intertwining of magnetic and ferroelectric orders in
hexaferrites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator employs a
combination of analytical and computational methods to perform this research
including renormalization group calculations, percolation theory, large-scale
Monte-Carlo simulations, exact diagonalization, and quantum mean-field
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the activities will impart broader
impacts on society by i) training students and early-career scientists, ii)
communicating the excitement of scientific discovery to diverse audiences, and
iii) improving the computational research and education infrastructure at the
PI's institution and beyond via a publicly accessible web page with instructions
on how to build and maintain a computer cluster for scientific
calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.