* 1828544
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Speed 3D Velocimetry System to Study Complex Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Joseph Atkinson, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 413,082.00

This project will advance our understanding of the spread of fires, the design
of drones, the treatment of aneurysms, the development of wind turbines and
engines, designs for buildings in high winds, the dispersion of pollutants, and
management of waterway ecosystems. A common feature of these disparate topics is
their strong dependence on complex, three-dimensional fluid flows that change
quickly in time. For example, the formation and rupture of aneurysms depends on
stresses created by the unsteady swirling blood flow inside arteries. Similarly,
the spread of atmospheric pollution is governed by how turbulence interacts with
the pollutant particles. The next breakthroughs in these fields require
measurements that can capture these 3D flows with high resolution in time and
space, made possible with the acquired High-Speed 3D Velocimetry System. This
equipment will be a shared resource for faculty and students, and will greatly
improve the quality of research in a wide array of disciplines. Moreover, this
exciting technology will be used to engage underrepresented students directly in
hands-on research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new instrumentation
will provide the capability for data collection that will support a deeper
understanding of the time-varying, often multi-phase flows in the situations
described above by measuring the unsteady 3D velocity and particle dynamics. The
system uses lasers to illuminate tracer particles placed in or already present
in a flow, then the 3D velocity is determined from multiple high-speed cameras
recording images of the particles from different viewpoints. These data will
provide insights on swirling flows, turbulence-particle interactions, pressure
fields, and fluid forces, revealing the underlying physics governing each
problem. Acquiring data, such as the unsteady pressure, will allow the stresses
to be connected to the flow behavior, yielding greatly-improved predictive
models for a wide variety of problems, including developing the next generation
of drone wings and wind turbine blades, and understanding how fish use schooling
to navigate turbulent flow. The system will also substantially advance our
knowledge of how sediment particles in rivers affect flow turbulence to better
predict erosion and deposition. Further, the instrumentation will be used to
capture 3D images of flames in turbulent combustion, measure combustion-gas
emissions via an ultraviolet lens and filters, and infer temperature from flame
color and intensity, enabling breakthroughs in efficiency and sustainability. In
these ways, the new high-speed measurement system will engage researchers from a
range of disciplines and have a transformative impact on a number of important
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.