* 1828299
* MRI: Development of a next-generation MALDI ion mobility mass spectrometry platform for molecular imaging and training
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Spraggins, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,426,379.00

This proposal is to develop an "advanced molecular microscope" for visualizing
chemically complex and diverse substrates, including biological tissues and
materials (e.g., polymeric drug delivery systems). This instrument will provide
revolutionary capabilities for the visualization of biological molecules,
dramatically expanding our understanding of cellular systems. The proposed
instrument combines state-of-the-art laser optics and mass spectrometric
analysis into a single molecular imaging platform. This instrument will enable
ultra-high spatial resolution imaging of thousands of biomolecules virtually at
the same time. Development and assessment of the instrument will be done in
collaboration with internationally recognized scientists whose projects were
specifically chosen based on their critical need for the proposed technologies.
The challenges raised by each project will drive further technology development.
These projects span numerous application areas, including engineered drug
delivery systems, natural product discovery and identification, fundamental
research in life science, and plant metabolism and biofuels. This next-
generation molecular imaging platform will be the foundational instrument of
tomorrow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument to be developed is a state-of-
the-art ultra-high spatial resolution matrix assisted laser
desorption/ionization (MALDI) trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS)
orthogonal quadrupole time-of-flight (TOF) molecular imaging platform. MALDI
imaging mass spectrometry combines the sensitivity and molecular specificity of
mass spectrometry with the spatial fidelity of classical microscopy. Imaging MS
is label-free, untargeted (concurrently detects thousands of chemically diverse
molecular species), sensitive (femtomole limits-of-detection), and specific
(discriminates molecules that differ by &lt;0.001 Da). Commercial imaging mass
spectrometry platforms are adaptations of instruments built for other purposes
and thus offer only limited imaging capabilities, lacking the performance to
solve in-depth challenges that complex chemical systems present. The proposed
novel MALDI timsTOF molecular imaging system will provide an unprecedented
combination of ultra-high spatial resolution imaging capability (1 micrometer
laser beam diameter), high-performance mass analysis (accuracy: &lt;2 ppm,
resolving power: &gt;50,000), high resolving power ion-mobility separations
(resolving power: &gt;150-200), and highly multiplexed fragmentation from a
single pixel (&gt;200 MS/MS events/s). This instrument will be the cornerstone
molecular imaging platform of the Vanderbilt University Mass Spectrometry
Research Center. The operational instrument will address the critical research
needs of Vanderbilt University as well as the regional, national and
international scientific communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.