* 1828581
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectrometer for Marine Biogeochemical Research
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Collin Ward, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2020
* USD 620,115.00

Ocean productivity, the health of our planet, and many of the resources
foundational to our modern society, are in large part by-products by how very
tiny, single celled microbes manufacture and degrade organic compounds in the
ocean. Each day ocean microbes synthesize enormous quantities of proteins,
sugars, and fats. In doing so, they manufacture a large share of the oxygen we
breathe, they remove harmful carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, and they serve
as food for many commercially important species of marine fish and crustaceans.
Microbes "clean" seawater of pollutants, and serve as the base of marine
ecosystems. However, marine microbes live a very competitive environment. The
nutrients that microbes need to grow and thrive are extremely scarce, and
nutrient cycling is extraordinarily efficient. Even small disturbances in
microbial nutrient cycles can have major consequences; oxygen in seawater can
disappear, and ecosystems can collapse. To understand how microbial cycles
operate, we need to identify and track organic compounds and nutrients that are
key to sustaining microbial life. Here we request funds to refurbish and
modernize a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer for use in a broad
suite of marine biogeochemical studies designed to understand microbial nutrient
cycles. The instrument will allow a number of scientists, students and staff at
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) to identify key organic nutrient
compounds that microbes use to extract nutrients from seawater, fend off
predation, and shield themselves from harmful UV radiation. The instrument will
also be critical to training the next generation of marine scientists through
the WHOI postdoctoral and summer student fellowship programs, and the WHOI/MIT
Joint Graduate Program in ocean sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron and
phosphorus are two nutrients that limit and shape marine microbial communities
across large tracts of the ocean. The chemical forms of marine iron and
phosphorus are largely unknown, and over the next few years, we propose use the
NMR spectroscopy to identify iron, copper, cobalt, and phosphorus containing
organic compounds. Initial results have allowed us to show that the degradation
of organic phosphonates is a source of atmospheric methane and ethylene, and
that siderophores, compounds synthesized by marine microbes to extract iron from
the environment, are actively produced in regions of the ocean where iron is
scarce. We will continue this work through the US GEOTRACES program, which will
measure trace metal and nutrient abundances across the Pacific Ocean from Alaska
to Tahiti. Many organic compounds and organic nutrients are supplied by dust and
river discharge into ocean margins. Determining the chemical identity of
terrestrial organic matter entering the ocean, and its availability to marine
microbial communities is key to understanding microbial nutrient cycles. A
second focus of our research over the next few years will be in using enhanced
NMR techniques to better characterize the nature and transformations of
terrestrial organic matter as it enters the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.