* 1828902
* NRT-INFEWS: Interdisciplinary Training, Education and Research for Food-Energy-Water Systems (InTERFEWS) in Semi-Arid Regions
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Stephanie Malin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,994,781.00

As the population continues to grow and demands for resources increase,
understanding the nexus of Food-Energy-Water (FEW) systems is vital to ensure
the reliability and equity of access to crucial resources. FEW systems are
tightly intertwined and involve complex tradeoffs that are not well understood.
Characterizing the demands for and tradeoffs amongst FEW resources is
particularly challenging in semi-arid regions, where increasing population
trends are likely to continue, and water shortage poses risks to agriculture and
energy industries. To develop appropriate technologies and to enhance FEW system
management, the next generation of analysts and researchers must be trained to
develop a system-level understanding of FEW issues. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Colorado State University will
address this need by undertaking research and training focused on FEW systems in
semi-arid regions. The project will prepare a diverse cohort of graduate
students with the transdisciplinary skills and knowledge necessary to make
meaningful contributions to the complex and changing interactions in FEW
systems. The project anticipates training thirty-four (34) PhD students,
including sixteen (16) funded trainees. To foster interdisciplinary
interactions, trainees will come from a broad range of disciplines including
engineering, economics, natural resource sciences, and
sociology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Interdisciplinary Training, Education and
Research in Food-Energy-Water Systems (InTERFEWS) project addresses issues in
science, technology, engineering, and math education, such as lack of capacity
to provide students with skills to solve complex problems and work across
disciplines. To develop these skills, InTERFEWS will use the Driver-Pressure-
State-Impact-Response (DPSIR) framework as a conceptual guide for assessing FEW
system problems and to underpin intentional integration of research, education,
and training activities. The DPSIR framework will provide a platform to promote
interactions across disciplines and provide students with needed skills in
systems-level thinking and problem solving. InTERFEWS includes four main
components: (1) a curriculum that includes three new InTERFEWS courses along
with a set of existing elective courses to specifically address FEW systems
issues; (2) apprenticeships on FEW systems topics organized through partnerships
with industry, government agencies and non-profits; (3) transdisciplinary
problem-solving and communications training; and (4) collaborative research to
foster technological, policy, and institutional innovations. The program will
break down barriers to transdisciplinary education by including physical
sciences, decision-making, big data and analytics, economics, policy, and social
sciences in the curriculum. Results and successful practices will be broadly
disseminated to the education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.