* 1828672
* MRI: Acquisition of a Spark Plasma Sintering System for Functional Ceramics at Rio Grande Valley, Texas
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jianzhi Li, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2021
* USD 229,700.00

With the support from the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI), the
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) acquires a Spark Plasma Sintering
(SPS) System. Compared with conventional consolidation techniques such as solid
state sintering and hot press sintering, SPS employs additional driving forces
such as electromechanical stress and high local temperature gradients. These
additional driving forces enable powder compacts achieving rapid sintering
without grain growth and near theoretical density at lower sintering
temperature. The SPS system is housed at UTRGV and used by faculty and students,
as well as others at the South Texas region. The instrument advances research on
optoelectronic ceramics important for potential uses in scintillators,
thermistors, sensors and spintronics devices, environmental remediation ceramics
for nuclear and chemical wastes, functional blend materials for energy
applications such as petroleum recovery and photovoltaic cells, and metal-glass
composites for prosthetics. UTRGV ranks 2nd in the nation in total Hispanic
enrollment (&gt;89% Hispanic enrollment) at four-year colleges. The exposure of
these students to cutting edge instrumentation facilitates their development as
scientifically literate individuals and contributes to a competitive scientific
workforce. The SPS system is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels. It especially impacts the development of a wide variety of advanced
ceramics from complex metal oxides and other functional materials which possess
broad application potentials such as advanced scintillators for medical
diagnostics, ceramics for nuclear waste encapsulation and thermistor ceramics,
etc. With the acquired SPS system, UTRGV will have the necessary capability to
build a highly competitive materials science and engineering research program,
and ultimately establish a Ph.D. degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV) is undergoing a transition to a
research emerging university that is of significant importance to the
preparation and success of our current STEM students. The award of a Spark
Plasma Sintering (SPS) system further promotes this transition. This acquisition
supports research and student training in Chemistry, Physics, and Materials
Science and Engineering fields. Faculty members from five departments and two
colleges directly use the SPS system for their research in materials science and
engineering. Specifically, the SPS system supports projects to advance
development of nanoceramics, metal-glass blends and other types of
nanocomposites. This acquisition broadens the research scope for all
participants, making it possible to address scientific problems in novel
research areas. The state-of-the-art SPS provides a new approach for advanced
materials fabrication via superfast Joule heating with additional driving forces
compared with conventional consolidation techniques. The instrument strengthens
current and futures courses at UTRGV. It provides unique opportunities for the
cross-disciplinary research, education and training of many undergraduate and
graduate students. The opportunity to participate in the state-of-the-art
research projects motivates UTRGV students from a diverse background to pursue
graduate school (M.S. or PhD degrees). It also serves the outreach activities to
high school students and teachers in South Texas. Finally, this new instrument
allows local companies to have access to an instrument that could solve ceramics
related science and engineering issues while helping to support maintenance of
the instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.