* 1828513
* MRI: Development of a Cloud-Computing Platform for Interferometric Processing
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jonathan Weintroub, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 09/30/2022
* USD 847,071.00

The technique of Very Long Baseline Interferometry (VLBI) links together radio
dishes around the globe to form Earth-sized telescopes. Each telescope in the
array, synchronized by a network of atomic clocks, observes the same cosmic
target at the same moment, recording data onto banks of hard-disk drives.
Currently, these disks are sent to a purpose-built computer cluster for
processing and imaging. But the sensitivity required for the most cutting edge
work in this field has led to recording rates and data volumes that now exceed
the capacity of in-house computing clusters. This project will include a
partnership with Google to develop infrastructure and software that will shift
VLBI processing to the cloud, where enormous virtual machines can be nimbly
configured to process scientific data at speeds that easily keep pace with
advancing recording rates. This project will revolutionize the practice of VLBI,
and provide an extensible means of increasing array bandwidths and spectral
resolution for a broad range of science. At the absolute limits of the VLBI
technique, a millimeter wavelength global array will image nearby supermassive
black holes as part of the Event Horizon Telescope (EHT). This project will also
include educational participation and early career development opportunities in
instrumentation and astronomy research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a scalable, cloud-based computational system for VLBI. This project is
motivated by the computational needs of extending EHT observations to short
wavelengths; however, it will develop a methodology that is broadly applicable
to the current and future needs of VLBI observations. The project will develop a
hardware/software approach in conjunction with commercial partner, Google. This
approach will include a new recording system for VLBI using customized
commercial appliances for the transfer of data from the telescope to the cloud,
and modifications to existing correlator code to make it suitable for execution
on a parallelized, cloud-based platform. This project will contribute to
broadening participation in science through student research opportunities made
in conjunction with the Urban Massachusetts Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation Program and the Akamai Workforce
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.