* 1828571
* NRT-INFEWS: Preparing future leaders: Rural resource resiliency (R3)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* David Steward, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,998,366.00

Rural communities in the United States and across the world are faced with the
challenge of producing food for over 9 billion people by 2050. At the same time,
many of these communities - including those in Western Kansas - are facing
serious challenges that threaten their survival, such as water shortages,
economic pressures, and a population decline. For rural communities to adapt and
thrive in a more uncertain future requires the development of new technologies
and practices to enable sustainable agriculture, which in turn requires leaders
who can think outside the box. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to Kansas State University will prepare students to
become science-based leaders and advocates for resilient rural communities by
combining engineering, economics, and sociological knowledge to meet the needs
of farmers, industry, and society. Students will engage with farmers, government
and industry through interactive sessions and will develop relevant skills
through innovative coursework and teamwork. This comprehensive program
anticipates training fifty (50) master's and doctoral students, including
twenty-five (25) funded trainees, from the colleges of engineering, arts and
sciences, and agriculture, &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A resilient food, energy, and
water system in Western Kansas and other semi-arid regions requires sufficient
capacity to adapt to short-term shocks and long-term adverse conditions (e.g.,
further groundwater depletion, growing competition for water between food and
energy interests, increasing resource demands for fertilizer production). The
interdisciplinary research efforts funded through this project will focus on
resource conservation, recovery, and reuse for sustainable agriculture,
including: (1) innovations for soil, water and microbial systems in the face of
drought, (2) hydrologic science and water conservation systems for efficient
food production, and (3) anaerobic bioreactors to transform animal waste into
usable energy, water, and fertilizer. Engineering innovations alone will not
bring about more resilient rural communities; it is critical that solutions also
address perceptions, barriers, and attitudes among stakeholders to meet their
shorter-term needs while enabling transitions to more resilient system dynamics
over longer time frames. NRT training through this program will create
culturally competent, interdisciplinary problem-solvers through immersive
experiences with producers and industry in Southwest Kansas, policy makers in
the state capital, and interdisciplinary coursework that integrates theory,
practice, and international discussions. In addition, outreach to agricultural
high school teachers will develop trainee leadership skills and trainee success
will be supported by team-based faculty and peer mentoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of bold, new potentially
transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The program is
dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high priority
interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship models that
are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.