* 1828949
* IRES Track II:  International Training to Understand the Relationships of Non-Bilaterian Animals
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Rachel Collin, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2024
* USD 252,954.00

This project will train 24 US graduate students over 3 years in the study of the
biodiversity of invertebrate animals. This project will contribute significantly
to enhancing expertise and developing the next generation of researchers
studying sponges, jellyfish, comb jellies, corals, and sea anemones. These
animals are key to understanding the origin of animals and they also play vital
roles in marine ecosystems. A series of 3 workshops held in Panama will allow
international experts to train these US graduate students and some foreign
students in the methods used to collect, identify, and understand these fragile
organisms. Staging this training at a field station with access to highly
diverse marine habitats will ensure that trainees gain exposure to the greatest
diversity of animals and habitats possible. Trainees will become proficient in
the skills necessary to document biodiversity, and some trainees will be
involved in describing new species. Such skills are vital for providing data for
conservation decisions and for various aspects of biosecurity. The project will
provide follow-up, in-depth international research training for 6 US trainees.
This project will address the current shortage of researchers skilled in
applying taxonomic and systematic methods to sponges, jellyfish, corals, and sea
anemones. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to train the next generation of researchers working on sponges, jellyfish,
comb jellies and corals by exposing them to tropical biodiversity and by
focusing on the methods and approaches that can help resolve the relationships
within and among these groups of animals. Conceptually, this project focuses on
two major challenges in understanding biodiversity: (1) documenting global
biodiversity and (2) determining the relationships within and among animal
groups. Taxonomy, the science of finding, describing and naming organisms, is
vital to all biological research and to understanding and conserving
biodiversity. The on-going effort to survey, inventory, and preserve the ocean's
biological diversity is threatened by a shortage of taxonomic expertise. This
project will train taxonomic experts in these groups who can document
biodiversity, apply novel methods to help resolve the relationships between
these groups, and ultimately understand the origins of animal life. This effort
will also promote conservation of marine animals, which are poorly documented
compared to terrestrial organisms. This project will support three 21-day
workshops in 2019, 2020 and 2021, mixing US and international experts and
trainees at a tropical field station in Panama. These workshops will (1) train
participants in methods for identification; (2) include in-depth lectures and
discussion on information and data relevant to understanding phylogenetic
relationships among the groups; (3) broaden trainee perspectives on each group
by providing hands-on experience with tropical diversity and meaningful
interactions with diverse international colleagues; (4) build lasting
international collaborations to promote US biodiversity research and improve
accessibility to international field locations. Each workshop will follow a
common framework and will share parts of the curriculum common to the 3 groups.
Outstanding trainees will experience a follow-on experience with additional in-
depth training in an international laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.