* 1828038
* MRI: Acquisition of a Tabletop High-Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ratan Dhar, CUNY York College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2021
* USD 170,000.00

Non-Technical Description This Major Research Instrumentation project supports
the acquisition of a tabletop high-resolution scanning electron microscope at
York College of the City University of New York (York College/CUNY). The
acquired scanning electron microscope is used in a wide range of fields
including chemistry, geology, environmental science, and pharmaceutical science;
it enables the training of undergraduate and master's students in the
fundamental principles of scanning electron microscopy, and enhances the
curriculum activities for pre-service teachers by providing them with advanced
skills and curriculum content. The tabletop scanning electron microscope is also
part of a substantial growth plan for a new Master's program at York College and
a key instrument for expanding and improving research and training activities
that are highly beneficial for York College students in the science disciplines.

Technical Description The tabletop high-resolution scanning electron microscope
enables compositional and topographical analysis of metals, nanoparticles,
pharmaceutical materials, and biomaterials. It is used in multidisciplinary
research projects such as 1) elucidation of the crystallization processes of
materials, 2) investigation of metal contamination in aquifers, 3) elucidation
of molecular mechanisms of amyloid formation from mutant peptides, and 4) study
of the anti-inflammatory and pro-inflammatory effects of nanoparticles in their
interactions with biological systems. The instrument can perform at a 1-30 kV
accelerating voltage range; it is equipped with backscatter and secondary
electron detectors, an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer, and a variable
aperture that can provide a similar resolution to some full-size systems. The
low costs of maintenance, the modest infrastructural requirements, and the
excellent ease-of-use make the instrument a convenient and versatile analytical
tool for York College faculty members and other researchers, who mostly rely on
undergraduate students for their research projects.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.