* 1828055
* MRI: Acquisition of Time of Flight-Inductively Coupled Plasma-Mass Spectrometer to support multi-disciplinary research and training in South Carolina and Nationw
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Eric Vejerano, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2023
* USD 635,931.00

This award will permit the acquisition of a time of flight-inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectroscopy (TOF-ICP-MS). In general, ICP-MS is widely used to
analyze metal isotopes in complex matrices after complete digestion into
dissolved form. Although this form of ICP-MS analysis remains commonly used,
alternative sampling approaches that produce transient (as short as 500
microseconds) signals are being adapted extensively, such as single particle and
single cell ICP-MS analysis. Sequential scanning ICP-MS instrumentations are
limited to measuring transient signals of one element only. However, many
materials are composed of multi elements. The TOF-ICP-MS allow: 1) full
simultaneous detection of the entire mass spectrum of elements from Li to U for
every single measurement in less than 50 microseconds; 2) multi-element
determinations in fast transient signals such as single particles and single
cells; 3) improved precision, particularly for measuring isotope ratios; 4)
real-time internal standardization; and 5) untargeted analysis, i.e.,
identifying analytes in a sample without a priori knowledge of analytes in the
sample. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the TOF-ICP-MS will fill a
crucial gap in elemental analytical facilities at the University of South
Carolina by enabling simultaneous, untargeted, multi-element analysis of
transient signals. The acquisition of TOF-ICP-MS will enhance on-going
fundamental studies and support diverse applications including: 1)
characterization of natural nanoparticles (NNPs) to better understand their
properties, environmental behaviors/functions, and environmental and human
health implications; 2) characterization of engineered (ENPs) to underpin
development of new ENPs and assess environmental ENP exposure for potential
environmental and human health implications; 3) characterization of incidental
nanoparticles (INPs) to understand the fate and behavior of metals in aerosols
emitted during combustion and thermal processing of wastes and their impact on
air quality; and 4) provide analytical support for the NSF-funded Virginia Tech
National Center for Earth and Environmental Nanotechnology Infrastructure
(NanoEarth). These projects are at the forefront of their respective fields, yet
their continued success hinges on ready access to the proposed instrumentation.
The acquisition of the TOF-ICP-MS will enhance and accelerate existing
collaborations between the PI and faculty, federal agencies (EPA, NIST and
USGS), and NanoEarth, and will allow the researchers to establish new
collaborations with other institutions nationally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.