* 1828380
* MRI: Acquisition of Cloud Computing Infrastructure for Science and Engineering Research Innovations
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Dulal Kar, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2022
* USD 517,657.00

This award provides for the acquisition of the Island Science and Engineering
Research Cloud (ISERC). ISERC will support major innovative research at Texas
A&amp;M University-Corpus Christi (TAMUCC) and other institutions in South
Texas. ISERC is an ideal base to tackle a multitude of research problems of
regional, national and global significance by providing high capacity computing
resources to empower science and engineering research. ISERC enabled projects
include geospatial analytics, coastal resiliency, ecology, genomics, bio-
informatics, environmental monitoring, health, geology, water resource
management, remote sensing, unmanned systems, agriculture, and climate
prediction. This research will have impact on the environmental sustainability,
health and economic well-being of coastal communities across the globe. The
instrument will be used by approximately 100 researchers comprising faculty,
graduate and undergraduate students. It is estimated that, each year, more than
300 students enrolled in STEM related courses would also benefit from
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ISERC supports heterogeneous computing environments
with low-latency, high-bandwidth, high computational power, and storage for
large data sets. It provides users with a dynamically scalable, robust,
heterogeneous, and virtualized architecture. By allowing confidential and secure
execution of guest virtual machines, it ensures the privacy and security of
data. The new cloud instrument can handle a wide variety of services
simultaneously, including ones for real-time, compute-bound, as well as data
intensive applications. Some of the major projects that are poised to commence
include: hyper-spatial 3D data streams for coastal resiliency, high throughput
phenotyping for agriculture, social media data analytics for security, cloud
data migration, seagrass genetics, biomimetic catalysis, climate impact on water
resources, genome sequencing, and predicting environmental factors for
respiratory diseases. ISERC will propel the academic community's knowledge
generation and provide research opportunities that will enable many further
follow-up projects, including multi-institutional and cross-disciplinary
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.