* 1828429
* MRI: Development of an Interactive Immersive Environment that Senses and Responds to Humans
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Gloria Washington, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2022
* USD 298,783.00

This project seeks to create a prototype immersive human-in-the loop system for
sensing and responding to human emotions and behaviors. It aims to develop a
prototype system that utilizes human-body based measures like heart, skin
temperature, and galvanic skin response aiming to understand how a person is
feeling and behaving.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Immersive environments are used in
various settings including physical therapy for missing limbs, storytelling for
children, and design of interactive building displays for architecture
professionals. Affective computing researchers have utilized immersive worlds
and physiological data to interpret, understand and respond to human emotion
related to healthcare decision-making, teaching programming to kids, and hostile
negotiation training. This effort utilizes mixed/virtual reality headsets,
interactive computing displays, and audio systems with the specific aims of
increasing understanding about gestures, words, facial expressions, and other
behaviors involved in design-thinking when using an immersive environment, and
improving undergraduate and graduate knowledge on use of an immersive human-in-
the-loop system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.