* 1828399
* MRI: A Console Upgrade for a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer Equipped with a Liquid Nitrogen-Cooled Probe to Aid Multidisciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Charles Drain, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 449,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor David Mootoo from CUNY Hunter
College and colleagues Charles Drain and Matthew Devany have upgraded the
console of a 500 MHz NMR spectrometer and have equipped the spectrometer with a
liquid nitrogen cryoprobe. This upgraded spectrometer allows research in a
variety of fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of
significant economic importance, as well as those that allow study of
biologically relevant species. In general, Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools available to chemists for the
elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify unknown
substances, to characterize specific arrangements of atoms within molecules, and
to study the interactions between molecules in solution or in the solid state.
Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometers is useful to chemists who are
carrying out frontier research. The cryogenic probe provides a significant
increase in sensitivity relative to standard NMR probes which permit use of
small samples. The instrument is used for research and research training at this
urban university and neighboring schools. Education and training in the science
of NMR data interpretation is being accomplished in three overlapping ways: (1)
via one-on-one interactions and workshops with the facility director; (2) in
undergraduate courses and research experiences for undergraduates; and (3)
through outreach activities that include demonstrations to high school and
undergraduate students, for example, in the CUNY Math &amp; Science Partnership
Program. This award provides research infrastructure that will benefit the
national health, and innovation in industry as well as technical workforce
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upgraded NMR spectrometer with a
cryoprobe enhances research and education at all levels. It especially impacts
studies of small molecules, biopolymers and natural product discovery. The
instrument is used to establish combinatorial libraries and to search for
biomechanistic probes. In addition, the spectrometer is used in the preparation
of scaffolds for nanotechnology materials, and functionalized lipids and dyes.
The instrument also serves researchers investigating materials for fuel cells
and batteries, and for quantitation of small molecules in agricultural
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.