* 1828059
* MRI: Acquisition of a High Resolution, Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer to Enable Research and Education at the Interface of Chemistry and Biology
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Ken Shimizu, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Ken Shimizu from University of
South Carolina Columbia and colleagues Qian Wang, Michael Walla, Thomas Makris
and Norma Frizzell have acquired a high-resolution quadrupole time-of-flight
mass spectrometer (HR-Q-ToF-MS) equipped with a series of attachments. In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions
and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection
and determination of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. An
instrument with a liquid chromatograph provides additional structural
identification power by separating mixtures of compounds before they reach the
mass spectrometer. In a quadrupole mass analyzer, there are four cylindrical
rods parallel to each other which are responsible for filtering sample ions,
based on their mass-to-charge ratio (m/z). Ions are separated based on the
stability of their trajectories in the oscillating electric fields applied to
the rods. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the
University and regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving
diverse students in research and research training using this modern analytical
technique. It provides training opportunities to faculty and students from
neighboring Historically Black College Universities (HBCUs) such as Benedict
College, South Carolina State University, and Claflin University. The instrument
supports partnerships with many local companies and government
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and
education at all levels. It is especially useful for the characterization of
compounds obtained by selectively functionalizing carbon-hydrogen bonds of
natural products, and for exploring protein assembly, bioconjugation chemistry,
and biomaterials sciences. The instrument is essential for studying protein
succination and non-enzymatic chemical modification of protein thiol residues,
and for studying the impacts of wastewater reuse, hydraulic fracturing, and
coal-fired power plant discharges on drinking water. The mass spectrometer is
used for the identification of mechanisms needed to maintain adequate
intracellular levels of the essential metal iron and mitochondrial control of
thiol-disulfide redox balance. The instrument is also used to determine plants
response to environmental stress, for understanding connections amongst neurons,
and deciphering the molecular pathways regulating cytoplasmic dynein, a
cytoskeletal motor protein that move along microtubules in
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.