* 1828476
* MRI: Acquisition of an Ultra-High Vacuum Cryogen-Free Magnet Cryostat to Enhance Multi-Disciplinary Research and STEM Education at San Francisco State University
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Andrew Ichimura, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2021
* USD 667,429.00

This award, funded by the Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI), will
bring new research and teaching capabilities to three Departments and Schools at
the College of Science &amp; Engineering at San Francisco State University and
six collaborating undergraduate and Ph.D. granting institutions through the
acquisition of an Ultra-High Vacuum Cryogen-Free Magnet Cryostat. This magnet
cryostat is a fundamental, non-invasive, complex physical property measurement
system and will enable student researchers, and faculty and staff members to
measure properties of nanoscale materials and devices ranging from electrical
transport and thermal conductivity properties to optical, and magneto-optical
properties. The acquisition of the cryostat will lead to the development of a
new comprehensive nanoscale shared research facility with broadly disseminated
scholarly outcomes. These include elucidating the physical properties of
nanoscale materials and devices, developing new course modules, and publishing
student authored/co-authored peer-reviewed articles and conference papers. The
cryostat system will support the integration of research and teaching and will
catalyze a new era of collaborations among seven Bay Area undergraduate and
graduate institutions thereby creating new research opportunities. It will allow
faculty, staff, and students to break new ground in their scientific inquiries
and will have profound benefits for both the investigators and their student
researchers. The training on the cryostat platform will prepare a large and
diverse student body for the challenges of graduate programs and professional
careers and will provide a large number of researchers from underrepresented
groups the skills to become the next generation of competent scientists and
engineers. Importantly, it will enable students to develop the core practical
skills and technical competencies that lay the foundation for the U.S. to build
talent to remain at the cutting edge of STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A low-temperature physical properties
measurement system equipped with a magnet is a powerful non-invasive tool to
characterize nanoscale materials and devices that are currently at the forefront
of interest in materials science and condensed matter physics. This cryogen-free
system is equipped with four major components: (i) a variable 12 T
superconducting magnet; (ii) a variable temperature unit for measurements
ranging from 1.65 K to 300 K; (iii) an electrical transport probe with a three-
dimensional sample rotator; and (iv) a confocal microscope operating at cryogen
temperature. The measurement capabilities include electrical transport,
magnetoresistance, Hall &amp; Quantum Hall Effect, thermal conductivity to
optical, optoelectrical, magneto-optical and magneto-optoelectrical properties.
The cryo-free system will allow all users to advance the frontiers of research
in the following areas of materials science: (i) electronic and photonic
materials (2D van der Waals crystals, van der Waals heterostructures, and
memristors); (ii) metals (plasmonic nanoparticles, graphene, and
ferromagnetics); (iii) semiconductors (metal oxides, wide bandgap materials;
(iv) strongly correlated materials (vanadium dioxides, Weyl and Dirac
semimetals) and (v) polymers with an emphasis on conductive polymers. The
combination of magnetic field, electrical contacts, and optical excitation of
materials at low temperatures will enable the measurement of transport
properties, optical properties and optoelectrical properties of a wide range of
nanoscale materials, which is of key importance for developing future nanoscale
electronics and photonics devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.