* 1828458
* MRI: Acquisition of an 18GHz to 110GHz Millimeter-Wave Anechoic Chamber
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Elias Alwan, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2022
* USD 575,997.00

Fifth generation (5G) cellular and millimeter-wave (mm-wave) networks are
expected to play a significant role in next generation communication and sensing
systems. Indeed, mm-wave technology provides multi-Gigabit-per-second (Gbps)
data rates to mobile and Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, projected to grow to
200 billion by 2020. Currently, 5G/mm-wave research is very active. However, to
effectively study, design, and characterize 5G/mm-wave systems, new state-of-
the-art instrumentation is needed, traditionally not present in academic labs.
The proposed instrumentation will provide unprecedented measurement and
characterization capabilities of 5G/mm-wave antennas and devices. Therefore, it
will enable Florida International University (FIU) to: (a) conduct current and
future cutting-edge 5G/ mm-wave research projects, (b) develop novel 5G/mm-wave
technologies for cellular networks, satellite and airborne communications, as
well as brain studies and cancer diagnoses and treatments, (c) offer new
opportunities to train post-docs, graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students to
become experts in high frequency radio frequency (RF) technologies, creating
much needed national workforce in this area, (d) serve as a state-of-the-art
technical hub in South Florida, attracting new statewide, national and
international academic and industry collaborators, (e) foster new opportunities
for cross-disciplinary and multi-institutional research, and (f) support the
growth of a strong and diverse U.S. workforce in RF communication. Therefore,
the proposed instrumentation will have significant impact in research,
education, and technology development. This acquisition will further advance
FIU's educational efforts to broaden participation of women and other
underrepresented groups in STEM through curriculum development, REU programs,
and outreach efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrumentation from
Microwave Vision Group (MVG), called -Lab, is highly specialized and
incorporates important requirements for compatibility and interoperability,
across 18 GHz to 110 GHz. This instrumentation consists of an anechoic chamber
equipped with absorbers, precision positioning control system, RF equipment
modules (network analyzers, coaxial cables, waveguides, probes, etc.) and data
post-processing. Different modules are required for different frequency bands
viz. K (18-26 GHz), Ka (26-40 GHz), V (50-75GHz), and W (75-110GHz) bands.
Research in the frequency range 18-110 GHz has so far been impeded by the lack
of affordable testing equipment with large measurement inaccuracies. This is
mostly due to the small footprint of related RF devices. As a result, research
activities in related communications, biomedical, and other scientific fields
have been so far limited to much lower frequency range. The procurement of such
instrumentation will eschew traditional limitations often encountered with high
frequency testing and characterization of future mm-wave, terahertz, and IoT
components devices and systems. The broadband frequency (18-110GHz) offered by
this instrumentation will enable groundbreaking and transformative research in
RF communications with multi-Gbps data rates. Such capability will revolutionize
a) cellular networks, b) airborne and satellite communication systems, c)
vehicle-to-vehicle communications, d) reconfigurable and deployable RF systems,
e) wearable and implantable devices, f) brain and cancer studies, g) terahertz
and mm-wave cameras, h) terahertz sources and on-chip terahertz antennas, and i)
secure communications among others. In summary, research in 5G and mm-wave
technologies, which will be enabled by the proposed instrumentation, is expected
to have great impact on information technology, telecommunications, diagnosis of
diseases and biomonitoring, thereby improving quality of life and
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.