* 1828869
* NRT: A Bioelectronics Incubator for Training Students (BITS) at the Cell/Material Interface
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jonathan Silberg, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,997,405.00

A major technological revolution is emerging as researchers develop the ability
to interface natural and synthetic cellular systems with nanoscale materials to
create hybrid cells and devices that communicate electronically. This new
interdisciplinary field has the potential to transform fundamental science,
industry, medicine, and our way of life. To achieve these innovations, industry
will require a workforce that collaborates across disciplines to develop devices
that enable measurement, manipulation, control and sensing of biological
processes of organisms, cells, molecules and reactions. Because this industry
will change how we interact with each other, this topic will present new policy,
economic, and environmental issues to solve. The National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to William Marsh Rice University will address
these challenges by training graduate doctoral students in the interdisciplinary
field of bioelectronics. The project anticipates training thirty (30) doctoral
students, including eighteen (18) funded trainees, from engineering, natural
sciences, and social sciences doctoral programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
typically begin training in disciplinary graduate programs, and collaboration
follows after investing significant time into defining the research problem,
often through co-mentored apprenticeships. This educational model is thought to
limit the kinds of questions that students pursue because students are not
poised to effectively integrate into the type of teams required for
bioelectronics innovation. To overcome these limitations, this NRT program will
integrate a team-first pedagogical model for doctoral training with
bioelectronics research to educate students about past interdisciplinary
innovations, theoretical underpinnings of interdisciplinarity, creation of
cohesive teams and community building, frameworks for achieving conceptual
understanding across disciplines, and strategies to understand the needs of
stakeholders. Research activities centered on bioelectronics themes encompass
diverse topics, such as light-harvesting systems that enable chemical synthesis
within cells, instruments that monitor complex electrical signaling in the
nervous system, and living sensors that interface with handheld devices. This
traineeship program will also provide training in effective communication,
teaching and mentorship, conflict resolution, leadership and management,
responsible conduct in research, and outreach. Students will work in
interdisciplinary teams to identify bioelectronics questions, perform team-based
research, and generate joint publications. Team integration will be achieved
through catalysts, including the synthesis of proposals and articles, the
creation of activities for educating others about interdisciplinarity,
interdisciplinary workshops, peer-writing groups, cell/device fabrication and
testing activities, and annual activities that refine interdisciplinary
communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.