* 1828041
* MRI: Acquisition of a Confocal Microscope for Student-Faculty Research and Research Training
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Marta Laskowski, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 576,185.00

An award is made to Oberlin College to support the acquisition of a confocal
microscope for use by faculty from Oberlin's Biology, Chemistry &amp;
Biochemistry, and Neuroscience Departments and by faculty at other institutions
in the region. The confocal system will advance undergraduate training through
mentored research and expansion of course-based research. The increased ease of
use and robustness of the requested confocal will greatly expand Oberlin's
ability to support student use in individually mentored research and in
curricular offerings, while the higher scan speed, greater sensitivity, and
addition of environmental control will enhance data collection. Science
education at Oberlin will therefore be enhanced by the improved activity and
productivity of individual faculty research programs. Access to up-to-date
instrumentation is essential to prepare students for careers in scientific
research, and Oberlin College faculty will incorporate the new confocal system
into four upper-level investigative laboratory courses as well as mentored
research where broadening participation of under-represented student groups is
particularly emphasized.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Modern confocal microscopy
systems improve the types and quality of data that researchers can obtain and
expand the range of research questions faculty can undertake. Oberlin
researchers will use the system to gain deeper insight into developmental and
biochemical processes through analysis of the mechanisms leading to organ
initiation and spacing in plants, regulation of a proton mediated cell-cell
signaling event in C. elegans, embryo formation in marsupials, immune responses
to intracellular bacterial pathogens, and a range of neuroscience topics. Data
and analyses from these studies will be published in peer-reviewed scientific
journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in both educational and
public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.