* 1828729
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-Ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Advancing Multidisciplinary Research and Education in Quantum Mechanics, Nanotechnology, Biosensors, and Energy Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Mebougna Drabo, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2021
* USD 628,558.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive research (EPSCoR) supports Alabama Agricultural
and Mechanical University to acquire a state-of-the-art high-performance X-ray
Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) to advance multidisciplinary research and
discovery in emerging and future technologies, while promoting diversity by
broadening the participation of underrepresented minority men and women. The
instrument has excellent capabilities in characterizing surfaces, nanomaterials,
thin films, and functional interface materials. It will support faculty and
student research activities in quantum mechanics, nanotechnology, biosensors,
and energy harvesting and storage. It will also aid undergraduate and graduate
students in characterization techniques, and in developing excellent analytical
and interpretational skills. In addition, the XPS will have significant impacts
on education and training through the many outreach and summer research programs
at Alabama Agricultural and Mechanical University. These programs benefit K-12
education, high school bridge programs, and transfer of 2-year community college
students to 4-year STEM degree programs. Thus, this instrument will also enhance
recruitment, retention and graduation rates into the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program and the EPSCoR program Alabama Agricultural and
Mechanical University will acquire a state-of-the-art high-performance X-ray
Photoelectron Spectrometer (XPS) to advance multidisciplinary research and
discovery in emerging and future technologies, while promoting diversity by
broadening the participation of underrepresented minority men and women. The
project is to advance multidisciplinary research and education, promote
diversity by broadening the participation of underrepresented minority groups,
and enhance the analytical and interpretational skills of students graduating
into the STEM workforce. The high-performance X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer
will enhance research activities in: 1) study and manipulation of quantum dots
for advancing energy harvesting and storage; 2) investigation and engineering of
reduced bandgap nanocomposite polymers for next-generation bio-sensing
technologies; 3) development of nanostructured metal plasmonic electrodes as
enhanced solar cell transparent conductors for high-efficiency conversion of
light to electricity; 4) synthesis and characterization of organic and
organometallic nonlinear materials for interface applications with the human
body; 5) nanoscale patterning of polymer thin films grating transducers for
sensing dynamic strain in solids and microarray biosensors; and 6) nanoscale
studies of charge-carrier transport and collection in contact-semiconductor
interfaces of materials for X-ray and gamma-ray detection applications. In
addition to these primary research programs, the XPS will support other research
projects, and education and training activities in North Alabama and nearby
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.