* 1828466
* NRT: Enhancing conservation science and practice: An Interdisciplinary program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Aram Calhoun, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,998,314.00

Global and local changes in environmental, social, and climatic conditions
increasingly stress, alter, or degrade ecosystems and human quality of life
despite continued efforts to develop integrated natural and human models that
help support effective decision-making. In response, organizations must focus on
managing for resilient human-natural systems - those that are able to respond
and adapt to the effects of rapid change. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Maine will create a new
graduate education model that integrates faculty and students from the social
and biophysical sciences in order to prepare the next generation of conservation
leaders to address these challenges. The project anticipates training twenty-
five (25) MS and PhD trainees, including twenty (20) funded trainees from forest
resources, wildlife conservation, communications, and environmental sciences. An
additional twenty (20) graduate students will participate in one or more of the
traineeship program components. Trainees will develop interdisciplinary
communication, collaboration, and professional skills to address emergent
conservation issues. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will develop an
interdisciplinary curriculum based on active learning models, professional
development, and collaborative research that integrates biophysical and social
sciences. The program will develop new master's and doctoral concentrations that
can be transferred to other settings in the U.S. and abroad, and that promote
the diversification of the STEM workforce. The curriculum consists of four
diverse learning experiences: (1) integrated courses that provide theoretical
and research foundations in socio-ecological resilience and science
communication; (2) an internship with a conservation management, policy or
science organization to master STEM professional skills; (3) an
interdisciplinary research project; and (4) a mentoring program to ensure
trainee success. Training will include close interactions with key conservation
partners from state and local agencies, the National Park Service, non-
governmental organizations, and community partners. Interdisciplinary courses
and research will address governance frameworks, biodiversity conservation,
sustainable rural livelihoods and resource-dependent economies, stewardship
values, citizen science and participation, and spatial sciences. NRT Trainees
will learn to promote a systems approach to conservation through a wide range of
biophysical and social science models and methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.