* 1828945
* Management of West Coast Winch Pool 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Bruce Appelgate, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,604,570.00

Funding is requested for Scripps Institution of Oceanography who maintains the
University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) West Coast Winch
Pool for the benefit of U.S. ocean scientists. The winch pool is a shared-use
facility that procures, maintains, upgrades, and makes available a variety of
portable oceanographic winches that are used by scientists aboard a broad range
of research vessels. The pool currently includes a deep-sea traction winch,
three light-duty winches, four general purpose mooring spoolers, one large
mooring spooler, a double-barrel capstan, and a tensioning wire spooling system.
Winches are shared following community-based scheduling methods run by UNOLS.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the
present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines
(NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to use the
vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.