* 1828541
* MRI: Acquisition of Large-Scale Real-Time Simulators for Next-Generation Smart Grids
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Mohammad Shahidehpour, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2021
* USD 349,143.00

Power systems are going through a paradigm change from the current power systems
dominated by electric machines to the next-generation smart grid enabled by
power electronics. Millions of active, intermittent, non-synchronous, variable,
and distributed energy resources and flexible loads are being connected to power
systems through power electronic converters. This brings an unprecedented
challenge to grid stability and reliability. To address this challenge, Illinois
Institute of Technology (IIT) is pioneering a synchronized and democratized
(SYNDEM) framework for next-generation smart grids, which enables all power
electronics-interfaced suppliers and loads to behave like virtual synchronous
machines (VSM). As a result, they can seamlessly integrate with the grid and
actively maintain grid stability, following the synchronization mechanism of
synchronous machines that has underpinned the operation and growth of power
systems for over 100 years. This will significantly reduce/defer the
infrastructure investment on transmission and distribution networks, reduce the
required reserve, release the communication infrastructure from low-level
control, enhance cybersecurity, and open up the prospect of achieving autonomous
power systems. The objective of this project is to establish a large-scale real-
time simulation facility to further advance the research, education, training
and outreach activities of IIT in next-generation smart grid while benefiting
some neighboring institutions and outreaching Chicago-area high-school students
and others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funds to acquire a large-
scale real-time simulation facility for next-generation smart grid with high-
penetration of power electronic converters. It consists of one RTDS NovaCor
power systems simulator, one main OPAL RT OP5707 power electronics simulator,
eight distributed OPAL RT OP4510 power electronics simulators, and a bundle of
software packages for simulation and communication. The eight OP4510 distributed
simulators can be operated individually for small-scale power electronics
simulations or together with the OP5707 for large-scale power electronics
simulations, which can be operated separately or together with the RTDS power
systems simulator, all through high-speed optical Aurora links. It provides a
great means to replicate and simulate real-world power systems and develop
enabling technologies for next-generation smart grid. The unique combination of
the strengths of the RTDS power systems simulator and the OPAL RT power
electronics simulators will substantially enhance IIT's research capabilities in
energy and power systems, power electronics, networked and autonomous systems,
embedded systems, communication systems, and cyber-physical systems. The
facility will also offer a great opportunity for students to obtain hands-on
experiences to broaden their career opportunities. Moreover, the facility will
have an impact on the research and training at neighboring institutions,
including University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC), Northern Illinois University,
Bradley University, and Argonne National Laboratory. The facility will also
impact on 100 Chicago-area high-school students annually through IIT's Global
Leaders Program and have a nationwide impact on about 45 people annually through
the Summer Institute on Sustainability and Energy of UIC. These will broaden the
participation in science and engineering research by women, underrepresented
minorities and persons with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.