* 1828782
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hybrid Supercritical Chromatography, High-Pressure Chromatograph, Quadrupole-Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer (SFC/UHPLC Q-ToF/MS)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Ming Tang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 258,797.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Joseph Genereux from University of
California Riverside and colleague Ming Tang have acquired a hybrid
supercritical chromatography, ultrahigh pressure liquid chromatograph,
quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (SFC/UHPLC Q-ToF/MS). In general,
mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to identify and
characterize small quantities of chemical species in complex matrices. In a
typical experiment, the components flow into a mass spectrometer where they are
ionized and the ion masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows
detection and determination of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture.
An instrument with a supercritical chromatograph provides additional structural
identification power by separating mixtures of compounds using high pressures
and temperature before they reach the mass spectrometer. In the ToF method the
mass-to-charge ratio of an ion is determined by the way of a time measurement in
which ions are accelerated by an electric field of known strength. The
acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at the University and
regional area. The instrument broadens participation by involving diverse
students in research and research training using this modern analytical
technique. The instrument serves as a tool for broadening the participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in science and engineering research at
this Hispanic Serving Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this unique
mass spectrometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially allows the use of electrophilic foot printing to identify protein
conformational changes in complex media and the creation of branched dendrimeric
architectures for energy transmission. The mass spectrometer aids the
characterization of non-covalent interactions between proteins and structured or
modified nucleic acids and the identification of aspartic acid epimerization in
the aging proteome. The instrument is also used to study self-sorting,
supramolecular catalysis and molecular dynamics as well as to investigate serine
peptide assembly. The mass spectrometer also serves researchers studying
structure and mechanism in tryptophan synthase and exploring olefin
polymerization catalysts with ligands featuring weakly coordinating carborane
anions. The instrumentation is also used in analyzing protein biogenesis and
protein quality, using metabolomics for deciphering t-cell heterogeneity and
using asymmetric methods and synthesis strategies for the study of
neuroprotective limonoids. It is also employed to study effects of post-
transcriptional and post-translational modifications on the dynamics of
eukaryotic translation initiation and to obtain entioselectivity from gold(III)
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.