* 1828144
* MRI: Acquisition of a Powder X-Ray Diffractometer (PXRD) for Interdisciplinary Research and Research Training
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ann Anderson, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2021
* USD 327,398.00

High quality powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) data is required to fully
characterize the crystalline structure of materials, and has wide ranging
applicability in the sciences and engineering. Research activities at Union
College that require PXRD span the departments of mechanical engineering,
physics and astronomy, chemistry and geology, and the interdisciplinary programs
of nanoscience and environmental science, policy and engineering. The major
fundamental scientific questions under investigation include: (1) How can the
photo-efficiencies of thin film solar materials be improved? (2) How can new
nanomaterials be used in applications such as protective coatings and
nanoelectronics? (3) What role do interfacial molecules play in the phase
transitions of nanomaterials? (4) How can better aerogel materials be created to
reduce automotive pollution? (5) How can unwanted phase changes occurring in the
production and storage of chocolate be minimized? (6) How old is the solar
system and what is the composition of the deep Earth? (7) How do hydrothermal
systems record volcanic activity? The research and research training to be
enabled will further strengthen Union's longstanding commitment to incorporate
research as an integral part of the undergraduate curriculum and to develop
innovative, multidisciplinary research and teaching opportunities through state-
of-the-art instrumentation. The instrument will be used in at least eight
regularly offered courses serving approximately 180-200 students annually,
nearly 10% of the student population. The instrument will fundamentally improve
the way diffraction can be taught, allowing students to better engage with the
concept of three-dimensional crystal structures and visualization. This new
instrumentation will also serve as a bridge to link classroom and research
experiences. The instrument will be used in over thirty undergraduate research
projects annually, including many students from traditionally underrepresented
groups. The mentoring students receive through their projects and courses will
prepare students well to move on to either graduate school or productive careers
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program supports Union College to acquire a new powder x-ray
diffraction (PXRD) system with low angle and variable temperature capabilities
that will enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of ongoing research efforts
by increasing instrument sensitivity, reducing collection times, adding a 2D
detector and controlled sample environments, and providing a modern, more user
friendly operating interface. The new PXRD platform affords versatile powder
diffraction applications including phase identification, quantitative analysis,
percent crystallinity, crystallite size and lattice strain analyses, particle
size, precise lattice parameter determination, pole figures, and Rietveld
refinement. A key advantage of the system is its high-speed detector, which is
relatively maintenance free and requires no cooling, no detector gas, and no
wire replacements. This diffractometer has automatic alignment, an advanced
software system, and cross beam optics capability, that combine to create a
flexible, intelligence-based data collection platform. In addition to supporting
current research projects, this new instrument will allow the PI's to continue
to develop new and innovative research programs that have potential to be
transformative in areas of applied science related to sustainability and clean
energy as well as in several subfields of fundamental science including
condensed matter physics, materials chemistry, planetary science, and
geochemistry. PXRD data will be published in peer-reviewed journals and
undergraduate theses and presented at professional society conferences (e.g. the
American Chemical Society, the Materials Research Society, the American
Institute of Physics, the American Geophysical Union, the Geological Society of
America, the Meteoritical Society, and the American Physical Society). Access
will be provided to collaborators and outside researchers who might benefit from
accessing archives of primary data to support their own research
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.