* 1828443
* MRI: Development of a Real-world Microgrid Simulation/Testing Instrument
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Agustin Irizarry, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2021
* USD 355,640.00

Microgrids are a powerful means of increasing the use of Renewable-Energy-
Sources (RES), an important part of the evolution of both Smart Grids and
distribution systems. The proposed microgrid testbed is an experimental and
educational platform for companies, communities and research institutions that
are developing solutions for the integration of RES and intelligent appliances.
The microgrid testbed promotes the progress of science and fosters prosperity
and welfare by advancing the integration of RES into the existing electric-grid
while increasing the reliability of the grid. It will improve the overall energy
efficiency by reducing peak-capacity requirements using developed techniques
like demand-side management and new tools such as smart plug-in-vehicles
deployment. This contributes to advance the state-of-the-art in microgrid
infrastructure research. Results can improve future designs and deployments of
microgrids while supporting the NSF-mission to promote the progress of science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microgrid testbed integrates experimental research,
development and education platforms in a single operational system. It is
designed to run experiments at all levels of controls to conduct research on
microgrids and smart grids, RES, energy storage, visualization of scenarios,
cooperative control among distributed generators, and energy management systems.
The facility is composed of a real-time simulator (RT-Lab) and an inverter-based
setup, two electronic DC power-sources, loads, a 1kW PV-array on the rooftop of
the building and two computers. The setup consists of four inverter-based-
generators controlled by intelligent controllers and the RT-Lab to make them
flexible enough to simulate DC and AC microgrids. One inverter-based-generator
has a back-to-back configuration to emulate different kinds of energy sources
and analyze the behavior in the DC-link. The system can also be connected to the
public grid to test interactions between both. Further, the system will have
capabilities to program some faults and test power quality problems. One of the
key capabilities of the facility is the flexibility to change the software and
firmware of each converter by using open firmware converters and intelligent
control units. This provides a platform to attract researchers, government
agencies and the community into microgrid-related
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.