* 1828355
* MRI: Development of a Multiscale Additive Manufacturing Instrument with Integrated 3D Printing and Robotic Assembly
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Kevin Walsh, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,546,219.00

In this project, the Nexus, a new instrument enabling robotic manufacturing for
complex systems spanning dimensional scales between 1:1000 of an inch and 1
foot, will be developed. The proposed infrastructure will be located at
University of Louisville's regional NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure site in order to facilitate US researcher access to unique
robotic assembly and additive manufacturing capabilities. The Nexus will
contribute novel hardware and software for rapid prototyping of emerging
microsystems, microrobots, wearable sensors, and multimaterial nanoscale
systems. This project will pave the way for the physical realization of future
advanced technology prototypes, such as hand-held microfactories for micro and
nano technology, the next generation soft robots, and higher performance solar
energy conversion systems. Engineering students using this MRI infrastructure
will be exposed to an education environment that emphasizes precision robotics,
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) and advanced manufacturing skills.
Imparting this knowledge to graduates is invaluable in keeping manufacturing
jobs and startup companies in the U.S., since labor costs are not a factor when
harnessing the potential of autonomous micromachines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Nexus will be capable of multidimensional 100 nanometer positioning accuracy
over meter distances for manufacturing of millimeter to computer tablet-sized
integrated systems. Innovative custom process capabilities on the Nexus will
include: 1) a fiber loom substation for smart fabrics, wearable sensors and soft
robots, 2) 3D robotic microassembly alongside aerosol jetting thin film
deposition capability for microrobots, in-situ packaged microsystems, and robot
sensor skins, 3) a custom ultrasonic metal-polymer printing on robotic
positioners for novel multimaterial plasmonic and bio-sensors, and 4) a photonic
sintering station for nanostructured thin films. The design of Nexus will be
carried out with in-house simulation tools using evolutionary search methods
from design databases, in order to 1) reduce project risks, 2) guarantee high-
yield manufacturing, and 3) optimize the system cost. The design framework will
guide the development of Nexus software for the automation of robotic transfer
motions between substations, intelligent process control, and more intuitive
human-machine interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.