* 1828099
* MRI:  Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer (IRMS) to enable interdisciplinary research at Dartmouth and beyond
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* William Leavitt, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 07/31/2021
* USD 338,190.00

An award is being made to Dartmouth College to support the acquisition of an
Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer (IRMS) and associated equipment to measure the
major stable isotopes of C, N, O, S, and H, both at natural abundance and
enriched levels. The acquisition of this IRMS will make isotopic techniques more
readily available to a wide range of departments at Dartmouth College and other
New England colleges, which will ultimately increase faculty research
productivity, undergraduate and graduate research capabilities, and the
potential for interdisciplinary collaborations amongst a variety of departments
and institutions. Advanced undergraduate students will have the opportunity to
run the IRMS to promote STEM training and career advancement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRMS will be used for research that advances
understanding of the global carbon cycle in the past, present, and future.
Isotopic analyses have become standard in many fields of biological and
geological research. Stable isotopes are used to test and make inferences about
past climates and ancient carbon cycling, to understand the connections within
aquatic and soil food webs, and to trace the movement of carbon, nitrogen, and
contaminants from plants into soils and then into aquatic systems and the
atmosphere. Researchers at Dartmouth are currently developing techniques to use
carbon isotope analyses and respiration quotients to partition soil respiration
into sources by specific compound classes. Such analyses have the potential to
allow a more mechanistic understanding of respiration, the largest flux of
carbon from the terrestrial biosphere to the atmosphere. Researchers are also
working to define unique carbon and hydrogen isotopic signatures for methane
produced during the breaking of carbon-phosphorus bonds to better understand
methane sources in marine and lacustrine environments. Results from these
research efforts will be published in peer-reviewed scientific journals,
presented at scientific meetings, and used in public outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.