* 1828738
* MRI: Launching an undergraduate-driven Genomics Center through acquisition of an Illumina MiSeq
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Joseph Schulz, Occidental College
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 226,559.00

An Award is made to Occidental College to support the acquisition of a next-
generation DNA sequencing system. The Moore Laboratory of Zoology and BioScience
building at Occidental College will feature a new Genomics Center and Ancient
DNA Lab, which will act as a collaborative hub for faculty and student research
in Biology. The new sequencer will enable faculty and undergraduate research in
collections-based and marine genomic research that involves specimen of birds,
marine invertebrates, fish, amphibians, and a range of other species. Faculty
users of the sequencer system will lead semester-long courses to generate data
and explore questions in their discipline. Additionally, the sequencer system
will enhance a successful and established NSF S-STEM program called COSMOS
(Creating Opportunities in Science and Mathematics for Occidental Students),
which targets freshman from backgrounds under-represented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new sequencer system will be used to advance
research in the environmental sciences with particular focus on environmental
change through time and urban biodiversity. Specifically, results will elucidate
change in North American birds by using the Mexican bird collection at the Moore
Laboratory of Zoology, including 49,000 specimens collected at 300 sites across
Mexico when habitats were largely intact (1933-1955). The sequencer will also
help to advance research on species diversity and evolution of mollusks with the
Cosman Shell Collection (110,000 specimens with strengths in Hawaii and the
Pacific), as well as evolutionary and ecological questions involving the fish
collection of the Vantuna Research Group (15,000 specimens and one of the best
collections of the Southern California Bight). Other faculty research enabled by
the sequencer includes urban biodiversity genomics on Los Angeles salamanders,
parrots, and near-shore rocky-reef fishes, as well as research on Pacific deep-
sea symbioses and the evolution of cone snail venom. The results of these
studies will be published in peer-reviewed journals, presented at scientific
meetings, and used in public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.