* 1828523
* MRI: Acquisition of a confocal microscope to enhance biological and materials research at Montana Tech
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Martha Apple,  Montana Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2021
* USD 364,383.00

A confocal microscope is a powerful instrument that will enhance research and
educational opportunities at Montana Tech, a rural, primarily undergraduate
institution (PUI) in southwest Montana. Confocal microscopy enables quantitative
characterization of samples across various fields, including biological,
environmental, and materials. At Montana Tech, 12 research users were
identified, along with two users at Salish Kootneai College (SKC), a nearby
tribal college that will benefit from the microscope's remote access
capabilities. The microscope will be used by at least 25 graduate students, and
20 undergraduate students for research projects in the first year, and it will
be included in the curriculum of five courses (including courses at SKC and
University of Montana Western), introducing approximately 100 students to
confocal fluorescent microscopy. Additionally, the microscope will be available
to industrial users through an agreement with Alpha Technology, LLC, and it will
be used in a collaboration with the Imagine Butte Resource Center, a local art
collective. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed Leica SP8 confocal system is
configured for maximum versatility and ease of use, given the needs of
researchers and instructors at Montana Tech. It includes an upright
configuration that enables easy visualization of biofilm samples, four laser
lines necessary for excitation of fluorophores commonly used in the biological
and environmental sciences, multiple detectors for simultaneous acquisition of
different excited fluorophores, and a high definition detector necessary for
live-cell work. The instrument will be used in a variety of projects, including
examining the impact of biofilms on metals transport in mine waste-impacted
streams, the adaptation of alpine plants in response to changes in climate,
biofilm formation and treatment in water treatment systems, biofilm-assisted
nitrate reduction, and the production of nanocomposite wound dressings and
tissue scaffolds. Overall, the addition of a confocal microscope to the suite of
analytical instruments at Montana Tech will increase research capacity and
enhance education at a rural PUI, enable access to advanced instrumentation by a
nearby tribal college, facilitate collaborations with industry, and promote
science educational outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.