* 1828183
* MRI: Upgrade of a 600 MHz Spectrometer for high-sensitivity Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Gary Pielak, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 09/30/2021
* USD 444,750.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Jeffrey Johnson from University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill and colleagues Gary Pielak, Alexander Miller,
Jillian Dempsey and Bo Li have upgraded the console of a 600 MHz NMR
spectrometer and have equipped the spectrometer with a cryoplatform to allow
higher sensitivity. This will transform and old instrument into a modern
spectrometer. This upgraded spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields
such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance, as well as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The cryogenic probe provides a significant increase in sensitivity relative to
standard NMR probes which permits use of small samples. The instrument is used
for research and research training at this university and neighboring schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research and education
at all levels. It especially impacts studies of complexity-building reactions
from feedstock chemicals as well as utilization of proton-coupled electron
transfer in solar fuel production. The spectrometer is used to investigate
quantum dots and in the exploration of structural and functional diversity of
microbial natural products and in the identification of new microbial natural
products. The upgraded instrument is also employed in characterizing
biosynthetic intermediates in natural product pathways and for probing
mechanisms in sustainable organometallic catalysis. Fluorine NMR in cells is
used to probe globular proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.