* 1828132
* MRI: Development of Integrated Multi-Access Entangled-Photon Sources and Single-Photon Detector Array Instrument for Interdisciplinary Quantum Information Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jennifer Barton, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,999.00

Quantum information science (QIS) gives rise to new, exciting paradigms for
communications, sensing, and computing. The research and development of QIS-
enabled science and technologies in the U.S., however, is impeded by the limited
availability of quantum resources that require specialized expertise to generate
and maintain. The INterdisciplinary QUantum Information REsearch (INQUIRE)
central-campus instrument removes the barrier to access quantum resources for a
broad scientific and student pool at the University of Arizona (UA). The INQUIRE
instrument is the world's first shared major facility as a test-bed to foster
interdisciplinary research and student training in QIS, an area identified as
both a national and NSF-wide priority. This new instrument enables the
convergence of QIS with diverse fields. INQUIRE is an accessible, multiuser,
networked platform that communicates quantum resources over a unique fiber
network between campus buildings, colleges, and scientific disciplines. Quantum
entangled photons arrive from INQUIRE on demand to various laboratories
conducting research in photonics, quantum-communications, bioimaging and
sensing, and materials science. These laboratories use entangled photons in
experiments and then route the processed light back to the INQUIRE instrument
for ultrasensitive measurements. In doing so, groups with no QIS expertise enjoy
state-of-the-art quantum resources to greatly foster the incorporation of QIS
into diverse fields and create unprecedented research and education
capabilities. Diverse early-career researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduate students in the UA Colleges of Engineering, Science, and Optical
Sciences, and visiting researchers from other regional and national institutions
benefit directly from advanced research and research training with the INQUIRE
instrument, and pursue QIS-enabled science and technologies to benefit the
society. Teaching laboratories at UA use INQUIRE to inspire STEM students to
pursue QIS education and careers, and to develop the next-generation workforce
who can apply the essential concepts of QIS to benefit U.S. society. In
addition, middle-school and high-school students visit the QIS teaching
laboratory to participate in QIS-based experiments, and open-house events
provide local community tours of INQUIRE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The INQUIRE
instrument has: 1) three high-brightness entangled-photon sources operating at
telecommunication wavelengths; 2) fiber optic links over a significant fraction
of the UA campus that link five different buildings and disciplines; 3) optical
switching to route entangled photons to multiple users and then back to
INQUIRE's single-photon detectors for ultrasensitive measurements; and 4) a
robust, safe, and accessible user and administrator software interface. This
central instrument delivers unique light sources to multiple scientific
disciplines such as biomedical engineering and materials science, and offers a
first-of-its-kind platform to explore the beginnings of quantum information
processing (QIP) and sharing. Research examples include QIP with two-dimensional
materials, broadband quantum-communication networks, photobleaching-free
biomedical imaging, and photonic quantum computing. The unprecedented
capabilities include: 1) all resources are remotely accessed without requiring
prior experimental QIS background to seamlessly integrate into a variety of end
users' experimental pursuits; 2) the INQUIRE resources can be simultaneously
accessed by multiple users, thereby maximizing the instrument's utilization; 3)
a user-friendly software interface enables end users to remotely and safely
configure the entangled-photon sources and take measurements; and 4) the
administrator has a software interface to maintain and monitor the state of
INQUIRE. Such an infrastructure provides highly automated management of this
unique multiuser resource, and ensures the long-term stability and robustness of
the instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.