* 1828236
* MRI: Development of a mmWave Software Defined Radio Network Testbed for Hybrid Measurement and Emulation
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Geoffrey Mainland, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 515,999.00

The largely unregulated and unused millimeter wave (mmWave) frequency band is a
potential home for new standards and protocols to increase network capacity
(especially for a future 5G cellular communication standard). This project
builds, deploys, and makes available to the research community a mmWave Software
Defined Radio (SDR) network testbed. A pressing need exists for flexible
hardware platforms to: &lt;br/&gt;(1) Rapidly prototype new mmWave systems that
consider not only point to point deployments, but also new multi-link mmWave
network architectures;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Allow for co-design of antennas, waveforms,
and networking algorithms -- a requirement given the unique propagation
characteristics of mmWave channel; and &lt;br/&gt;(3) Allow for hybrid
measurement and emulation to allow real and virtual nodes to co-exist, which
would enable scalable studies of new mmWave network architectures.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The mmWave SDR network testbed will be a flexible hardware platform
that will enable researchers to rapidly prototype new mmWave systems. Through
intermediate frequency integration with the Echo Ridge Dynamic Spectrum
Environment Emulator (DySE) channel emulator at Drexel and integration with
commercial computational electromagnetic simulators, the testbed is expected to
enable both over the air prototyping capabilities with commercial and custom
antenna technologies as well as evaluation of emulated mmWave networks with
customizable combinations of real and simulated nodes. The SDR testbed will
consist of 5 Universal Software Radio Peripheral (USRP) X310 SDRs, enhanced with
custom built millimeter transceivers designed and built in partnership with
National Instruments. The instrument being developed will permit rapid
prototyping of new mmWave systems that includes point-to-point deployments and
multi-link mmWave network architecture, enabling researchers to test and verify
new algorithms and protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.