* 1828910
* NRT-INFEWS: UMD Global STEWARDS (STEM Training at the Nexus of Energy, WAter Reuse and FooD Systems)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Xin-Zhong Liang, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,057,335.00

Our global food, energy and water resources are being stressed by diverse
factors such as population growth, climate variability and human/environmental
interfaces. Solutions to these challenging problems require scientists,
engineers and policy experts working together to ensure food, energy and water
security for future generations. However, cross-cutting, transformative science
and policy discoveries can only come about through interdisciplinary training
that prepares our future scientific leaders for success across a number of
career pathways. To address this need, this National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Maryland College Park (UMD) will
establish an interdisciplinary, STEM graduate education program that trains
students to effectively work and communicate across disciplines to address
food/energy/water issues from molecular to societal levels and from local to
global scales. The UMD Global STEWARDS NRT program will prepare students through
hands-on domestic and international experiences, as well as research, training
and outreach opportunities that integrate the biological, physical, social,
behavioral and computer sciences. This project anticipates training sixty (60)
PhD students, including thirty (30) funded trainees, from programs in the life
sciences, earth system sciences, engineering, computational sciences, social
behavioral sciences, natural resource management studies, and energy and
environmental policy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UMD Global STEWARDS trainees will
focus on a range of topics in three integrated food/energy/water research areas:
(1) agricultural resilience through energy-efficient water reuse; (2) food
safety and security in variable climate scenarios; and (3) decision support
systems to advance food-energy-water adaptation strategies. Trainees will
participate in five interdisciplinary training elements: (1) introductory and
advanced experiential coursework addressing the food/energy/water nexus; (2)
intensive, annual, two-week "Winter Boost" workshops; (3) a domestic internship
based in a non-academic setting; (4) a "Global Summer Amp" broadening experience
in Israel or Nepal; and (5) involvement in food/energy/water-related outreach
and mentoring. Communication and professional development activities will be
woven throughout the NRT training elements. Trainees will take ownership in the
program and develop leadership skills by participating in student-led committees
and annual symposia. UMD Global STEWARDS graduates will emerge from the program
as well-balanced life-long learners, stellar science communicators and
distinctive professionals armed with the communication and professional skills
needed to translate research discoveries into actionable science at the
food/energy/water nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.