* 1828737
* Collaborative Research: A four-dimensional view of deformation in the Eastern Alaska Range - where did the slip on the Denali fault go?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Sarah Roeske, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 01/31/2022
* USD 345,892.00

The Denali fault in south-central Alaska ruptured in a 7.9 magnitude earthquake
in 2002, one of the largest continental strike-slip (horizontal motion of blocks
of rocks past each other) earthquakes ever recorded. The event brought attention
to this little-studied but major fault, which crosses the trans-Alaska oil
pipeline as well as the two main highways in Alaska. Scientists predicted Denali
fault earthquakes to have only strike-slip motion, but instead, the 2002 quake
started as a thrust (putting one block of rock over another) earthquake and
uplifted rocks in the Alaska Range along a previously unknown thrust fault. The
unexpected earthquake uplift pattern provided the scientific community
additional evidence that thrust faults can siphon lateral motion from the
strike-slip Denali fault. If these types of fault interactions persist for
millions of years, then determining the amount of thrust faulting next to the
Denali fault could help solve a long-lived controversy of how much total
displacement has taken place across the Denali fault and explain why the Denali
fault is surrounded by large mountains on all sides (forming the Alaska Range).
Unraveling the history of thrust faulting and uplift next to the Denali fault
will not only help chip away at these intriguing scientific questions but will
also inform how significant these faults have been in the past and where the
greatest seismic hazards in the Alaska Range are today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
further understand how faults in the region may be transforming lateral slip
from the Denali fault into uplift of the Alaska Range, project researchers will
install 7 temporary seismometers in this area to record earthquakes and ground
motion. By interpreting these seismic signals, the data can produce
3-dimensional CAT-scan type image of where the faults are in the subsurface and
the root of the mountains. Project investigators will also conduct geologic
mapping studies, which provide a view of where the faults are at the surface.
The geologic maps, combined with 3D images of the rocks at depth, will show
where major faults exist at depth and if they cut the earth's entire crust. The
project will involve several types of isotopic dating methods to determine the
timing and rate of motion on these faults. The age information will provide the
fourth dimension to the study, time, and will show which faults have been most
active in both the distant and recent past. The ultimate goal of the study is to
document how faults that have thrust and strike-slip motion connect into the
main Denali fault, and what role they play in uplifting the mountain range. The
results are important for updating the seismic hazard potential for the oil
pipeline, which survived the strike-slip earthquake without breaking but is not
engineered to withstand a large thrust earthquake. This project will provide
training for students in field methods and laboratory applications and the
overall results will be distributed to the public through outreach talks, spoken
word performances, and the creation and installation of a highway wayside
interpretative sign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The modern and deep time constraints
on the horizontal offset history of the Denali Fault have been shown to vary
east to west over a distance of ~ 200 km, with as much as 360 km of slip
"missing" in the Cenozoic. The potential that the missing slip has been taken up
through crustal shortening and/or strike-slip faulting off the main strand of
the fault has not been thoroughly investigated. The eastern Alaska Range has
significantly thicker crust in an ancient suture zone region compared to
neighboring crustal blocks. Preliminary results indicate that a significant
component of this crustal thickening occurred since the Oligocene through a
combination of high-angle and low-angle thrust faults. This study will test the
hypothesis that crustal shortening and thickening could play a major role in
reducing the strike-slip component of the Denali fault. An alternate hypothesis
is that strike-slip faulting within the suture zone is the important mechanism
for bleeding off the slip. Neither of these hypotheses have been fully
investigated by previous researchers in this region. To address this research
question, project researchers will collect and combine geologic map data,
thermochronology, and seismic imaging to determine the mechanisms, timing, and
extent of crustal shortening and thickening, and compare that to previously
unrecognized strike-slip faulting in the southern Alaska Range suture zone.
Seven broadband seismometers, which will be installed over a region of 80 by 30
km (average spacing 15-20 km), will provide a more detailed view of the crustal
thickness and intra-crustal discontinuities than the EarthScope Transportable
Array can provide. Low-T thermochronometry will include isotopic systems that
record cooling from 400 to 65 degrees C, and when combined with sediment
tracking (detrital zircons) and structural studies will provide a 4-d analysis
of the region's crustal structure. These new results, integrated with existing
thermochronology, geochronology, and seismic data, will yield important geologic
constraints on how slip dissipates along long-lived transpressive strike-slip
faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.