* 1828645
* The Origins Of Democracy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kelly Knudson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 230,710.00

In this project the investigators will address the processes through which
stratified societies and city-states emerge and the mechanisms for the formation
of citizenship and democracy. Emphasis will be placed upon the role of non-elite
in the emergence of democracy. Bioarchaeology, the study of human remains in
archaeological and historical contexts, is well suited to give voice to the non-
elite, often the silent people of the past, who infrequently appear in written
sources, art, and architecture. By linking science to the humanities, this
project will combine a variety of lines of evidence to shed light into the life
conditions and mortuary treatment of the non-elite and the outsiders in early
city-state communities. In addition, this project will enhance the visibility of
females in the profession. It will also build a number of collaborations between
US and non-US academic institutions and will thus provide research venues for
dissertations and postdoctoral research positions expanding the range and impact
of US archaeological activities. It will also provide significant training for
undergraduate, graduate, and junior professionals in the field of bioarchaeology
and related scientific methods, such as chemical analysis for the reconstruction
of past diets and population movement. Furthermore, this project will
significantly advance the cause of cross-disciplinary research and analysis. At
the same time, through its pioneering approach to the recovery, management, and
dissemination of bioarchaeological data, this project will serve as a model for
future studies of similar nature, scope, and
ambition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this broader context, this project will
focus on the archaic city-state of Athens and the social, political, and
economic factors that led to the development of the foundations of the modern
western society. This study will make a novel and significant contribution to
ongoing debates about the formation of the early city-state by targeting the
life-histories of non-elite in archaic Athens. The researchers will examine
possible changes in residence, diet, health, demographics, and activities in
relation to mortuary treatment. How were the non-elite buried? Were they
incorporated in formal cemeteries of the city? Was violence sanctioned within
the social milieu during times of political upheaval and how is this represented
in the mortuary record? By integrating a variety of approaches, including
forensic, chemical, and radiocarbon analyses, this study will reconstruct the
lived experiences of past people who were not part of the elite as a reflection
of broader processes of sociopolitical change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.