* 1828371
* MRI: Acquisition of a Variable-Pressure, Field-Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Randall Headrick, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2021
* USD 480,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;In supporting the acquisition of a
variable-pressure, field-emission scanning electron microscope, this project
enables researchers and educators in Vermont and northern New York to explore
materials at the nanometer scale. Research projects spanning physics, chemistry,
engineering, materials science, and geology rely on the instrument for analysis
and characterization, identifying elemental composition and local crystal
structure. Remote operating capabilities allow classrooms and museums in the
region to perform live experiments and demonstrations. The modern instrument,
with its wide-ranging capabilities, serves as a core research infrastructure for
local universities and industries alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The scanning electron microscope is equipped with
secondary electron, five-segment back-scattered electron, electron backscatter
diffraction, and energy dispersive spectroscopy detectors. Combined with
variable-pressure and low-voltage operating modes, these detectors allow for
topographic, compositional, and crystallographic characterization of delicate
samples at spatial resolution of 1.2 nm. The instrument enables research
projects exploring nanoporous oxide structures, organic crystals, optoelectronic
devices, optical filters, metal nanowires, rheology of crustal processes, and
mineral weathering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.