* 1828320
* MRI: Acquisition of an accelerated solvent extractor (ASE) for undergraduate research and teaching  at Pace University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Zhaohua Dai, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 48,388.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Elmer-Rico Mojica from Pace
University and colleagues Zhaohua Dai, Nigel Yarlett, Rita Upmacis and Jaime-Lee
Rizzo have acquired an accelerated solvent extractor (ASE). This instrument
allows extraction of substance of interest from mixtures of compounds with the
aid of high temperatures and high pressures that make the various substances
more soluble. Once the materials are dissolved, the mixtures are separated with
the use of columns. In the column, there are substances that interact
differently with the various components, thus allowing separation. Because of
the high temperature and pressures, the system allows (much like a pressure
cooker) the use of small volumes of liquids in the separation. This makes these
systems environmentally friendly since they produce little waste. Common
applications are in extraction of pesticides, herbicides, flame retardants,
active ingredients in medicines, vitamins, dietary supplements, detergents and
textiles. The instrument is used to train students in research at the host
institution and the Navarro Borough Manhattan Community College. The solvent
extractor serves many underrepresented students and facilitates retention in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this accelerated solvent
extractor is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It
especially impacts the characterization of natural materials, such as bee
propolis, and their use as antimicrobial and antiprotozoal agents, the analyses
of organic micropollutants and the presence of pharmaceuticals and personal care
products in various types of sediments from New York City. The instrument is
also used for investigating the presence of pollutants and pesticide residues in
commercial tea samples, fruits, vegetables, honey and milk and for improving the
sample preparation methods in the analysis of illicit drugs. In addition, it
benefits the development of molecular imprinted xerogels materials designed by
computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.