* 1828246
* MRI: Acquisition of a Fluorescence Microscopy System for Research and Teaching at Kettering University
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Gillian Ryan, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2023
* USD 251,274.00

This award is to purchase an advanced fluorescence microscopy system for
Kettering University. The system will enable high-resolution, three-dimensional
imaging of cells on a microscopic scale. These capabilities allow molecules and
nanoparticles that have potential for enhancing disease treatments to be tracked
relative to various parts of the cell. The system will support interdisciplinary
research in studying cellular processes with the goal of improving treatment of
cancer and other diseases. The system will provide excellent training
opportunities for students to prepare them for graduate school or employment in
scientific fields after graduation. The system will also enable science-oriented
outreach to women and other underrepresented minorities via pre-college programs
and summer research experiences for undergraduates. Furthermore, the instrument
will be used to provide professional development for teachers and enhance
science education of under-served students in Flint and surrounding areas via
field trips to the university and Internet-enabled remote microscopy
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument will include an inverted
microscope with epifluorescence components and light source, an electron-
multiplier CCD camera, and a confocal laser scanning system, all of which are
critical for the study of the localization and transport of molecules and
nanoparticles. The first project will study the mechanisms of ultrasound-
mediated delivery of fluorescent agents to cells in the presence of
microbubbles, thereby potentially enabling better non-invasive spatiotemporal
control of drug delivery. The second project will study the symmetry-breaking
mechanisms of eukaryotic cells during movement with fluorescent dyes, thereby
contributing to an improved understanding of metastasis. The third project will
study the uptake and distribution of fluorescent magnetic nanoparticles in
cancerous cells and spheroids with magnetic and ultrasonic methods. These
magnetic nanoparticles can be used for noninvasive hyperthermic cancer treatment
via induction heating. The fourth project will study the biotoxicity of
fluorescent silver nanoparticles on yeast as a model for treating infectious
fungi. The fifth project will test fluorescent gold nanoclusters as a means to
image beta-amyloid aggregates and study the process of beta-amyloid plaque
formation towards a better understanding of Alzheimer's disease. The final
project will develop fluorescent quantum dots and characterize their ability to
act as nanothermometers in the intra- and extracellular environment during
hyperthermia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.