* 1828988
* Workshop: Initiation of the Highly Integrated Basic and Responsive Research (HIBAR) Research Alliance
* ENG,EFMA
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Sandra Brown, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 02/28/2019
* USD 50,000.00

This award will provide support for a two-day workshop to be held at the
University of California, San Diego. The workshop will convene both academic
stakeholders (including senior leadership and individual researchers) and
organizational stakeholders (e.g. from APLU, disciplinary societies, etc.) to
initiate formation of the HIBAR Research Alliance. HIBAR - Highly Integrated
Basic and Responsive Research - involves the partnering of academic researchers
with experts from business, civic or non-governmental organizations to ensure a
real-world perspective during formulation of research questions. The four key
tenets of the HIBAR approach are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Embrace the attainment of new
knowledge coupled with the solution of important problems&lt;br/&gt;2. Combine
academic research methods with practical design thinking aimed at
application&lt;br/&gt;3. Engage, from the outset, efforts of academic and real-
world experts as equal partners&lt;br/&gt;4. Target time-to-use less than
academic norms and more than in direct application&lt;br/&gt;The HIBAR model of
using productive collaborative academic-societal partnerships to accelerate
breakthrough discoveries offers potential for academic researchers to develop
highly impactful research questions that address key societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Workshop will take the first steps to
establish the HIBAR Research Alliance (HRA), and to identify appropriate
strategies for promotion of HIBAR research. Two parallel themes will be
discussed. Theme 1 will concentrate on design of nurturing experiential
environments to maximize HIBAR research. Theme 2 will focus on scaling these
efforts in order to maximize positive impact. The HRA will concentrate on
leveraging Networked Improvement Communities to achieve promulgation of the
HIBAR approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful promotion of academic engagement
with HIBAR research, with consequent acceleration of use-inspired research,
offers substantial potential for broader impacts through accelerating
breakthrough discoveries that address pressing societal challenges and
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.