* 1828164
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope for Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Rodney Dale, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 396,971.00

An award is made to Loyola University Chicago (LUC) to support the acquisition
of a laser-scanning confocal microscope. The acquisition of the proposed
microscope will allow faculty to train students in the use of current technology
in the context of independent research and academic instruction, as well as to
advance their research programs. The Co-PIs on this grant mentor multiple
undergraduates each year, providing students the opportunity to gain valuable
research experience, to contribute to publications, and to present work at
regional and national conferences. Undergraduate students will also utilize the
confocal microscope in a Biological Imaging course, Cell Biology lab, and
Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences, reaching more than 200 students
each year. In addition, use of this microscope will be incorporated into
multiple outreach programs, including two for high school students: the Emerging
Biologists Workshop, an intensive one-week research experience, and the Biology
Internship Program, an eight week internship. Finally, a collaboration with
Ripon College has been established as part of an effort to share this technology
with institutions that do not currently have it available. These programs
demonstrate the commitment of LUC to engaging students in cutting-edge research,
and exposing students to current technologies in the classroom and through
community outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A laser-scanning confocal microscope
is absolutely essential to the research programs of numerous LUC faculty members
spanning the Biology, Chemistry, and Psychology departments. Current laser-
scanning confocal systems allow for the acquisition of data with increased
resolution and speed, as well as reduced damage to samples over time. These
advances allow for improved live imaging and the visualization of details at a
cellular level that are critical for advancing our understanding of how tissues
develop and function. Acquisition of this instrument will enhance research in
the areas of gonad, craniofacial, and nervous system development, circadian
rhythms, axon guidance, and drug addiction. This instrument will allow faculty
to pursue cutting-edge research aims, and will contribute to the University's
efforts to attract world-class researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.