* 1828190
* MRI: Development of a hybrid mass spectrometry platform with mass-selective optical spectroscopy of cryogenic ions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Mark Johnson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Mark Johnson from Yale University
and colleagues James Mayer, Scott Miller, Patrick Holland and Nilay Hazari built
a new type of mixed mass spectrometer. The spectrometer enables mass-selective
isolation of ions for optical spectroscopic characterization after the ions are
cooled in a chamber having an inert atmosphere without oxygen or water. The aim
of the proposal is to use a hybrid approach in which high resolution mass
spectrometry is integrated with optical spectroscopies, such as infrared. The
key to this innovation derives from the addition of a cryogenic ion processing
stage between the usual ion manipulations (for example, tandem mass
spectrometry) and the optical spectrometers that allow the collection of
spectra. The instrument includes incorporation of an enclosed, inert environment
for ion injection that include sample manipulation in a glovebox and low
temperature sample preparation to prolong the ion stability. It is designed as
an inert sample orbitrap mass spectrometer with ion spectroscopy (ISOMSIS). In
general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods used to
identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species embedded in
complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized into the parent ion and its fragment ions
and their masses are measured. This highly sensitive technique allows detection
and determination of the structure of molecules in a complex mixture. The
addition of a chamber where the ions can be cooled after separation followed by
insertion into a spectrometer that measure how light (such as infrared light)
interacts with species of interest substantially increases the structural
specificity in characterization of unknown compounds and intermediates. The
building a new instrumentation is essential to improve economic development and
to prepare the new generation of instrumentalists. Students participate and the
building process and use the instrument in outreach activities such as that Yale
Pathways to Science. The investigators also demonstrate the capabilities
afforded by this instrumental platform in activities ranging from outreach to
the local community and connections to local chemical
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award to build this mixed mass spectrometer
is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially
impacts studies directed to study research is directed to the enzyme nitrogenase
model compounds in processes that incorporate nitrogen in plants. The instrument
is also used for investigations of the oxygen reduction reaction. In addition,
it aids in the discovery of small peptides that catalyze enantioselective
reactions, and in the preparation of catalysts with earth-abundant metals to
make more environmentally friendly materials that will improve economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.