* 1828611
* MRI: Development of Enodia: A Highly Reconfigurable, HPC-Backed Instrument Enabling Multifaceted Interactive Visualization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Larry Hodges, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,375.00

This project, developing a highly reconfigurable collaborative visualization
instrument named Enodia, aims to support virtual reality (VR) and 2D content,
and multiple interaction modalities (supporting very different physical display
constellations) at the institution and within satellite nodes at several
collaborating colleges and universities. Enodia operationalizes the idea that
different activities call for different physical arrangements of tools,
workspaces, and people for intensive research engagement with screen mediated
content, especially for collaboration and communication-oriented research
activities. It builds upon groundbreaking hybrid tangible multitouch and
gestural interaction support and allows highly diverse room-scale display
geometries to be reconfigured within minutes/seconds, flexibly driving many
displays in diverse locations across several campuses (outreach partners). It
also permits its compute cluster to be back-filled at lower
priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach allows for several large stage
screens of the anchor visualization environment and multiscreen deployments at a
flagship and several regionally and nationally distributed satellite locations
(all driven by a single computer cluster) to be physically reconfigured in
minutes and even seconds. These configurations include wall(s), nooks,
architectural mockups, and room partitioning into multiple independent subareas,
to support diverse scientific domains and use contexts. The prioritized, layered
VM approach supports both local and distributed use, both of collaborative and
independent nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.