* 1828193
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Laser-Based Biomolecular Imager
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Adi Dubash, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2022
* USD 156,858.00

An award is made to Furman University to support the acquisition of a
biomolecular imager for shared use amongst faculty, staff and students in the
Biology and Chemistry departments. Faculty in the Biology and Chemistry
departments at Furman University are committed to maintaining strong
undergraduate research programs that positively impact the long-term training
and development of the next generations of scientists. To provide these
experiences, faculty are actively engaged in novel research programs and in the
mentorship of undergraduate students in the lab. The new imager system will
positively impact at least 35 undergraduate researchers each year and support
programs funded through NSF-Research Experiences for Undergraduates. It will
enable research experiences for high school teachers and students. In addition,
faculty and undergraduates from historically black colleges and universities in
the region, two-year colleges, and other regional undergraduate institutions
will have access to the bioimager for their research needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furman faculty have wide-ranging research projects that
include the biophysical characterization of AT-hook containing proteins; the
elucidation of the role for desmosomes in the coordination of cell migration;
investigating compounds of sulfur and selenium for their ability to protect DNA
from reactive oxygen species damage; characterizing the DNA adduct and DNA
photocleavage properties of novel Cr (III)-diimine complexes; studying the
stress response of a fungal pathogen; elucidating the roles of chromatin
condensation and decondensation in T-cell activity; and conducting genetic
fingerprinting of sea anemones exposed to environmental stressors. The new
imager system will aid all of these efforts by improving data acquisition speed,
sensitivity, quality, and flexibility. Faculty research will result in
presentations at meetings within their respective fields and publications in
nationally-disseminated, peer-reviewed journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.