* 1828585
* MRI: Acquisition of a Three Component Particle-Image Velocimetry System to Enable Fundamental Research in Wind Engineering and Fluid Mechanics
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Arindam Chowdhury, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 466,076.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) award supports the acquisition of a
three-component particle-image velocity velocimetry (PIV) system to enable
previously unavailable wind flow field measurements at the Wall-of-Wind (WOW)
Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) facility. These data
will enable improved understanding of the correlation of peak wind loads on
buildings and turbulent flows around buildings in urban settings. Enhanced
understanding of the physics of turbulent wind flows may lead to major
breakthroughs in both fluid mechanics and wind engineering. This knowledge
enables more resilient designs that enhance economic competitiveness and reduce
property loss and loss of life during severe wind events such as hurricanes. The
instrumentation will also spur new cross disciplinary research collaborations at
WOW in areas ranging from pollutant dispersion in urban areas to energy systems
and aerodynamics of unmanned aerial vehicles. The instrumentation will provide
enhanced student research training with hands-on PIV measurements, new
experimental modules, and exposure to a broad range of fluid dynamics research.
The data from WOW experiments will be made available to community researchers
through NHERI DesignSafe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are fundamental knowledge
gaps in characterizing turbulent wind flows at high Reynolds numbers--
particularly at complex fluid-structure interfaces. This high spatio-temporal
resolution PIV system will enable simultaneous measurements of small-scale
transient and turbulent flow characteristics, as well as of large-scale mean
velocity field features. This will permit whole-flow-field measurements (rather
than just the impact of wind on the built environment) to study fluid-structure
interaction at high Reynolds numbers that cannot be achieved in conventional
wind tunnels. The PIV will also provide an important tool for the validation of
numerical models for turbulent flow simulations, and the fundamentals of fluid-
structure interactions-- potentially leading to breakthroughs in wind
engineering, fluid dynamics and high-fidelity computational fluid dynamics
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.