* 1828402
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hyperspectral Field Spectroradiometer to Enable Interdisciplinary Research
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Maureen Clayton, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 77,601.00

Hyperspectral imaging is a rapidly growing field of knowledge and application
area in remote sensing, becoming one of the most critical skills needed by
future employees in the remote sensing industry. This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the acquisition of a portable Hyperspectral
Imaging instruments for both laboratory- and field-based research at the
University of Northern Iowa, a primarily undergraduate institution, that has a
deep commitment to high-quality and high-impact scholarship to all students. The
FieldSpec (R) Spectroradiometer instrument is widely used in many STEM fields
including Geographic Information Science, Remote Sensing, Environmental Science,
and Biology for various applications. This instrument will have an immediate
impact on active research, teaching, and training activities by faculty,
students, staff researchers, and trainees on and outside campus. It will enhance
the curriculum in core science and technology areas, support undergraduate and
graduate students to gain hands-on experience and education that connects to
applied and experiential learning, and strengthen the ability of faculty to
facilitate improved quality of their research and teaching. This device will
promote the creation of a highly interdisciplinary research environment, enable
intra- and inter-departmental research collaboration, and will increase the
possibility of securing external funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
benefits of FieldSpec (R) are its portability, provision of the fastest and most
accurate measurement in nearly any environment, and the capability of spectrally
characterizing the chemical and structural properties of a target by collecting
hundreds of contiguous spectral channels from laboratories to remote field
sites. The instrument will enable: 1) the best possible approach to calibrate
and validate laboratory, aerial, and satellite remote sensing images; 2) rapid,
accurate, and cost-effective spectral measurements whenever and wherever it is
required; and 3) development of hyperspectral signature libraries for different
materials from laboratory and field settings with new approaches. Specifically,
this device will provide new knowledge discovery in the science of Hyperspectral
Imaging in many core interdisciplinary research areas including image
processing, geomorphology/mineralogy analysis, urban and road surface materials
mapping, the Arctic environments and cryosphere monitoring, plant physiology
estimation, and water quality assessment, which will benefit the training of
students and allow for interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.