* 1828069
* MRI: Acquisition of an Inductively-Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) System at Missouri State University
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Richard Biagioni, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 156,918.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Cyren Rico from Missouri State
University and colleagues Richard Biagioni, Robert Pavlowsky, Gary Michelfelder
and Melissa Remley have acquired an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer
(ICP-MS). In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical
methods used to identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species
in complex matrices. In a typical experiment, the components flow into a mass
spectrometer where they are ionized and the ion masses are measured. This highly
sensitive technique allows detection and determination of the structure of
molecules in a complex mixture. The ionization using an inductively coupled
plasma allows detection of metal ions and several non-metals present in very
small concentrations. The acquisition strengthens the research infrastructure at
the university and regional area. It is used by many students, some
underrepresented in science. Fields of study include analytical, environmental,
geochemical, and agricultural sciences. The ICP-MS also contributes toward
outreach to other local universities such as Evangel University and Ozark
Technical Community College. It is used for educational program targeting women
and first generation college students since no academic institution in southwest
Missouri has ICP-MS capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of the
ICP-MS is aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels, especially in
areas. It especially impacts studies of fate, transport, toxicity, and food
chain transfer of engineered nanomaterials as well as plant/soil interaction
with environmental stressors. The instrument is also used to analyze nutrient
and geochemical cycling. The mass spectrometer is employed for trace elements
analysis in biological, food, dietary supplements, and environmental samples.
Some examples are sediments, soil, volcanic rocks, drinking water, wastewater,
effluents, and plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.