* 1828774
* MRI: Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Compound-Specific Applications in Biogeochemistry and Environmental Studies at UC Santa Cruz
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Daniel Costa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2021
* USD 564,184.00

Stable isotope analysis is now one of the most important tools in a remarkable
variety of research, with key applications spanning oceanography, biogeochemical
cycle research, ecology and food webs, paleoecology, archaeology, and
paleoclimatogy. Work in all these areas increasingly requires sensitive analysis
of the isotope ratios of a range of elements (carbon, hydrogen, oxygen,
nitrogen, sulfur), in a wide variety of sample types, and the most innovative
projects increasingly require new, leading-edge approaches, such as isotopic
analysis of individual organic compounds (CSIA). This award to the University of
California at Santa Cruz (UCSC) involves the acquisition of an isotope-ratio-
monitoring mass spectrometer (IRMS) to serve investigators and students across
multiple disciplines. This acquisition will have wide broader impacts. First,
the instrumentation will significantly expand UCSC's basic research
infrastructure, supporting core campus priority areas for excellence in coastal
sciences and environmental sustainability research. It strongly enhances UCSC's
core education and teaching mission, allowing graduate and post-doc training on
cutting-edge instrumentation while supporting a far greater range of projects.
The instrumentation will support undergraduate research, via senior theses and
direct involvement in research labs, as well as the incorporation of hands-on
projects into higher level courses. The project team will also develop a new
initiative for a summer outreach program, in collaboration with UCSC's division
of student success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UCSC will acquire a Thermo Scientific
253+ isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS), with two front-end peripherals
configured for cutting-edge CSIA capabilities, including the ability to make
isotopic measurements on unknown compounds, and the addition of sulfur isotope
capability. This high-sensitivity IRMS will have two main sample input
peripherals: (1) a GC-Trace Ultra-GC coupled to a TSQ Duo Triple Quadrapole Mass
Spectrometer, and configured with a programmable Tri-Plus RSH auto-sampler
capable of automated derivatization/standard additions; and (2) an IsoLink CNOHS
Elemental Analyzer (EA) with a new unified combustion/pyrolysis design that will
bring needed sulfur isotope capability. Each component in this configuration was
chosen to fulfill a critical need. The 10 KV 253 IRMS will provide high
sensitivity, allowing a range of new, nano-scale compound-specific applications,
particularly critical for individual-compound N measurements. The customized
Tri-Plus RHS auto-sampler can both make and inject derivatives with automated
addition of internal standards. This will provide high sample throughput. The
TSQ Duo Triple Quadrapole Mass Spectrometer represents a completely novel,
cutting-edge capability, allowing researchers to simultaneously identify unknown
structures as they measure their C and N isotope ratios. Finally, the EA IsoLink
(CNSOH) interface will bring the ability to measure S isotopes to UCSC for the
first time, allowing 13C, 15N, and 34S values to be measured simultaneously on a
single sample, even at extremely high C/S ratios (e.g., wood
samples).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.