* 1828297
* MRI: Acquisition of a GC triple quadrupole mass spectrometer for Environmental and Biogeochemical research
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Hussain Abdulla, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 09/30/2021
* USD 222,141.00

Environmental assessment and ecosystem-level research requires advanced
analytical capabilities. This acquisition of a gas chromatograph with a triple
quadrupole mass spectrometer will provide a previously unavailable instrument to
South Texas scientists studying biogeochemical cycling and environmental
contaminants. This instrument has the ability to detect and quantify thousands
of compounds, including anthropogenic contaminants, that can then be studied in
greater detail to assess their metabolic role or influence on ecosystems. These
areas of research are vital, not only to the rapidly developing and
industrialized South Texas region but throughout the northern Gulf of Mexico.
Additionally, with much of this region experiencing regular extreme weather
events and environmental change, this instrument will play a role in
understanding how our ecosystems are adapting to this shifting
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This instrument has capabilities that will enable
a broad range of research for the faculty at Texas A&amp;M University Corpus-
Christi, but also other Hispanic Serving Institutions in our region. Some of the
potential areas of research enabled by this instrument include: assessing the
fate, transport and ecosystem effects of industrial and agricultural
contaminants; determination of bacterial metabolites in freshwater and marine
sediment; analysis of amino acids in sediment organic matter and biological
matrixes; determination of natural organic matter biomarkers; analysis of
atmospheric dissolved organic nitrogen. These studies will encompass basic and
applied research that seeks to examine natural scientific processes and the ways
in which humans are influencing our world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.