* 1828237
* MRI: Acquisition of an Aberration Corrected Low Energy Electron Microscope (AC-LEEM) for high resolution spectroscopic imaging of surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* David Bell, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,067,500.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports Harvard
University with the acquisition of a new type of microscope called a "Low Energy
Electron Microscope" which provides revolutionary possibilities for
visualization of material surfaces in different environmental conditions. This
new microscope will explore the frontiers for surface science research with the
ability of visualizing reaction effects in a dynamic mode, surface
modifications, surface reconstruction and studies of materials in operating
conditions. This microscope is applicable to a wide range of research areas,
such as catalysis, energy storage, energy transfer, quantum materials science,
nanowires, thin films, photovoltaic and perovskite stability. This cutting-edge
instrument will open new avenues for fundamental and applied materials research
for next generation of electronics, for energy storage technologies (batteries
for example) or for advanced defense applications. This new microscope will be
installed at the Center for Nanoscale Systems (CNS), which is a member of the
NSF's National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure Network (NNCI) and a
fully open access environment. This instrument will enable the education of
students and researchers from multiple institutions across the county in
leading-edge science techniques and methodology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program Harvard University will acquire a new type of
microscope, an Aberration Corrected Low Energy Electron Microscope (AC-LEEM).
LEEM is one of the critical new frontiers techniques for surface analysis with
the ability of visualizing reaction effects in a dynamic mode, surface
modifications, reconstructions and in-situ research. The AC-LEEM will be
installed in an open access environment at the Center for Nanoscale Systems
(CNS), which is a member of the NSF's National Nanotechnology Coordinated
Infrastructure Network (NNCI). This instrument supports researchers from a broad
national base and is applicable to a wide range of materials research areas,
such as catalysis, energy storage, energy transfer, quantum materials science,
nanowires, thin films, photovoltaic and perovskite stability. This cutting-edge
instrument will open new avenues for fundamental and applied research. LEEM
enables researchers to explore surface states and surface interfaces, by imaging
(LEEM), diffraction (LEED) and spectroscopies, both optical and electron, in
extreme detail while dynamically heating/cooling the sample and allowing the
addition of a gas (reactive or otherwise) to provide visualization of dynamic
surface modifications and reconstructions. This system allows the sample to be
heated up to &gt;1500 deg. C. The system allows control of the gas injection for
fine-tuning the speed of surface reconstructions and modification. The system
incorporates an Ultraviolet light source for Angle-Resolved Photoemission
Spectroscopy (ARPES). High resolution Electron Energy Spectroscopy (ES) and
mapping can also be performed. The placement in a national user facility allows
students and researchers access to this advanced surface analytical
instrumentation. This instrument will be integrated into the teaching of
materials science, physics, chemistry and catalysis through innovative new
educational programs on "nanoscale imaging and analysis" at the graduate,
undergraduate and adult education levels. It will enhance Research in
Undergraduate Education (REU), Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) and
Research Experiences for Veterans (REV) programs and will allow students and
teachers to be exposed to cutting edge technology, and the CNS educational
outreach models such as workshops, short courses and "open houses" to
disseminate new information to a broader audience. This microscope will give the
Unites States a competitive edge in materials science research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.