* 1828636
* NSF MRI:  Development of a Multifocus Structured Illumination Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* William Sullivan, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 697,990.00

An award is made to the University of California, Santa Cruz to develop and
construct a groundbreaking new imaging system for live 3D super-resolution
microscopy and employ this instrument to study the dynamic processes of life
beyond the classical resolution limit (~ 200 nm). The instrument will employ
Multifocus Structured Illumination Microscopy, a transformative new imaging
technique. The project team will construct and employ this powerful 3D super-
resolution imaging system in the University of California at Santa Cruz (UCSC)
Life Sciences Microscopy Center in collaboration with biology research groups
with an initial focus on studying chromatin dynamics. Our DNA genomes are stored
in the nucleus of cells as a protein-DNA complex known as chromatin. The basic
repeating subunit of chromatin, the nucleosome, consists of a protein core with
DNA wrapped twice around its outside, like thread around a spool. Our DNA
genomes are organized into millions of regularly spaced nucleosomes which allow
our DNA to be stored compactly and create new opportunities for regulation of
gene expression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multifocus Structured Illumination
Microscopy is designed to enable 3D imaging of chromatin in living cells at
nearly physiological conditions with super-resolution capability. Using
specially designed diffractive optical components, which will be custom made by
the project team in one of the University of California academic nanofabrication
user facilities, the microscope will simultaneously capture, on a single camera,
an entire 3D volume of the biological specimen, by multiplexing and focus
shifting the beam of light exiting the microscope objective. Employing fast
Structured Illumination super-resolution imaging, the microscope will
furthermore provide improved contrast and resolution to allow visualization of
structures smaller than 200 nm, which have classically been impossible to study
in living specimens. Placement of this instrument in the UCSC Life Sciences
Microscopy Center ensures direct availability of new and exciting optical
technology for application in biological research. The microscope will open up
new fields of research, initially in chromatin dynamics, and successively also
in other fields of biological research, where live 3D imaging beyond the
classical limit of resolution is needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.