* 1828184
* CIF: Student Travel Support for the 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Mahesh Varanasi, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) is the premier
international conference in information theory, the scientific discipline that
studies the mathematical foundations of reliable communications, whether by
telephony, television, wireless or optical systems, and the fundamental limits
of data storage, such as CDs, DVDs, flash drives, or other semiconductor media.
The symposium series has run since 1954, originally every two years, and yearly
since 2000. This project funds the participation of US-based students in this
event. Participation at this conference will enhance the research experiences
for students and provide increased opportunities for new
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students form an integral part of the
Information Theory community, and the IEEE ISIT Conference continues to promote
student participation through the ISIT Jack Kiel Wolf Best Student Paper Award,
the creation of the ISIT tutorial series, and the Information Theory Society
Student Committee. Students comprise about one-third of the participants at
ISIT, and the travel funds offered through this award will support the
attendance at the 2018 ISIT by students enrolled in a graduate or undergraduate
program in the United States and whose papers have been accepted for
presentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.