* 1828310
* MRI: Acquisition of a Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Bradley Kraft, St. John Fisher College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 304,950.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Bradley Kraft from St. John Fisher
College and colleagues Renuka Manchanayakage and Anand Sridhar have acquired a
400 MHz NMR spectrometer. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of
fields such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance, as well as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The instrument positively impacts student researchers who coauthor papers and
present their results at local and national conferences. The spectrometer
promotes its enhanced research opportunities in its outreach, and empowers
future generations in science and engineering. Secondary school students who
attend Science Exploration Days participate on hands-on workshops that introduce
them to NMR spectroscopy. The team of researchers also have industrial
collaborations that benefit the region.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposal is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It is especially
helpful in analyzing the structure, bonding, dynamics, and reactivity of Group
14 metal complexes and for characterizing, and evaluating applications of
synthesized ionic liquids. The spectrometer aids investigators in designing and
synthesizing inhibitors of the enzyme 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate (DXP)
synthase. It is also used in investigations of the phytochemical constituents of
tropical, succulent flowering plants native of tropical Africa from the
Kalanchoe species which may have potential antiviral
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.