* 1828514
* MRI: Acquisition of a Powder X-Ray Diffractometer for Research and Research Training at Bloomsburg University of Pennsylvania
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Brett McLaurin, COMMONWEALTH UNIVERSITY OF PENNSYLVANIA
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 129,192.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will support acquisition
of a powder X-ray diffractometer (PXRD) that will allow for the identification
and characterization of solid materials such as minerals and building materials.
X-ray diffractometry is a technique common in industry and research.
Undergraduate science students at Bloomsburg University include many of first-
generation and/or economically disadvantaged students; access to such an
instrument will allow for opportunities in faculty-sponsored research and
research training in addition to laboratory exercises within an academic course.
This type of experience is essential for science graduates when applying for
positions in graduate school or industry. Combined with existing facilities at
the institution, a PXRD is a major step towards developing a center for
materials characterization in a region with currently limited analytical
facilities. Access and training on how to use this instrument will enhance
student professional development and will support
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PXRD has applications to a variety of
research, including: 1) Determination of mineralogy in complex rare earth ores
from a deposit in Wyoming to understand environmental and economic impacts of
deposit development. Rare earth elements are essential resources for modern
electronics. They are naturally found in few places at economic grades, and even
then, they are in mineralogically complex deposits that are challenging to
processes. The Bear Lodge deposit in Wyoming is a rich, but undeveloped deposit.
PXRD use in concert with automated mineralogical analysis and other methods is
necessary to optimize mineral processing in cost terms and limit environmental
impacts of mining. 2) Classification of different varieties of asbestiform
minerals in order to help gauge human health risk in mixed land use areas of
Nevada. Asbestiform minerals need not be anthropogenic in order to be a health
hazard. Southern Nevada has many rock units with potentially hazardous mineral
fibers mobilized by erosion. Samples of these rocks obtained during field
mapping are best assessed by PXRD in order to determine the speciation of the
fibers. 'Asbestos' is a term than encompasses many minerals with similar habits
and potential health impacts can vary depending on exact type. 3)
Differentiation of soluble versus insoluble heavy metal-bearing minerals in coal
mine waste in central Pennsylvania to assess water quality impacts. Past and
current coal mining has resulted in significant heavy metal contamination of
soils in parts of Pennsylvania. The bioavailability of these elements, such as
lead, is a major health concern to residents of these regions. Use of PXRD with
X-ray fluorescence allows for the risk to be assesses in terms of the proportion
of contaminants residing in water-soluble mineral phases. Simple chemical
analysis can identify lead in a sample, but PXRD is necessary to determine the
potential mobility of lead (and other elements of
interest).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.