* 1828354
* MRI: Acquisition of LA-ICP-MS to support research in environmental and engineered systems, geology and environmental geosciences, and chemistry for a sustainable future
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Christopher Daniel, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2022
* USD 396,300.00

Solving environmental and public health challenges requires science and policy
informed by accurate measurement of trace elements in many types of
environmental media. Those measurements can help answer many scientific
questions, such as those involving Earth's mineral record, rare earth elements
(REE), and human exposure in fabrication laboratories to nanoscopic aerosolized
metal particles. The laser ablation inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometer
(LA-ICP-MS) acquired through this project will help Bucknell University faculty
and student researchers pursue answers to these questions in the fields of
environmental engineering, geology and environmental geosciences, chemical
engineering, and others, by allowing efficient and accurate measurement of the
majority of elements and isotopes. Bringing this research capability to central
Pennsylvania will strengthen the region's competitiveness for researcher
recruitment and funding. Bucknell University has in place several programs for
increasing participation and retention of underrepresented students in STEM
fields, providing a strong framework for maximizing this project's impact on
research training infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The versatility of this
instrument will support research across a broad range of disciplines. For
example, analysis of municipal wastewaters and biosolids will reveal the
abundance of REE available for recovery, opening up new sources for these
critical raw materials. Diversification of the global REE supply chain could
reduce the environmental impact of virgin REE extraction, bolster U.S. resource
independence, and could alleviate human rights abuses arising from conflict
metal situations. Second, the instrument's ability to characterize aerosol
composition and properties will support research that could show that tools used
in modern MakerSpaces generate metallic nanoparticles with sizes and character
that represent an inhalation exposure risk to humans. These results should help
fill the gap in occupational safety/health policies and emissions controls for
these modern fabrication tools to which children in K-12 school laboratories are
increasingly exposed. Finally, minerals can be analyzed for isotope
geochronology and trace element geothermometry to understand when and how they
form. Results have the potential to open a new frontier in solving questions
about the rates of tectonic processes, the timing of extinction events and rates
of climate change over geologic timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.