* 1828629
* MRI: Acquisition of a high-performance GPU-based computer for advanced multiscale materials modeling
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Juan De Pablo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2021
* USD 999,491.00

The funds from the Division of Materials Research support the University of
Chicago to acquire a modern, Graphics Processor Unit (GPU) based computer that
will allow researchers from a wide variety of disciplines to pursue new
materials research directions that are based on the use of machine learning
strategies and that could not be investigated without access to the necessary
computational resources. Four focus areas are envisaged, namely (1) new
materials discovery, (2) development of new molecular models, (3) machine-
learning enabled interpretation of experiments, and (4) development of new
simulation algorithms that rely on concepts from machine learning. A series of
workshops and other outreach activities will be carried out to engage the
broader materials research community in advanced computational research on GPU-
accelerated computers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of
Materials Research supports the University of Chicago with the project
"Acquisition of a high-performance GPU-based computer for advanced multiscale
materials modeling" . The instrument is a high-performance GPU (Graphics
Processing Unit) cluster tailored for fast and efficient simulations, including
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, hybrid particle-continuum simulations,
mesoscale simulations and continuum simulations. This cluster will thrust
forward a wide array of multidisciplinary research projects anchored in
molecular engineering, physics, chemistry, and biology, and builds upon the
investigators' involvement in developing the fastest, most powerful suite of
simulation software for particle-based simulations on GPUs, including molecular
dynamics simulations, evolutionary optimization algorithms, and powerful deep
learning-assisted advanced sampling algorithms. That software is now distributed
freely, and it is used throughout the world. The acquisition of a large GPU
cluster at The University of Chicago will provide a unique computational
resource and drive new collaborative efforts in algorithm and software
development at the interface between molecular engineering, physics, chemistry,
biology, computer science and materials science. The system will operate as a
facility to serve four interrelated objectives, namely (i) support the local
research community and their collaborators to achieve significant scientific
advances on an array of collaborative research projects touching on proteins,
membranes, cytoskeleton, fluids, colloids, nanoparticles, polymers, and
mechanical metamaterials; (ii) create a vibrant interdisciplinary intellectual
research community of theoreticians and experimentalists around the facility,
and promote the creative development of novel and more effective advanced
sampling algorithms, centered on the creation of a unified set of software tools
supporting state-of-the-art methodologies; (iii) organize workshops to train
undergraduate, graduate, and postgraduate students from a wide array of
disciplines to disseminate knowledge about the utilization of distributed
computational environments; (iv) contribute to diversifying the scientific
workforce by organizing training and educational programs for undergraduate
students from institutions serving under-represented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.