* 1828787
* MRI: Development of a Highly-Multiplexed Cavity Optomechanical System for Single-Molecule Mass Spectrometry and Inertial Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Michael Roukes, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 10/31/2022
* USD 612,349.00

This project is to develop an unprecedented instrument for studying proteomics -
the collection of proteins constituting the molecular machinery underlying all
life forms. Genes are the molecular precursors of this cellular machinery; genes
are the templates encoding how such proteins are constructed within cells. A
profound technological revolution has recently enabled detailed studies of
genomic templates; indeed, it has permitted decoding the human genome itself.
Similar advances in technology for proteomics has not occurred. Underlying this
is the fact that genomic studies are enabled by making billions of identical
copies of individual genes. This gene amplification then enables their
straightforward analysis en masse. No similar molecular amplification process
exists for proteins. In fact, critical processes in health and disease are often
determined by only a few copies of a protein molecule within a cell. Fundamental
advances in biology and medicine can therefore only be made if proteins are
studied molecule-by-molecule. A practical means for accomplishing this is
identified in this effort, and assembly of novel instrumentation for such
analyses is proposed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team has identified a
unique technological path toward these ends that concatenates three key
elements. First, single-molecule analysis of intact proteins and protein
complexes. This is based on two novel approaches previously invented by this
team - nanomechanical mass spectrometry and inertial imaging. Second, microwave-
frequency cavity optomechanics. This enables ultrasensitive measurements upon
the key nanomechanical devices, down to the quantum-mechanical limits of
detection. Third, state-of-the-art high-resolution native mass spectrometry.
This enables studies of intact (unfragmented) proteins and protein complexes.
These three building-blocks will be assembled into a singular hybrid instrument
to enable a new multi-physical approach for single-protein analyses that
surmounts the limitations of all current methodologies. It offers realistic
prospects for automated, high-throughput protein purification, and for
identification of intact protein species. Further it is technology that could
ultimately be widely disseminated. Deep proteomic profiling of individual cells
will be transformational for biological research, clinical medicine, and
pharmaceutical development. Surprisingly, no other technology is poised to
enable this. The proposed work will be highly cross-disciplinary in nature,
bringing together efforts of researchers spanning physics, engineering,
chemistry, biology, and mathematics. This project's highly-collaborative and
rich research environment will provide unparalleled opportunities for graduate
students and postdocs involved in its broader efforts. The team and the
collaborators are committed to providing long-term access to this instrument for
biological and medical research - both in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.