* 1828678
* MRI: Development of an Underwater Mobile Testbed Using a Software-Defined Networking Architecture
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Yang-Ki Hong, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This project, developing one of the first Software Defined Network (SDN)-based
underwater mobile testbeds to support the operation of marine robot fleets, aims
to address a technological bottleneck, that of achieving integrated
communications and navigation underwater. A fleet of Autonomous Surface Vehicles
(ASV)s are directed to follow sampling Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) to
provide acoustic and Magnetic Induction (MI) communication over relatively short
ranges. Launching the following effort thrusts: Acoustic &amp; MI Communication;
Control of ASVs &amp; UAVs; SDN architecture; and Integration and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testbed will be designed to achieve cost-
effectiveness, transferability, flexibility, and scalability and is expected to
become a stable instrument that is accessible by multiple research communities
that include ocean acoustics, communication and networking, robotics,
oceanography and environmental sciences. The hybrid acoustic/MI communication
will be used to achieve reliability and high data rates across the mobile
network for ASVs and AUVs, while smooth autonomy of the fleet would be ensured
by cooperative localization and real-time data transfer among the ASV-AUV pairs.
The testbed is expected to enable various research directions, including
underwater swarming, deep-learning-based underwater joint networking and
navigation, and integrated oil spill responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.