* 1828545
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dual-Beam Focused Ion Beam / Scanning Electron Microscope for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Marija Drndic, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2019
* USD 793,537.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation grant
allows acquisition of an advanced microscope at the Singh Center for
Nanotechnology at the University of Pennsylvania. This microscope uses two
different types of particles - electrons and ions - to form high magnification
images and give quantitative information about the chemical composition of
materials. The microscope is outfitted with a number of special tools that make
it particularly capable of characterizing soft matter: materials such as
plastics, liquid crystal polymers and biological cells. These materials have
been very difficult to characterize in the past as they are very fragile when
exposed to high-energy electrons and ions. This instrument includes the ability
to freeze samples to very low temperatures to mitigate this problem. It plays a
vital role in the education of undergraduate and graduate students, visiting
scientists, post-doctoral research associates and local high school students and
teachers through existing NSF-funded Center efforts on the campus. The
instrument is also used in advanced undergraduate/graduate laboratory classes
across multiple departments. Additionally, its location in a fully staffed,
open-access NSF National Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure facility
allows scientists and engineers from multiple nearby companies and universities
to utilize the tool for their own work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The focused ion beam (FIB) / scanning electron microscope
(SEM) enables five major research activities: (1) serial sectioning
(cryo)tomography, (2) cryo-sample preparation for subsequent scanning
transmission electron microscopy (S/TEM) characterization, (3) time-of-flight
secondary ion mass spectroscopy (ToF-SIMS) characterization, (4)
nanofabrication, and (5) S/TEM sample preparation. Serial sectioning allows in-
depth understanding of the three-dimensional structure of liquid crystal
polymers, colloidal nanoparticle superlattices, polymer/nanoparticle composites
and other hierarchical materials. Cryo-transfer and FIB-based sample preparation
is used to develop methods for characterizing semi-crystalline polymers,
colloidal nanoparticle superlattices and polymer/nanoparticle composites. ToF-
SIMS allows researchers to understand diffusion in polymeric materials with
unprecedented resolution. The instrument supports multiple nanofabrication
efforts at the Singh Center's Quattrone Nanofabrication Facility and enables new
fabrication approaches for two-dimensional materials. Finally, the low-
voltage/low-current capabilities enables ultrathin sample preparation for use in
the Singh's S/TEM instruments across a range of research projects which require
exquisite atomic-scale characterization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.