* 1828268
* MRI: Acquisition of a microfluidic-based 3D printer for additive manufacturing of biomaterials for fabrication of tissue-on-a-chip models.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Thomas Boland, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2022
* USD 255,790.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) with the acquisition of a Lab-on-a-Printer
(LOP) with RX1 Bioprinting Platform. The instrument will enable accelerated
fundamental 3D-bioprinting research at UTEP. The LOP technology is uniquely
capable of combining multiple cell types and biomaterial inputs on a single
printhead cartridge, enabling the precise deposition of different cells and
materials in 3D to recreate and mimic the complex structure of real tissue. The
RX1 Bioprinting Platform uses the LOP technology to rapidly and precisely
construct functional 3D living tissue, with an advanced material processing
capability providing accurate control over patterning of the biological building
blocks, rapidly. At UTEP, the RX1 Bioprinting Platform will be used in several
high impact projects including, engineering tissues with blood vessels, the
human heart wall, tissues for nerve regeneration and developmental biology, and
the application of novel 2D/advanced materials for in-vitro studies.
Concurrently, the RX1 Bioprinting Platform will provide sustained and cross-
disciplinary studies while contributing to and advancing STEM education and
training by providing students access to cutting-edge teaching, research
technologies and opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of the researchers is to employ the Lab-on-a-Printer (LOP) to utilize
hydrogels (synthetic and naturally derived) as scaffolds for bioprinting aimed
at tissue-on-a-chip studies. In addition, non-hydrogel type materials such as
polymer blends (including Polyurethane, PCL-PLLA), shape memory polymers and
nanocomposites with nanowire inclusions will also be targeted. The 3D-printed
constructs will include biological neural network development, dose
optimization/ minimization of small molecule based therapeutics and enhanced
dielectric energy storage and energy harvesting for energy related applications.
The LOP technology can easily enable printing of soft structures (such as
tissues) which provides needed exploration of biomaterial with advantageous
properties than currently possible. The instrument will support
multidisciplinary, team-based opportunities involving Engineering faculty at
UTEP and faculty from other scientific disciplines and help establish new
critical regional collaborations within the state of Texas and neighboring New
Mexico. The technology and hands-on use of this printer will be incorporated
into existing or new courses with laboratory component, exposing nearly 100
students annually to this technology. It will strengthen outreach to the
community, local middle- and high-school students. It will lead to new industry-
academic collaborations benefiting both the scientific community at UTEP and
industry, nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.