* 1828942
* NRT-INFEWS: The DataFEWSion Traineeship Program for Innovations at the Nexus of Food Production, Renewable Energy and Water Quality
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Robert Brown, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,907,236.00

Agriculture lies at the heart of interactions among food, energy and water
systems. It is an increasingly energy-intensive enterprise, but it is also a
growing source of energy. Agriculture places large demands on water supplies
while poor practices can degrade water quality. Each of these interactions
creates opportunities for modeling, driven by sensor-based and qualitative data
collection, to improve the effectiveness of system operation and control in the
short term as well as investments and planning for the long term. The large
volume and complexity of the data collected creates challenges for decision
support and stakeholder communication. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to Iowa State University will build a community of
researchers that explores, develops and implements effective data-driven
decision-making to efficiently produce food, transform primary energy sources
into energy carriers, and enhance water quality. The project anticipates
training forty-eight (48) MS and PhD students, including twenty-four (24) funded
PhD trainees, from agricultural and biosystems engineering, agronomy, industrial
engineering, mechanical engineering and natural resources ecology and
management. The project aims to prepare trainees for multiple career paths such
as research scientists, bioeconomy entrepreneurs, agribusiness leaders, policy
makers, agriculture analytics specialists, or professors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable provision of food, energy and clean water
requires understanding the interdependencies among systems as well as the
motivations and incentives of farmers and rural policy makers. Effective
innovation at the nexus of these food, energy and water (FEW) systems requires
data-rich system modeling with analytic capabilities for diverse types of data.
The traineeship has four key components. First, trainees will complete a new
graduate certificate to build competencies in fundamental understanding of
interactions among food production, water quality and bioenergy; data
acquisition, visualization, and analytics; complex systems modeling for decision
support; and the economics, policy and sociology of the FEW nexus. Second, they
will conduct interdisciplinary research on (a) technologies and practices to
increase agriculture's contributions to energy supply while reducing its
negative impacts on water quality and human health; (b) data science to increase
crop productivity within the constraints of sustainable intensification; or (c)
decision sciences to manage tradeoffs and promote best practices among diverse
stakeholders. Third, they will participate in a new graduate learning community
consisting of a two-year series of workshops that focus in alternate years on
the context of the Midwest agricultural FEW nexus and professional development.
Fourth, they will have small-group experiences to promote collaboration and peer
review. Each trainee will create and curate a portfolio that combines artifacts
from coursework and research with reflections on the broader impacts of their
work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.