* 1828066
* MRI: Acquisition of a Hybrid Real-Time Simulator for Real-Time Power Grid Simulations
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2022
* John Pierre, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,033,396.00

This MRI proposal requests funds for the acquisition of a hybrid real-time
digital simulator, which is a combination of specialized high-performance
computing (HPC) hardware and software tools capable of performing real-time
power grid and hardware-in-loop simulations with various external devices. The
equipment will be located at the University of Wyoming (UWyo) and made
accessible online for open-access use by investigators at UWyo, Montana Tech,
other academic institutions and power companies worldwide. The acquisition of
the requested hybrid real-time power system digital simulator will promote
interdisciplinary collaboration efforts to build our next-generation smart power
grid. In addition, the curricula in the power engineering area will be updated
with better demonstrations of power system operations to students and therefore
attract and provide competent workforce for the challenges of our next-
generation power system. The open accessibility of the equipment will also
promote collaborations among researchers. Meanwhile, the integration of research
and education will help attract undergraduate students for higher education.
Furthermore, given that UWyo is the only provider of baccalaureate and graduate
education and research in Wyoming, acquisition of the proposed instrument is
expected to have a tremendous impact on the training of future scientists at the
high school, community college, and the undergraduate level. UWyo actively
promotes college preparedness, access, and success among students traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields by focusing special programs on first-
generation, female, low-income, and ethnic minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of the hybrid real-time digital
simulator will provide a great platform for research efforts in many different
areas including data mining, statistical signal processing, high-performance
computing and wind energy towards power grid modernization. Specifically, the
capability of the proposed instrumentation to perform both real-time power grid
and hardware-in-loop simulations is vital for a variety of projects currently
underway in several departments at the UWyo and Montana Tech, including 1) the
development of machine learning and statistical signal processing algorithms
using synchrophasor measurements for reliability analysis and dynamic wide-area
situational awareness; 2) the invention of advanced measurement and analyzing
techniques based on point-on-wave measurements for both transient and steady-
state analysis; 3) the application of modern high-performance computational
technologies for real-time analysis of the grid; 4) the integration of improved
system models including renewable generation sources for different time scale
power system stability studies; and 5) other large system simulation studies.
The research team at UWyo and Monata Tech has an excellent record of
contributions to power system stability analysis and high-performance
computation over decades. However, their past research has mostly been based on
actual field measured data and on smaller power grid models implemented in
software. This new hybrid simulator will provide them a powerful tool to take
this research to a more in-depth level in multiple ways. It will enable them to
simulate larger power grids in finer detail and more complex scenarios. A hybrid
simulator also enables them to interface with actual hardware devices such as
PMUs used in grid monitoring. Furthermore, the hybrid simulator has the
capability to interface with other real-time digital simulators as a network
simulator to conduct smart grid communication co-simulations. All these add
tremendous new dimensions to their research, putting them in a position to
continue to make high impact contributions to the US power
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.