* 1828676
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dedicated Electron Beam Lithography (eBL) System for Interdisciplinary Research, Hands-on Education and Inspiring Outreach
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2021
* USD 599,526.00

This award provides support to Northwestern University (NU) to procure a
dedicated electron beam lithography (eBL) system for interdisciplinary research,
integrated hands-on training and education, and outreach. The ability to
position structures down to the nano-/molecular-scale with exquisite and precise
control over size, site, shape and overall architecture is one hallmark of
modern science and engineering. Advances in research across multiple fields,
from optoelectronics to quantum information processing to biosensors, are
enabled by the ability to manipulate matter at these length-scales addressed by
the eBL nanopatterning and nanolithography. In this context, eBL has become the
workhorse for patterning with nanometer-scale precision across a large spatial
area. This eBL system will significantly impact the Northwestern community and
beyond. Undergraduate, graduate students and researchers will benefit from the
hands-on training and cleanroom experience with the new dedicated eBL, and its
diverse applications. The instrument capabilities will form hands-on laboratory
modules in courses in broad area of materials fabrication and characterization.
The system will be housed in a dedicated clean-room nanofabrication facility
called "NUFAB", and will help provide a complete integrated
micro/nanofabrication process flow within the facility. In addition, NUFAB is
part of the NSF-National Nanofabrication Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI) node
in the Midwest region called Soft- and Hybrid Nanotechnology Experimental
(SHyNE) Resource. As an NNCI node, SHyNE Resource provides access to this
dedicated eBL to regional and national users, such as SMEs and large
corporations, in addition to access to local area institutions, regional
universities and community colleges. The eBL system will greatly enhance NU and
surrounding research capabilities, regional infrastructure under NSF-NNCI node,
and contribute to integrated and cross-disciplinary education and outreach, with
lasting impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eBL system
supported by this award will be key in enhancing the "figures of merit" for
patterning and lithography that are essential for myriad scientific challenges
and technological proof-of-concepts addressed by project team, NU colleagues and
collaborators. It will enable hitherto challenging experiments in a wide range
of initiatives. The eBL system will impact broad categories in: plasmonics and
photonics; quantum structures and phenomena; materials for electronics and
energy; NEMS/MEMS sensors and systems; soft matter, fluidics and biomolecular
structures. The eBL system will enable fabrication of active nanoscale elements
across inch-scale spatial distribution for broad-beam
interrogation/measurements. It will push the limits of plasmonics and photonic
structures in terms of size, shape, definition, fidelity, at the nanometer
scale. Theorists and modeling experts will cross-correlate experimental findings
for potential breakthroughs in light-matter interactions. The eBL will enable
fabrication of nanoscale contacts for critical transport and related
measurements of emerging functional nanostructures, as their size requires
nanoscale contacts. Those exploring quantum phenomena/systems in spatially
confined systems (2-D layers, semiconductor heterostructures), will make use of
the precision stage, pattern "stitching" and other novelties of the proposed
system. The system will serve as a testbed for the development of novel
electron-beam resists and materials modification by electron-beam exposures. It
will enable exploring the role of roughness and spatial confinement on wetting
behavior, fluid transport, biomolecular sorting and other phenomena anchored by
nanoscale fabrication and patterning of eBL system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.