* 1828359
* RUI: The Timing and Evolution of Devonian Fire Systems and Their Implications for Atmospheric Oxygen Concentration
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Gastaldo, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 231,571.00

Charcoal can be preserved in the rock record, and so it is an excellent
indicator of wildfire activity in deep-time. The earliest known charcoal
evidence of wildfires dates from about 420 million years ago when there were no
trees and plants were extremely small and moss-like. These plants required very
wet environments for growth and reproduction. The small size of plants and their
dependence on moist conditions means that they should be a poor source of fuel
for wildfires. However, there are a significant number of sites from this time
420-400 million years ago that preserve charcoal and thus evidence of ancient
wildfires. There are very few charcoals preserved over the following 30 million
years, which is surprising since vegetation around the world became larger and
more independent of water and so a better source of fuel for fire. This proposal
aims to investigate rocks from North America deposited during the time interval
from 420-359 million years ago (the Devonian Period) when evidence of wildfires
is lacking. This study will assess whether this anomaly in fire abundance really
exists and what factors may have controlled it, including whether oxygen in the
atmosphere may have been too low to have supported fires. Undergraduate interns
will be engaged in the project and trained in fieldwork and laboratory
techniques related to the study of fossil charcoal. At a time when the global
impact of fires on many communities is growing, this project will provide these
undergraduates an opportunity to share topical and exciting results on fires in
deep time with both the scientific community and, through online content, the
broader general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Preliminary evidence indicates
that global fire occurrences during the Early to Mid-Devonian were not affected
primarily by fuel but rather, flammability was governed by atmospheric oxygen
concentration (pO2). This master variable of the Earth system is considered to
have profoundly impacted metazoan evolution, but its quantification in deep time
is uncertain. This proposal aims to test the hypothesis that pO2 was the primary
driver of fire occurrence at this time by seeking and isolating charcoal from a
range of North American Devonian-age sedimentary settings and assessing it in
terms of sedimentary setting, taxonomy and petrographic characteristics.
Comprehensively determining early fire regime evolution will afford new insights
into the evolution of fire feedback into biogeochemical cycles and will permit
models of pO2 during the Devonian to be critically examined. These data will
collectively provide base level insights into environmental change during this
key interval in the terrestrialization of Earth. Undergraduate interns will be
engaged in the project and trained in fieldwork and laboratory techniques
related to the study of fossil charcoal. These undergraduates will continue
their projects during the academic year as capstones and disseminate their
results through presentations at conferences and through collaboration in
scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.