* 1828083
* MRI: Acquisition of a Next Generation, Data-Centric Supercomputer
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Mark Shephard, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2021
* USD 999,000.00

The project will support the acquisition of a data centric supercomputer at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI). This instrument will lead to significant
advancements in science and engineering problems currently being tackled at
RPI's Center for Computational Innovations (CCI) for applications including: the
definition of new designed materials, applying active flows control for energy
savings and microbiological systems modeling for medical treatment planning. The
research will also include the development of new extreme-scale simulation
technologies, graph analysis algorithms and the construction of entirely new
simulation workflows. Hundreds of researchers and students from over 20
universities, 5 DOE national laboratories, 3 major industrial research centers
(Corning, GE and IBM), 50 faculty, 4 start-ups across 11 U.S. states will take
advantage of this proposed cyberinstrument to continue making a deep impact on
their research. Student participation has been key to CCI's current success and
national interest is anticipated not only due to the instrument's ability to
advance current research but also due to its potential as a prototype model for
future exascale systems. Students engaged in projects supported by the
instrument will become the next generation of compute and data intensive
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new instrument integrates IBM POWER9 CPUs with
next generation NVIDIA Volta GPUs into a hardware accelerated unified memory
system (e.g., cache coherent). Additionally, all compute nodes are augmented
with non-volatile memory storage, and a subset of the nodes include FPGA
acceleration. The system will be used by faculty, students and CCI collaborators
to address current barriers caused by the need to interact with massive data
volumes that are used in and produced by next generation simulation tools. The
cyberinstrument and algorithmic developments to be carried out will enable a new
level of understanding and enhance our ability to solve many key challenges
including: the accurate diagnosis of breast cancer directly from large-scale
image datasets; semantic integration of the abundance of heterogeneous,
multimodal, and multiscale data to improve personal health; modeling plasmas in
fusion reactors; modeling active flow control devices that will greatly increase
the weather conditions under which wind turbines will produce electricity; and
combined biological data and model integration on molecular, cellular, and organ
levels to understand organism-level phenomena and gain predictive understanding
in systems biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.