* 1828163
* MRI: Acquisition of Hardware for the Enhancement of the ELSA High Performance Computing Cluster to Enable Computational Research at The College of New Jersey
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Michael Ochs, The College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2021
* USD 651,032.00

The College of New Jersey (TCNJ) will acquire equipment to significantly upgrade
and enhance the Electronic Laboratory for Science and Analysis (ELSA) High
Performance Computing cluster. TCNJ is a primarily undergraduate institution
promoting a deep engagement of undergraduate students in research. Many of
TCNJ's School of Science faculty members are working at the cutting edge of
computational research in their fields, which include a broad range of areas
including biochemistry/biophysics, genetics, bioinformatics, astrophysics,
machine learning, and mathematical biology. In order to maintain a diverse and
state of the art resource that meets the current and future computational needs
of TCNJ's faculty and undergraduate students the current ELSA cluster requires
targeted hardware enhancements. The new instrument will (1) enhance the research
capacity and resulting scientific discovery of TCNJ's School of Science faculty
members and their undergraduate research teams; (2) expose a greater number of
undergraduate students and researchers to this powerful computational
infrastructure through a series of newly developed High Performance Computing
and data visualization short courses and workshops; and (3) improve access to
the ELSA cluster for students traditionally underrepresented in STEM, as well as
to researchers beyond TCNJ through a new collaboration with Open Science
Grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand the research programs of
more than 13 faculty members (many of whom are early career faculty) spanning
all five of TCNJ's School of Science departments. The computationally intensive
work that will be supported through this project includes a diverse array of
scientific efforts, including studies of pilus biomechanics, estimations of cell
signaling processes, methods for investigating the strength of passwords and
security of password systems, and improving our understanding of the most
energetic objects in the universe. Currently, the research programs of TCNJ
faculty members in these and other areas are restricted by inadequate graphic
processing unit (GPU) resources and by the slow speed aging central processing
unit (CPU) servers part of the current instrumentation. The new ELSA cluster
will allow faculty and student researchers at TCNJ to run workflows ranging from
embarrassingly parallel computations, to those that necessitate high levels of
parallelization over hundreds of cores, intensive GPU computations, and remote
visualization of simulation results. The instrument will thus ensure that these
research programs are able to reach their full potential. This project will also
benefit nearly 100 undergraduate student researchers each year who are part of
these labs and work directly on the cluster. As a result, in addition to
improving the capacity for scientific discovery, the proposed acquisition will
help TCNJ meet the demands of developing an undergraduate workforce that is
ready to leverage increasingly powerful High-Performance Computing resources,
now and in their future careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.