* 1828426
* MRI: Acquisition of a Time-Resolved, Image-Intensified Camera for the Spatial Imaging of Quantum-Entangled Photons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Enrique Galvez, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 74,821.00

Imaging with cameras has transformed science and society. Modern cameras often
record huge numbers of photons, the quantum-particles of light, with arrays of
electronic detectors. This research project will investigate new applications
for images that are carried by a small number of individual photons. A state-of-
the-art camera will be acquired to study images formed with single photons. This
will open new possibilities for studying how imaging can be accomplished in ways
that take advantage of quantum aspects of photons, such as entanglement. This
team will explore how new imaging methods can lead to a deeper understanding of
light and pave the way to developing new quantum technologies. The camera will
also enable undergraduates to do research on quantum optics phenomena, such as
"ghost imaging", and this will improve their education on the fundamentals of
quantum physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial modes of light are the
basic components of images. The goal of this research is to image the spatial
modes of single photons that are quantum entangled with other photons, and with
other degrees of freedom, such as polarization. The image-intensified camera
will enable acquiring the images of photons that are not possible with
conventional cameras due to shortcomings in their triggering technology. This
team will investigate using the camera to characterize the quantum state of the
light in ways that are alternative to current methods. This team will also
investigate the images carried by photons through their entanglement, and they
will investigate high-dimensional hyper-entanglement of light. The camera will
help undergraduates to do research in quantum optics with entangled photons, and
this will improve students' understanding of quantum
entanglement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.