* 1828057
* MRI: Track1 Acquisition of a Confocal High Content Screening System to Enhance Bioengineering and Biomedical Research.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Niall Howlett, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2022
* USD 893,169.00

Funds are requested for the purchase and installation of an Opera Phenix
Confocal High Content Screening System. This equipment will facilitate new
collaborations to address important questions in fields ranging from molecular
biology to environmental engineering. The team will use this equipment to answer
research questions regarding: (1) the survival of life in extreme environments,
(2) the design of more efficient dispersants for use in remediating oil spills,
(3) the growth of cell and biofilm on diverse surfaces including water
filtration systems, (4) the use of aerosol medicines in cancer treatments, (5)
the dynamic complexities of tissue repair and regeneration, and (6) the
interactions between nanomaterial therapeutics and sensors and human cells. The
equipment will be housed in a state-of-the-art imaging facility that will offer
training workshops for students and industry professionals, and provide external
services through state-wide and national networks. The researchers will also
reach general audiences through a new open-house activity called "Images of the
Invisible," which will highlight the work of this initiative. This instrument
will also have a positive impact beyond campus, fueling research and education
initiatives involving regional colleges and universities, collaborations with
industry, and growing outreach programs in local secondary
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed instrument will allow for the rapid
study of many phenotypic and molecular features of cells and cell components
because of its high throughput capabilities. Nine high-impact projects have been
identified by investigators in this collaboration, where the unique capabilities
of this laser scanning confocal high-content screening system are essential. The
data obtained from this time-resolved and parameter-controlled equipment will be
beneficial in the design of materials and implementation of activities,
including next-generation nanotechnology-based biosensors, biofouling control
agents, discovery of new Fanconi anemia genes, drug delivery strategies, and
novel biomaterials. The ten participating investigators will perform ongoing
funded research in areas of cell and molecular biology, nanomedicine,
nanotoxicology, geobiology, materials synthesis, biomaterials, regenerative
biology, and environmental engineering using the new capabilities. Beyond these
areas, the instrument will promote on- and off-campus collaborations with other
fields of research through statewide research networks and the Rhode Island
Consortium for Nanoscience and Nanotechnology. The research team has an
extensive record of education and outreach activities. The applications and
results obtained from this equipment will broaden and enrich curriculum
development, mentoring, and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.