* 1828238
* MRI: Acquisition of an X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer for Characterization of Next-Generation Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Coleman Kronawitter, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2021
* USD 559,636.00

This Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of a multi-
user XPS instrument to serve a large community of scientists at the University
of California Davis and in the greater Davis area. X-ray Photoemission
Spectroscopy (XPS) is a surface sensitive technique that can provide detailed
information about the chemical composition of materials, chemicals and devices.
Therefore, data from XPS measurements is of great importance to the
understanding and development of materials in chemical, physical, environmental,
and engineering research. The instrument will positively impact the research of
over 33 faculty members from three institutions and enhance the research
infrastructure and educational outreach of UC Davis. It will accelerate current
progress and enable new directions in research. More than ten projects will be
affected, including research on renewable fuels and the manufacture and
optimization of next generation electronics. The instrument will also aid the
discovery of more efficient devices for solar energy conversion and it will
enable fundamental research on the properties of catalysts used in chemical
industry. This instrument will have a strong impact on the education and
training of the next generation of scientists. Concepts related to XPS are
taught in many graduate and undergraduate courses at UC Davis, and students
enrolled in these classes will now have the opportunity to engage in hands-on
actual experiments with the instrument. During the summer, the instrument will
be made available to undergraduate students in the NSF-REU (Research Experiences
for Undergraduates) program in Physics and Chemistry departments. New learning
modules will be created and integrated into the high school summer outreach
program COSMOS (California Summer School for Mathematics and Science).
Additionally, the instrument will serve economically disadvantaged and minority
students that come to campus as part of the MURPPS (minority undergraduate
research participation in the physical sciences), CAMP (California alliance for
minority participation in math, science and engineering), and UC LEADS (UC
Leadership program for disadvantaged students) programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acquisition of an X-ray Photoemission
Spectroscopy tool (XPS) is proposed to enhance materials science research and
educational activities at UC Davis and in the Northern California Sacramento
region. The XPS tool will enable spatially resolved chemical state analysis with
a detection resolution from 0.1 to 1 atomic percent and an imaging resolution of
1 micron. Acquisition of an XPS will add a critical new dimension to materials
research on the UC Davis campus, where expertise and infrastructure for the
successful application and operation is available. XPS will impact the materials
research and training activities of over 177 direct users who are working in
research and development of novel, next-generation materials for industrial
applications and renewable energy technologies. It will boost the campus
research infrastructure and educational outreach of UC Davis, accelerating
current progress and enabling new directions in materials
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.