* 1828659
* Learning from the PROSE: Exploring professional organizations' role in supporting Black engineering student success
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Jeremi London, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 845,487.00

Despite millions of federal investments to broaden participation, Black students
continue to be underrepresented at all levels of engineering. Existing research
not only provides evidence of the barriers to undergraduate engineering degree
completion, it also reveals factors that positively influence the academic
outcomes of high-achieving Black students. Factors like being more socially
integrated on campus and being conscious of one's racial identity are among
them; and involvement in certain types of professional organizations on campus
provide a context for both of these factors to occur. As part of Learning from
the PROSE (Professional Organizations Supporting Excellence), the aim of this
study is to understand how students' engagement with identity-related
organizations - like the National Society of Black Engineers (NSBE) and those
that makeup the National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC)- contributes to the
successful completion of engineering programs. This project is focusing on the
experiences of those who have already successfully completed their undergraduate
education, namely Black graduate engineering students. The findings from this
study will advance our understanding of the unique role identity-related
organizations play in promoting the success of one of the least represented
groups in engineering. The explicit focus on Black engineering graduate students
who have graduated from a range of institutions allows us to deeply explore
similar dynamics in different contexts. By extension, this will allows us to
develop a robust set of strategies for supporting minority students at all
levels of education, reinforce the efforts of professional organizations that
align with various dimensions of their identity, and shed light on pathways to
the professoriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although Black people represent
approximately 13% of the U.S. population and are one of the fastest growing
demographics in the nation, they made up less than 4.4% of engineering degree
recipients at the undergraduate, Master's and doctoral levels during the
2015-2016 academic year. This work will learn from Black engineering graduate
students that have successfully navigated engineering environments and self-
selected to continue study in a graduate engineering program. Using the Model of
Co-Curricular Support and Community Cultural Wealth as theoretical
underpinnings, this qualitative and video-based research project will
investigate how engagement in identify-related organizations as undergraduate
students contributed to the successful navigation of their engineering programs.
More specifically, this project aims to investigate the mechanisms by which
professional organizations provide the critical professional and psychosocial
support that contribute to the development and success of Black engineering
students using a three-phase approach: performing a systematic literature
review, conducting phenomenological interviews, and exploring novel means of
dissemination. Although existing research typically investigates such
experiences while being enrolled in undergraduate engineering programs, using a
phenomenological approach, this study takes a comprehensive and reflective view
that can only be obtained after the experience is over. Moreover, relying on a
mixture of qualitative and video-based methods provides the basis for
disseminating the research findings in traditional and novel ways. This study
will uncover critical aspects of access to networks and support systems from the
perspective of Black engineering students that have demonstrated persistence
while highlighting partnership opportunities among existing on-campus programs
that could promote a shift away from the siloed approaches to supporting student
success. This study will also develop knowledge by serving as an initial
investigation into the significance of engaging in multiple identity-related
professional organizations simultaneously. Insights emerging from this
investigation will likely have implications for other underrepresented groups
(e.g., Latinx, LGBTQ, transfer students, etc).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.