* 1828710
* MRI: Acquisition of an Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) System for Profiling Open Channels
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Philip Gerla, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 105,520.00

This Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) Program grant will support acquisition
of a modular Acoustic Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP) instrument system that
will enable fundamental research on stream, river, lake, canals and culverts in
North Dakota and the upper Midwest. ADCP instruments are both boat and static
platform deployable and can collect data autonomously. ADCP allows for spatially
and contemporaneously resolved quantification of water velocities profiles and
such measurements are necessary across watersheds to better forecast flooding
events. As such the instrument will support research that is poised to advance
the national health, prosperity and welfare in that improved flood forecasting
can reduces loss of human life, can be used to help mitigate property damage and
most efficiently target first responder efforts, and by study of these systems,
better civil engineering approaches can be taken to lessen the severity of
future flooding events. The instrument system would support a multi-disciplinary
research group of faculty and students from various engineering, science,
natural resources, geoscience departments and programs at the University of
North Dakota (UND), Valley City State University (VCSU), and Turtle Mountain
Community College (TMCC), a tribal college, to conduct water resources related
research. Much of the research is societally relevant and will help to improve
flood forecasting and inform water resources management decisions. The
investigators plan to engage K-12 students in experiential leaning of field
analytical techniques as applied to research problems in watershed
hydrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ADCP that will be purchased using funds from
the award will support fundamental research on: the hydrodynamics of open
channel flows in snow-melt triggered flooding on North Dakota rivers and
streams; studies of the impacts of prairie restoration on stream and river
hydrographs; and studies of nutrient, solute and sediment transport dynamics in
large rivers and higher order streams, lakes, canals and culverts in North
Dakota and the upper Midwest. ADCP allows for spatially and contemporaneously
resolved quantification of complex flow fields where laminar flow and turbulence
interact on short timescales. ADCP relies on the Doppler effect of sound waves
scattered back from particles within the water column to allow for flow field
and depth profiling of the water bodies with cm-scale
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.