* 1828072
* MRI: Acquisition of a Time-of-Flight Mass Spectrometer for Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Patrick Limbach, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 339,500.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Edward Merino from University of
Cincinnati and colleagues Patrick Limbach, James Mack II and Neil Ayres have
acquired a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, tandem time-of-flight,
tandem mass spectrometer MALDI-ToF/ToF-MS/MS) equipped with multiple ionization
sources. In general, mass spectrometry (MS) is one of the key analytical methods
used to identify and characterize small quantities of chemical species in
complex samples. MALDI TOF combines gentle ionization (ideal for producing
intact ions of peptides, proteins, nucleic acids, carbohydrates, synthetic
polymers, and other similarly sized species) with a detection mode that offers
an excellent balance between sensitivity and accuracy across a wide mass range.
This highly sensitive technique allows identification and determination of the
structure of molecules in a complex mixture. The acquisition strengthens the
research infrastructure at the university and regional area. The instrument
broadens participation by involving diverse students with this modern analytical
technique. The instrument improves research projects from around southwestern
Ohio. The Mass Spectrometry Facility analyzes samples from other universities
and private companies. Thus, this new instrument answers new research questions
derived from the local area. The instrumentation enables further growth in
research that addresses wider research themes of biomaterials, chemical sensing
and many other applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It is especially useful in
characterizing synthesized blood compatible biomaterials and for uncovering the
chemistry and biology of reactive molecules. This mass spectrometer is used in
the development of recyclable catalysts and reagents using mechanochemistry and
in investigations of radiation-induced damage during translation in melanized
fungi which is associated with a wide variety of infectious
syndromes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.