* 1828408
* MRI: Acquisition of a 500 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectrometer to Benefit Research and Education in Maine
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Alice Bruce, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 535,900.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Matthew Brichacek from University
of Maine (UM) and colleagues Alice Bruce (UM), William Gramlich (UM) and Thomas
Schwartz (UM) as well as Karl Bishop from Husson University have acquired a 500
MHz NMR spectrometer. This spectrometer allows research in a variety of fields
such as those that accelerate chemical reactions of significant economic
importance, as well as allow study of biologically relevant species. In general,
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is one of the most powerful tools
available to chemists for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is
used to identify unknown substances, to characterize specific arrangements of
atoms within molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between
molecules in solution or in the solid state. Access to state-of-the-art NMR
spectrometers is essential to chemists who are carrying out frontier research.
The instrument is the first 500 MHz NMR spectrometer in the state. Having a
spectrometer with this field strength positively impacts educators and
scientists at institutions ranging from biomedical research institutes such as
Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory, the Jackson Laboratory, and Maine
Medical Center Research Institute to local high schools such as Bangor High
School and colleges such as Husson University, Eastern Maine Community College,
and Kennebec County Community College as well as industries such as Sappi North
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this NMR spectrometer is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially aids in the
characterization of glycans produced by automated synthesis as well as studies
of metabolomics of blue mussels. The instrument is also used in investigations
of the mechanisms of metal mediated thiolatedisulfide exchange reactions and the
search for microprobes for bioanalysis. In addition, it is used in studies of
biofuels and heterogeneous catalysis and for preparing sustainable polyesters
with selectable, lignin derived pendent groups. The spectrometer also serves
researchers investigating the synthesis and characterization of azobenzene
photoswitches in petrochemicals and converting biomass to chemicals and
fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.