* 1828567
* MRI: Acquisition of a Regional Resource for Long-Term Archiving of Large Scale Research Data Collections
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Amy McGovern, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 967,755.00

The project will support University of Oklahoma (OU)'s acquisition, deployment
and maintenance of a large-scale storage instrument -- the OU &amp; Regional
Research Store (OURRstore). This instrument will enable faculty, staff,
postdocs, graduate students and undergraduates to pursue data-intensive research
(by building large and growing data collections), and to share and publish these
datasets (which they can make discoverable and searchable). Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) research is increasingly data-intensive, with
massive growth of research data collections. Yet a substantial fraction of
universities and colleges have been underprepared not only for the volume,
velocity and variety of data, but especially for long term stewardship of
rapidly growing data collections. In addition, many STEM research projects
require substantial storage during their experiments, so much so that holding it
all on disk is too expensive to be practical. This challenge is quickly becoming
more acute, because disk prices are now improving much more slowly than in the
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OURRstore is a large-scale storage instrument,
consisting of a substantial tape library, as well as crucial support subsystems
such as servers, disk, network components and software. OURRstore allows the
massive growth of storage capacity needed to address the requirements of the
large and broad research community that it serves. Via an innovative, low cost
business model, OURRstore offers a cost-effective data storage and access and
solution. The research topics supported by the instrument include: weather
forecasting, weather radar and weather data mining, including for severe storms
such as tornadoes and hurricanes; earthquake triggers and seismology; data and
modeling for agriculture, forestry, water and earth ecosystems; coastal
simulation; molecular systems that control growth and development of vegetation;
microbial contamination of infrastructure; effects of repeated stress on
organisms; RNA processing in mitochondria; nanotechnology; visual neuroscience;
physiological adaptation to extreme environments; astrophysical objects and
stellar atmospheres; malware cybersecurity; influence of microblogs on social
media. OURRstore maximizes its impact across the US in the following ways.
First, it serves as a national model for affordable, large scale, long term,
multi-institutional storage. Second, the OURRstore community includes a
substantial number of people from underrepresented populations: over 200
research team members are one or more of the following: women, African
Americans, Hispanics, Native Americans, disabled, and US veterans. Third, the
instrument will enhance OU's current "Supercomputing in Plain English" webinar
series, a popular outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.