* 1828764
* MRI: Acquisition of a Benchtop X-ray Crystallography System
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Yujie Sun, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 111,238.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Lisa Berreau from Utah State
University and colleagues Yujie Sun and Tianbiao Liu have acquired a benchtop
single crystal X-ray diffractometer. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows
accurate and precise measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a
molecule, including bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information
about the spatial arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules.
The studies described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic
chemistry, materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral
part of teaching as well as research and research training of graduate and
undergraduate students in chemistry and biochemistry at this institution. The
presence of a modern small molecule X-ray crystallography system on the USU
campus is transformative for students, as they are currently receiving hands-on
training in this technique that was unavailable before the acquisition. The
instrument is used in summer internship programs that bring additional
undergraduates into USU research labs from regional two- and four-year schools.
The PI and Co-PIs welcome Native American students from southeast Utah each
summer to participate in a weeklong summer research experience in their
laboratories and utilize the diffractometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of
this basic diffractometer is aimed at enhancing research and education at all
levels. It especially impacts studies on structural and electronic factors that
influence divalent metal/oxygen-promoted aliphatic carbon-carbon (C-C) bond
cleavage reactions. The diffractometer allows the pursue of investigations of
the properties of flavonol-based carbon monoxide-releasing molecules as well as
studies of oxygen chemistry of first row transition metal complexes with a Lewis
acidic metal cation in the secondary coordination sphere. The instrumentation
also serves investigators developing molecular electrocatalysts for carbon
dioxide reduction to methane and methanol which is economically
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.