* 1828280
* MRI: Development of a System for High-Resolution Uninterrupted Capture of Complex Animal Motions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Amos Abbott, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 09/30/2022
* USD 265,666.00

This major research instrumentation award supports the development of an
integrated camera array that will be customized to meet the challenges of
capturing fast and highly complex animal motions--providing an enabling tool for
fundamental research to understand and model the dynamics of motion. The
instrument will permit uninterrupted motion tracking for hundreds of points on
an animal as it executes even the most complex motions, such as midair
somersaults that bats perform in pursuit of prey. The unprecedented detail,
quality, and quantity of the data to be generated will provide the basis for new
fundamental research into how animals use freedom of movement to attain
unmatched levels of performance in maneuverability and energy efficiency. The
large volume of quantitative data produced by the instrument will bring data-
intensive methods--from non-linear dynamics and machine learning-- to bear on
the field of animal motion. A deeper understanding of the principles behind
animal motion will be key to the development of next-generation mobile robots
that can handle unconstrained, natural environments. These highly dexterous,
mobile robots will enhance productivity in applications such as manufacturing,
health care, disaster response, precision agriculture, forestry and
environmental monitoring and clean-up. This instrument will also enable
fundamental research on the motion of man-made structures, such as the complex
dynamic motions inherent in flutter in aerodynamic systems. Knowledge gleaned
from this instrument will also help veterinarians to diagnose disease and pain
from animals' motion patterns. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
involved in instrumentation development and the instrumentation will enable
interdisciplinary research training opportunities in engineering and biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument will combine high
spatial and temporal resolution with the ability to view a moving animal from
many different angles at the same time. It will consist of 48 high-speed video
cameras that can deliver a 1280x1024-pixel image resolution at 1057-Hz frame
rate. High-quality illumination will be provided by 8 specialized lights so that
no part of a moving animal will ever be hidden from view. All cameras in the
array will be synchronized (precision &lt; 10 nanoseconds) and operated
automatically to allow for efficient capture of large motion data sets. A
recording of 5 seconds, for example, will result in over 250,000 images with 332
Gigabytes of raw data. The project team's automated image processing methods
will allow reliable tracking of several hundred landmark points across such
large image sets. The instrument and its accompanying suite of software tools
will be used for the study of previously unexplained animal motion capabilities
such as the highly articulated flight of bats, gliding of snakes, and lizards
running on vertical substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.