* 1828141
* MRI:  Acquisition of a III-V Molecular Beam Epitaxy System for a new Materials Growth User Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Matthew Doty, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,000,000.00

The growth of high quality thin films of semiconductor materials is critical to
research ranging from fundamental physics to the understanding of electronic
devices including transistors, lasers, photodetectors, and advanced solar cells.
With this award from the Major Research Instrumentation program, the University
of Delaware will acquire a molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) system to permit the
growth of high-quality materials for these and other applications. This system
will serve as the centerpiece of a user facility to allow researchers from
around the country to grow materials to support their research programs in
physics, electrical engineering, materials science and engineering, chemistry,
and other fields, providing a regional and national impact to this acquisition.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award from the Major Research
Instrumentation program supports the acquisition of a molecular beam epitaxy
(MBE) system for the growth of III-V semiconductors. This system will have
several unique characteristics: it will contain an atomic hydrogen source for
low-temperature substrate cleaning, bismuth and rare-earth effusion cells, a
high-flux silicon cell, and a band-edge thermometry system to permit reliable
temperature measurement at low growth temperatures. It will also be connected
under vacuum to an existing topological insulator MBE system. This setup will
enable the growth of a variety of new materials and heterostructures that are
currently unavailable to users within and outside of the University of Delaware.
This system will form the backbone of a new user facility focused on materials
growth within the context of a larger Institute for Nanoscale Innovation, which
contains several other synergistic user facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.