* 1828649
* MRI: Acquisition of iMARC: High Performance Computing for STEM Research and Education in Southeast Wisconsin
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Scott Reid, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 681,425.00

The regional resource, iMARC (infrastructure for MARquette Computing), in south
east Wisconsin, provides faculty and students with appropriate infrastructure to
engage efficiently in the challenges that require parallel computing and
facilitate hands-on training in HPS techniques for large-scale compute- and
data-intensive analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;iMARC is a replacement system that
features a modern CPU, large RAM volumes, fast storage, and graphical processing
unit (GPU) accelerators, aiming to increase 60+-folding computational power
affording a new level of capabilities for research and education for more than
20 major users across Southeastern Wisconsin. It integrates MUGrid (Marquette
University Computational Grid) and regional SeWHiP (Se Wisconsin High
Performance cyberinfrastructure) for computational sciences, thus enabling the
next generation of large-scale compute- and data-intensive research and
education at Marquette and neighboring institutions. The high performance data
storage of iMARC enables faculty across multiple departments and institutions to
tackle new cutting-edge questions. This cluster, coupled with initiatives to
support infrastructure renewals, addresses the growing demand for regional
scientific computing resources and high-quality training in HPC technologies.
iMARC creates a unique resource for parallel computing in data analytics for the
challenges in large-scale computing and provides a development environment for
large-scale parallel computing tasks that facilitate deployment to XSEDE (the
national computing infrastructure). The majority of the users rely on and
greatly benefit from the general computational capabilities of the cluster
delivered by the CPU-only nodes. The new system will bring the capabilities
related to the research in biomolecular modeling and artificial intelligence to
a new level. The peak performance of the CPU-only nodes will be at 176 TFLOPS,
which is a 30-fold increase over the peak performance of the old
machine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.