* 1828262
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Laser Scanning Microscope with Multi-spectral Imaging and Super-resolution
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Edward Ruby, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 520,481.00

An award is made to the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM) to acquire a new
laser scanning microscope (LSM) with multi-spectral imaging and super-resolution
capabilities to support research and training in the life sciences. The LSM will
be used for demonstrations for K-12 science classes of local public and private
schools, as part of laboratory demonstrations and sessions for undergraduate and
graduate university courses in the life sciences, participants in NSF REU
programs and in other specialty workshops, and by undergraduate and graduate
students and postdoctoral associates conducting research with UHM faculty.
Attracting youth to careers in the sciences and training the next generation of
scientists, engineers and educators in advanced techniques are major goals of
our facility and this institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested LSM will
be used by researchers to answer fundamental questions in cell biology,
developmental biology, ecology, marine biology, microbiology, oceanography,
symbiosis and tropical agriculture. The new instrument will support NSF- and
other funded research in a broad range of life sciences including: marine
invertebrate-bacterial symbiosis; structure and function of marine bacterial
communities; plant-fungal symbioses; crustacean peptide hormones; protein
expression and enzyme function in a model plant; bacterial biofilms in marine
larval settling; amphibian-microbe-fungal associations; and marine copepod
population structure. The results from these studies will be published in
scientific peer-reviewed journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in
both teaching and public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.