* 1828012
* VENTURES-Vision for Excellence at Navajo Technical University in Research and Education in STEM
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Weitz, Navajo Technical University
* Standard Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2022
* USD 721,824.00

Navajo Technical University (NTU) is one of the premier institutions of higher
education in the Navajo Nation, providing a unique balance among science,
engineering, technology, tradition, and identity rooted in the Dine Philosophy
of Education: Nitsahakees, Nahata, Iina, and Siihasin. The proposed project,
Vision for Excellence at NTU in Research and Education in STEM (VENTURES), will
develop a partnership between NTU and the NSF Materials Research Science and
Engineering Center (MRSEC) at Harvard University. By providing research and
educational opportunities in materials science that address environmental and
health concerns of the Navajo Nation, the partnership will build robust pathways
for under-represented Native American students (Navajo) in STEM, from K-12 to
undergraduate, and from undergraduate to graduate programs. The goals of this
partnership are to: 1) increase the number of Native Americans earning
undergraduate degrees in STEM fields, 2) increase the research infrastructure at
NTU so that students and faculty can perform research within their own
community, 3) increase the number of Native Americans entering and completing
graduate programs in materials science and related fields, and 4) include Native
American perspectives and methods of inquiry in materials science research.
Additionally, the research program will allow for ample opportunities for
students and faculty to communicate back to and receive feedback from the Navajo
community via work with K-12 schools, and the Navajo Chapter Houses. Technology
transfer from Harvard to NTU will facilitate growth at NTU in research
activities in materials science and engineering; concomitantly, the
collaboration will draw upon Navajo traditional knowledge and ways of learning
in defining and implementing the research and educational activities. Research
and educational results with joint authorship from the partnership will also be
disseminated in peer-reviewed journals and conferences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two materials research areas in this award
are relevant to health and environmental issues that are of immediate importance
to the Navajo Nation. Research area 1, which will focus on materials and
techniques for detection of low concentrations of pollutants, is motivated by
the long history of uranium mining on the Navajo Nation, as well as more recent
extraction activities, such as fracking. Research area 2, which will study
mechanical properties of cell membranes, will help to address a growing health
concern for the Navajo people - a rising incidence of high cholesterol and
associated coronary disease. Professor Thiagarajan Soundappan (Navajo Technical
University), and Professor David Weitz (Harvard University) will lead
collaborative teams of 8-10 faculty from NTU and Harvard. Collaborative research
teams in research area 1 will develop and test electrodes for detection of
mining contaminants, and develop microfluidics-based laboratory models for flow
and detection of contaminants through soil. Research area 2 will investigate the
ability of phytosterols to act as cholesterol surrogates and how they modify the
sterol profile of mammalian cell membranes, as well as examine the resulting
membrane biophysical properties (using capillary microfluidic techniques). By
linking each research area to an issue of concern to the Navajo people, this
team will be able to achieve the objectives of increasing enrollment in STEM
fields at NTU, and will inspire students to continue to graduate research in
materials and related fields. In addition, the highly accessible research
techniques can be readily adapted into courses at NTU and outreach activities to
the Navajo Nation, incorporating cultural knowledge and
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.