* 1828232
* MRI: Acquisition of an Atomic Force Microscope for Materials Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Richard Dluhy, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2020
* USD 314,912.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award
supports the University of Alabama at Birmingham to acquire an atomic force
microscope for interdisciplinary materials research and education. This
microscope supports a diverse, multi-departmental research in soft materials
ranging from soft synthetic hydrogels to relatively dense composites and
biological structures. The instrument provides enhanced capabilities for
quantitative nanoscale mapping of electrical, mechanical, biological, and
chemical properties. It also plays a vital role in student education in the
fields of chemistry, materials science, biomedical science and biomedical
engineering. Educational opportunities are available not only for
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows on the campus, but
they expand via outreach to local middle and high school students. These
multidisciplinary educational efforts are important to increase the recognition
of the research efforts in the Departments of Chemistry, Medicine, and
Biomedical Engineering in order to improve student recruiting, especially among
underrepresented populations. A high caliber research environment is also vital
to the regional economy in Central Alabama through raising community awareness
toward biomedical and soft-materials
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This atomic
force microscope combines the capabilities for high-resolution and high-speed
imaging with quantitative nano-electrical and nanomechanical mapping. The
ability to acquire multifunctional, high-resolution data under a wide range of
operating conditions allows for studies on a broad spectrum of dry and hydrated
samples. The types of samples extend from synthetic networks, polymer
composites, nanodevices, to cell membranes and tissues. The common theme among
these samples is that they all involve soft materials, i.e., synthetic polymers,
biological structures, or combinations of the two. An increased ability to
characterize state-of-the-art nanomaterials results in an enhanced fundamental
understanding of the structural properties of soft materials and the composition
at their surfaces. This includes the effect of the surface morphology on the
physical, biological, and chemical characteristics of the materials. The
understanding enables transformative research for the development of new
materials in tissue regenerative therapies, controlled drug delivery, molecular
sensing, and related biotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.