* 1828793
* MRI: Development: Extreme Life Volumetric Imaging System (ELVIS)
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Scott Fraser, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2023
* USD 630,286.00

The objective of this project is to develop a unique multi-modal volumetric
microscope capable of instantaneous imaging of sample volumes approximately
100-fold larger than those sampled by conventional fluorescence microscopy, with
spatial resolution sufficient to detect most bacteria and archaea. This
instrument will combine two modalities for the first time: Digital Holography
Microscopy (DHM) (which includes amplitude [brightfield] and quantitative phase
imaging) and Fluorescence Light Field Microscopy (FLFM). The Co-PIs have
established each technology separately as research instruments in their
laboratories; this will be the first time that a microscope with all of the
described capabilities will be made available for research. The instrument that
will be build will be packaged for field use in aquatic environments. It will be
used in the lab, and also made available to researchers. PSU is undergoing a
major renovation of its research infrastructure, plan, and long-term outlook,
which includes a growing interest in STEM and a major expansion in PhD programs.
This instrument will enable research and training across academic levels, from
high school through PhD, and will be an important part of PSU's growing research
profile and engagement with other institutions and the community. The PI has an
established pattern of public outreach and training; two areas of particular
excellence are (1) engaging undergraduates in research, with a particular
emphasis on recruiting women and underrepresented minorities, including English
language learners; and (2) developing curriculum and training programs for STEM
teachers. This instrument will assist these efforts, as well as new efforts,
specifically: addition of a laboratory component to the existing
junior/senior/graduate-level Cellular and Molecular Biophysics course; creation
of a new Senior Capstone field course; participation in the NASA "Spaceward
Bound" teachers' workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first combined volumetric
brightfield, phase, and fluorescence imaging system, will be created by coupling
holographic and light field microscopy. This will enable instantaneous
volumetric imaging, which has a wide variety of emerging and potential
applications in cell, developmental, and organismal biology, as well as in the
physical sciences (hydrology, materials science). Conventional microscopy
requiring sectioning (confocal or multiphoton) is too slow to capture a large
number of kinetic events: bacterial swimming, heartbeats, blood flow,
intracellular organelle movement, and many more. The limitations of conventional
imaging modalities could be mitigated if one could record the spatial
information of an extended sample volume in a single camera snapshot. Such
synchronous volumetric imaging capability not only removes the delicate focusing
requirement of conventional microscopy, but also dramatically enhances the
imaging throughput. In this project, the PI will tailor the instrument to in
situ environmental microbiology of remote or extreme environments. Micron-scale
organisms remain a neglected size scale for which limited in situ imaging has
been performed. Specific target areas for ELVIS include the open ocean, sea ice,
glacier ice, and hydrothermal vents. A dozen interested users from different
institutions have been identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.