* 1828868
* Collaborative Research: Testing Models of Calcite Microcrystal Diagenesis Through Experiments, Geochemistry, and Advanced Imaging
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Franciszek Hasiuk, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 03/31/2019
* USD 239,703.00

The resources contained in underground geologic reservoirs are key to the
economic activity and vitality of communities, companies, and countries. To
develop these resources in a cost-effective manner, it is vital to understand
the plumbing of these reservoirs-specifically how big the pores (open spaces)
are in the rocks, how well they are connected, and what kind of fluids they
hold. This study focuses on small pores, called micropores, to understand how
they form, and how they change as they are buried in the Earth. This knowledge
will allow people such as farmers, water plant managers, and the oil and gas
industry to drill fewer wells, increasing their economic competitiveness and
decreasing disturbances to the environment and people. Micropores are also
responsible for premature deterioration of roads constructed with crushed
limestone. Therefore, the results from this work could lead to more robust
highways, reducing construction and maintenance costs, while providing a safer
and smoother ride for drivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous work shows that
most micropores are hosted in a framework of calcite microcrystals. The current
research aims to understand the fundamental controls on the textures of these
microcrystals in limestones. Numerous generalized pathways for calcite
microcrystal formation and evolution have been proposed. None, however, has tied
microcrystal texture to diagenetic process in a robust manner. Our aim is to
integrate laboratory experiments, advanced imaging, and high-resolution
geochemical techniques to better understand the diagenesis of calcite
microcrystals and thus the micropores between them. Specifically, we propose to
use experiments and a wide variety of natural samples to assess the geochemical
heterogeneity and genetic evolution of the various calcite microcrystal
textures. We hypothesize that spatial variations in microcrystal chemistry will
reveal that the different microcrystal textures correlate to positions along a
diagenetic trajectory of increasing cementation (i.e., microcrystal textures
become more fitted with progressive burial and
cementation).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.