* 1828305
* MRI:   Acquisition of a high-energy micro-computed tomography scanner for inter- and multi-disciplinary STEM research
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Claude Gagna, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 426,621.00

An award is made to the New York Institute of Technology (NYIT) to acquire a
micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) scanner for visualizing, reconstructing,
and analyzing organic and inorganic objects in three dimensions. Micro-CT
utilizes X-rays to reveal the internal structure of objects at the microscopic
level, without having to section them. It has fostered countless transformative
projects in biology, engineering, and medicine. The acquisition will enable
opportunities to engage high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, as
well as the general public, in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM). Faculty involved in this program will mentor high school students
through NYIT's Science &amp; Technology Entry Program (STEP), which introduces
economically disadvantaged and traditionally underrepresented students to STEM
fields. In addition, faculty and students in Engineering will incorporate CT-
based technology into the Cultivating Resources for Employment with Assistive
Technology (CREATE) program to develop technologies that help people with
disabilities in their work environments. To engage with the broader community,
NYIT will collaborate with "Through the Lens Initiative", an innovative science
art competition, to showcase compelling 3D visualizations of student research
using micro-CT data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Access to the micro-CT facility will
stimulate groundbreaking research in biology, paleontology, nanotechnology,
engineering, and life sciences and will foster a network of collaborations among
local universities, ultimately strengthening the larger scientific community.
Micro-CT technology has been widely adopted across archaeological, biological,
and materials sciences over the past decade. Moreover, recent methodological
advancements, such as contrast-enhanced CT imaging of soft tissues, promise
enduring and novel applications for the future. The new micro-CT facility at
NYIT will have a significant impact on the scientific community on Long Island,
one of the most academically dense areas in the U.S.A with an enormous and
diverse research community. Thirty-two researchers from Long Island and the New
York Metropolitan Region have already submitted projects for scanning. These
projects will utilize micro-CT imaging on structures that span five orders of
magnitude in size (from nano-cement to dinosaur bones), 200 million years, and a
wide spectrum of organic and inorganic materials. At NYIT, these studies will
promote interdisciplinary collaboration across three colleges and provide
outstanding research opportunities for students at all academic levels,
promoting future scientific advancements within the New York Metropolitan Region
and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.