* 1828528
* MRI: Acquisition of a GPU cluster to support interdisciplinary research in human learning, machine learning, and data science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Patrick Shafto, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,999.00

This Major Instrumentation Grant award supports the Acquisition of a GPU cluster
to support interdisciplinary research in human learning, machine learning, and
data science at Rutgers University--Newark, a Minority Serving Institution
(MSI). It permits purchase of 3 Nvidia dual V100 GPUs to enable theoretical
advances and practical applications in interdisciplinary understanding of
learning. Rutgers-Newark is undertaking a multiyear effort to build strength in
interdisciplinary computer science to support research training, and to address
issues of diversity and representation within computer science and data science.
These resources would: (1) enable the application of computationally-intensive
methods in order to develop new theories and tools to understand human and
machine learning; (2) support existing cross-disciplinary training efforts, such
as graduate-level courses centered around deep learning and Deep Gaussian
Processes; (3) enhance existing funded research by allowing the deployment of
advanced data-analytic methods. The GPU cluster will provide a common
computational resource for researchers from the Computer Science, Psychology,
and Neuroscience departments through which they may collaborate to advance the
state-of-the-art in each field. This purchase will complement the existing high-
performance computing infrastructure already on campus as well as a recent NSF-
supported purchase of a 1.2 petabyte storage system for cataloging the dynamics
of human visual experience. Also, it will supplement an NSF-sponsored Mobile
Maker Center for community-based data collection and fMRI research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans remain the most powerful and impressive available
models of learning, although the roots of these abilities are not fully
understood. Although machine learning methods have become exceptionally powerful
in recent years, they remain opaque in ways that human learning is not and still
require vastly more data, energy and compute power than human learners. Both
human and machine learning would benefit from the ability to more tightly
connect and study the strengths of each. Gaussian processes provide one such
unifying framework. They are an object of interest in machine learning, where
they have dual interpretations as regression models and as neural networks, as
well as in human learning where they have been proposed as models of cognition
and perception. These multiple interpretations of Gaussian processes are key to
their interest for bridging human and machine learning. From a theoretical
perspective, Gaussian processes are equivalent to (a specific type of) neural
network, but much more amenable to mathematical analysis, and can be stacked to
obtain Deep Gaussian processes. This Deep learning framework may allow more
systematic mathematical analysis than other Deep learning approaches---for
example the ability to derive explanations for their inferences. The primary
research goal of this project is to use the GPU cluster and the investigators'
interdisciplinary expertise to draw deep connections between machine learning
and human learning perspectives to advance the state of the art in both, while
also improving data analytic capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.