* 1828416
* MRI: Acquisition of 30kV Electron Beam Lithography System for Multidisciplinary Research on Nano-Photonics, Nano-Biophysics, Nano-Chemistry, and Nano-Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Marlan Scully, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 689,500.00

The ability to pattern designed nanoscale structures precisely is critical for
research in nanoscience. Electron Beam Lithography, which uses a scanning
electron beam, is one of the most reliable and powerful methods to create
patterns with sub-10 nm resolution in a relatively large surface area. This
project enables Baylor University to acquire an Ultrahigh Resolution Electron
Beam Lithography System for the development of a high-impact, multidisciplinary
program of nanoscience research and education at Baylor University. Instrument
users will include faculty and students from Baylor University's Physics,
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Chemistry and
Biochemistry, and Environmental Science departments. The instrument will expand
nanofabrication capabilities at Baylor University for studying physics, optics,
chemistry, biology sensing, and optical device applications on the nanometer
scale. The instrument's capabilities will open the path for researchers to
explore promising nanoscale sciences and applications. The electron beam
lithography system will also be incorporated into education and outreach
activities, including the Baylor Mayborn Museum events, online outreach
activities, Baylor Summer Science Research Program, Advanced Instrumentation
Workshop, and Optical Society of America events and workshops. The research and
training opportunities provided by this nanofabrication instrument will align
with Baylor University's strategic plan to advance research and education and
strengthen the engagement with the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will acquire an Ultrahigh Resolution Electron Beam Lithography System to support
nanoscience and nanotechnology research and education. The tool provides
ultrahigh resolution patterning (&lt;8 nm) in combination with the highest level
of automation for complex applications. The thermal field emission filament
technology, cross-over-free beam path, and column technology produce an
extremely high beam current density, extremely low aberrations, fast writing
speed, large field sizes, and millimeter-long periodic patterns with zero
stitching errors. No other laboratory in the Central Texas region has this type
of instrument critical to state-of-the-art nanoscience research. The instrument
is ideally suited for research in nano-optics/photonics, nano-biophysics, nano-
chemistry, and large-area nanoscale electronic and photonic devices. Examples of
the nanoscale applications that can be fabricated include tunable ultrathin
optical metasurface components, nanoscale and portable surface-enhanced coherent
Raman sensors, point-of-care on-chip optical biosensors, plasmon-assisted
photocatalytic reactors, efficient nanoscale bio-medical applications, and next-
generation nano-electronic/photonic devices. The acquisition of this electron
beam lithography system will not only enable innovative system-oriented
nanoscience and nanodevice research activities at Baylor University and nearby
colleges, but also facilitate the training of a new generation of students and
postdoctoral researchers on nanoscience and nanoengineering at Baylor
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.