* 1828450
* MRI: Acquisition of a state-of-the-art atom probe for three-dimensional imaging and analysis of materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Pascal Bellon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,563,107.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program supports the
University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign (UIUC) with the acquisition of a atom
probe instrument for three-dimensional imaging and analysis of materials.The
controlled organization of materials at the nanoscale can offer dramatic
improvements in their structural and functional performances, as illustrated by
high strength structural materials for automotive and aerospace applications,
alloys with nanodispersoids for high irradiation resistance for nuclear power
applications, opto-electronic nano-devices for high efficiency energy conversion
and fast communication, or advanced ceramics for sensing and coatings for harsh
and high temperature environments. A critical need for further optimizing these
materials and developing new ones is the chemical characterization in three
dimensions of their underlying nanostructures. Recent technical breakthroughs in
atom probe tomography allow the mapping of chemical elements in these
nanostructures with unprecedented spatial resolution and detection efficiency.
This instrument will be part of the User Facility at the Materials Research
Laboratory at the University of Illinois, ensuring that it will be broadly
accessible to the materials community for research and education. The research
enabled by this instrument will provide critical knowledge for the development
of materials with broad societal impacts in the areas of energy, medicine,
information technology, transportation, and the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) grant supports the acquisition of an atom probe for three-
dimensional imaging and analysis of materials. This state-of-the-art local-
electrode atom probe offers unprecedented detection efficiency and versatility.
This instrument will be integrated in the User Facility of the Frederick Seitz
Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) at the University of Illinois, and broadly
accessible to internal and external users from academic and non-academic
organizations. This instrument will be used to unravel the chemistry of
nanostructures in three dimensions with sub-nanometer resolution in a wide
variety of fields, including (1) advanced nanostructured nuclear materials with
increased radiation tolerance; (2) ion segregation and transport at grain
boundaries and other defects in oxides and ceramics; (3) Si and III-V semi-
conductor heterostructures, nanowires and quantum dots. It will also allow
elucidating the response of complex materials systems, such as (4) the coupling
between chemistry and local plasticity in bulk metallic glasses, high-entropy
alloys with shape-memory function, and nanotwinned metals; (5) the self-
organization of bulk alloys under external forcing such as irradiation and
severe plastic deformation, resulting in self-adapting functionalities; (6) the
evolution of surfaces subjected to harsh environments, including plasma-facing
materials, battery electrodes, and bio-actives interfaces nanostructured for
osseointegration and mineralization; and (7) the development of advanced
superalloys and coatings. The data acquired by users will be archived in a
broadly accessible, but secured data repository for the benefits of the
development and validation of atomistic models. In addition to fulfilling
critical research needs, the APT will support the University core missions of
education by providing user training, education, and outreach opportunities.
Furthermore, the University of Illinois and the vendor will establish a
strategic partnership, with the MRL hosting APT training classes every year,
further expanding the pool of users trained to used state-of-the-art atom probe
tomography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.