* 1828827
* RAPID: Turning a Lake Sinkhole Event into Natural/Man-Made Tracer Experiments and Data Collection Campaign for Advanced Understanding of Karst Hydrogeology and Solute Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2021
* Stephen Kish, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 49,773.00

Although lake drainage into sinkholes is common occurrences in karst systems,
little is known about the relationships among lake water, groundwater, spring
water, and river water. The continuous drainage of a large amount of lake water
and water-contained contaminants into lake sinkholes can be viewed as a natural
tracer experiment. If the contaminant concentrations are monitored in
downgradient karst springs and rivers, the lake sinkhole drainage can be used to
gain knowledge about the transport of water and contaminants. To test this, the
project will use a man-made dye tracer along with water chemistry measurements
to in an actively draining lake sinkhole. The dye tracer and water chemistry
will be monitored and measured in the lake, the upper Floridan aquifer, karst
springs, and rivers. Results from this project will be shared with the Florida
State Geological Survey and environmental management
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the hydrologic connection
among lake drainage via sinkholes, springs, and estuaries in a karst system. A
dye tracer experiment will be used to calculate the transit time from an
actively draining lake sinkhole to downgradient springs and rivers. To evaluate
if environmental tracers or contaminants can be used as surrogates for dye
tracer experiments in karst systems, chromophoric dissolved organic matter
measurements will be taken in conjunction with the dye tracer. The results of
this study and the associated methods development may be applied to many other
karst systems in the U.S. The PIs will collaborate with the Florida State
Geological Survey and their results will be shared with state government water
resources and environmental management agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.