* 1828064
* MRI:  Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer for Next Generation Functional Molecules and Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* George Christou, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 279,999.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Lisa McElwee-White from University
of Florida and colleagues George Christou, Khalil Abboud, Ronald Castellano and
Adam Veige have acquired a dual source single crystal X-ray diffractometer. In
general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise measurements of the
full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including bond distances and
angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial arrangement of a
molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies described here impact
many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry, materials chemistry and
biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of teaching as well as
research and research training of graduate and undergraduate students in
chemistry and biochemistry at this institution. Students enroll in a graduate
crystallography course and the many informal classes that introduce modern
automated systems and advanced software packages for structure solution and
refinement. Moreover, undergraduate students who register to do research in the
X-ray lab learn current best practices for crystal structure
determination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels. It especially impacts the design and syntheses of
precursors for deposition of inorganic materials and the determination of
mesoscale order in organic films via hydrogen bond directed topology. The
instrument is also used in the identification of transition metal clusters that
behave as single-molecule magnets and aids in characterizing products of click
synthesis of metallopolymers and highly emissive materials. The diffractometer
is also useful in the search for anticancer agents from marine cyanobacteria.
This instrument also serves investigators developing strategies for the
functionalization of amines and preparing chiral biaryl heterocycles as ligands
for enantioselective catalysis. The instrumentation is also used in the study of
chemical probes to determine the structure and mechanism of nonribosomal peptide
biosynthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.