* 1828325
* MRI: Acquisition of a Atomic Force Microscope (AFM)-Raman Microscope
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Karl Booksh, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 558,228.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) programs and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Professor Karl Booksh from the
University of Delaware and colleagues Raul F Lobo, John F Rabolt, Thomas E
Hanson and Jocelyn Alcantara-Garcia have acquired an atomic force Raman
microscope. Raman microscopy is a principal characterization technique for both
surfaces and bulk samples. Using a laser, the microscope scans a sample which
produces vibrational spectroscopic data providing chemical information about the
material. An atomic force microscope (AFM) also scans a sample using a small
probe or tip to provide information about the surface such as topography,
hardness, electrical and thermal properties. Combining the two techniques in an
AFM-Raman microscope provides both types of information from the same regions of
the sample. It has wide application in research endeavors across the pure and
applied sciences and engineering. An important application is use in the
investigation of converting methane to chemicals such as methanol using a
catalyst on a surface. The microscope will enable study of the reaction of
surface species as a function of reaction conditions to optimize the yield of
valuable products. The acquisition will impact 5 colleges, 13 departments at the
University of Delaware (UD) and users at Delaware State University (DSU, an
HBCU) and the Winterthur Museum. The Raman microscope will significantly benefit
female, minority, and junior faculty at both UD and DSU. The research and
training of a significant number of female and underrepresented minority
students will also be greatly enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. The structure and
morphology of trilayer coaxial electrospun polymer nanofibers is under
investiation, and analysis of high tensile strength polymers. Chemical
modification of surfaces, methane activation over copper-containing zeolite
catalysts and catalytic conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to chemicals and
fuels is being studied. Synthesis of hierarchical semiconducting nano-composites
is another research area to benefit from the instrument. The microbial iron- and
sulfur-oxidation and biomineral composition in environmental samples is
explored, and mechanisms and control of sulfur metabolism in chlorobaculum
tepidum. The Winterthur Scientific Research and Analysis laboratory within the
Department of Conservation at Winterthur Museum is using the non-destructive
instrumental technique afforded by the microscope in the analysis of works of
art and cultural heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.