* 1828266
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Total Reflection X-ray Fluorescence Spectrometer to Enable Ultra-Trace Element Analysis at Washington State University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Mechthild Tegeder, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 125,861.00

An award is made to Washington State University (WSU) to acquire a total
reflection X-ray fluorescence (TXRF) spectrometer in support of life and
environmental sciences. The machine will significantly contribute to WSU's
mission of research and teaching excellence through the advancement and
application of new knowledge. Researchers will intensely study the
biogeochemical cycles that impact all life on earth, examining in particular the
balances of macro and micronutrients within microorganisms, plants, and animals.
This work will ultimately help ensure the quality and quantity of global food
supplies. The new instrumentation will also contribute to an excellent training
environment for students. Graduate and undergraduate students will receive
hands-on instruction on the TXRF spectrometer. In addition to gaining state-of-
the-art technological training, they will learn the trace elements of food crops
and the ion level constituents of a healthy human diet. Students will thus be
prepared and engaged to advance in their studies, improve health, and
potentially pursue STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly sensitive and
accurate detection analysis provided by the TXRF will identify nutrients and
toxic metal ions in soil, water, organisms, and food down to the subcellular
levels. Researchers will use the TXRF to focus on three areas of scientific
inquiry: 1) the importance of metal ions for cellular function and plant
physiology; 2) the nutrient composition of food and its impact on human and
animal health; and 3) the role of mineral compositions in ecosystems for
biodiversity and pollution mitigation. Investigations in these diverse areas
will enhance the understanding of the global biogeochemical cycle, specifically
the systems and processes by which nutrients and toxins move through the
environment and its microbes, plants, and animals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.