* 1828358
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for Research and Teaching in the Fields of Chemistry, Geology, Biology, Physics, and Forensic Science
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Michael Norton, Marshall University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 399,000.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs as well as the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Professor Rosalynn Quinones-
Fernandez from Marshall University and colleagues Michael Norton, Aley El-
Shazly, Iyad Hijazi and Sean McBride have acquired a field emission scanning
electron microscope (FESEM). A scanning electron microscope is an essential tool
for the study of materials. It focuses a beam of electrons at the sample. The
electrons interact and are scattered from the material to produce an image of
the surface and its structure. A field-emission SEM has a electron gun designed
to provide very high resolution images. This instrument upgrade improves image
resolution and allow elemental analysis presently unavailable to researchers at
Marshall. The science enabled by the acquisition impacts areas of interest to
the community (for example, Appalachian geology, insects endemic to West
Virginia and forensic/environmental analyses). Undergraduate research training
and course instruction (100 students/year) involves largely regional students
from Appalachia. The FESEM enhances at least five different annual outreach
activities some of which target specifically minority and underrepresented
students. A researcher from West Virginia State University, a Historically Black
College and University, and another researcher at the University of Charleston
also benefit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at enhancing research
and education at all levels. Research projects are ongoing to control surface
properties of metal oxide nanoparticles and to investigate DNA based platforms
for single molecule sensing nanostructures. Other projects focus on atomistic
modeling techniques to probe for nanomaterial with unique properties, and
experiments on self-assembled nanoparticle membranes. Investigations are
underway to model and simulate rigid and flexible body dynamics for soft robotic
applications. Other investigations use geological sample imaging and analysis to
understand the tectonic setting of metamorphic and igneous rocks of the southern
Appalachians. Arachnid sensory morphology and characterization of sensory
sensillae in the Tsetse fly are being studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.