* 1828117
* MRI: Acquisition of a Variable-Temperature, Dual-Wavelength, Single-Crystal X-Ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Scott Daly, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Peebles
* 07/31/2021
* USD 279,650.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation and the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation programs. Professor Leonard MacGillivray from
University of Iowa and colleagues James Gloer, Christopher Pigge, Gregory
Friestad and Scott Daly have acquired a dual source single crystal
diffractometer. In general, an X-ray diffractometer allows accurate and precise
measurements of the full three-dimensional structure of a molecule, including
bond distances and angles, and provides accurate information about the spatial
arrangement of a molecule relative to neighboring molecules. The studies
described here impact many areas, including organic and inorganic chemistry,
materials chemistry and biochemistry. This instrument is an integral part of
teaching as well as research and research training of graduate and undergraduate
students in chemistry, medicinal chemistry, pharmacy and biochemistry at this
institution. It also provides crystallographic services free of charge to
faculty and student researchers in primarily undergraduate institutions that do
not possess single-crystal X-ray diffractometers in eastern Iowa, western
Illinois, and northern Missouri.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially impacts studies on
effects of noncovalent bonding in molecular solids and exploration of templated
solid-state reactions. The diffractometer aids the characterization of
synthesized compounds using non-innocent ligands, and those having soft-donor
ligands with f-elements. The instrument is essential for studies coupling earth-
abundant metals with non-innocent ligands to be used in electrochemical carbon
dioxide reduction. It is also useful in designing catalytic carbon-hydrogen
activation with N-acylhydrazones and for studying reactivity and selectivity in
radical polar crossover reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.