* 1828187
* MRI: Acquisition of an HPC System for Data-Driven Discovery in Computational Astrophysics, Biology, Chemistry, and Materials Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Surya Kalidindi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 3,699,317.00

The project funds the purchase of a high-performance computing and storage
system at the Georgia Institute of Technology. This computing instrument will
support data-driven research in astrophysics, biosciences, computational
chemistry, materials and manufacturing, and computational science. These
projects contribute to national initiatives in big data, strategic computing,
materials genome, and manufacturing partnership; and NSF supported observatories
such as the gravitational wave observatory and the South Pole neutrino
observatory. The system also serves as a springboard for developments of codes,
software prototyping, and scalability studies prior to using national
supercomputers. Advances made in computational methods and scientific software
are disseminated in the form of open-source codes and data analysis portals.
Over 33 faculty, 54 research scientists/postdocs, 195 graduate students, and 56
undergraduate students will immediately benefit from the instrument. In
addition, the system provides training opportunity at all levels from
undergraduate students to early career researchers, in important
interdisciplinary areas of national need. A fifth of the system capacity is
utilized to enable research activities of regional partners, researchers from
minority serving institutions, and other users nationally through XSEDE
participation. The project involves undergraduate student participation from
historically black colleges from Atlanta metropolitan area. Public outreach
efforts are planned through videos of public interest and local events such as
the Atlanta Science Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cluster will combine
regular compute nodes with others configured to emphasize one of the following:
big memory, big local storage, solid state storage, Graphics Processing Units
(GPU), and ARM processors. In doing so, the system can be employed by a
diversity of projects. In astrophysics, the instrument bolsters data-driven
research including detection of gravitational waves, astrophysical neutrinos,
and gamma rays. It does it by leveraging data from leading astroparticle
observatories and contributing to their mission. It also leads to improved
insights into formation of supermassive black holes and large-scale structure of
the universe. The computing system also aids the development of parallel
software in computational genomics, systems biology, and health analytics.
Important applications in assembly and network analysis of plant genomes, and
environmental metagenomics are pursued. The instrument also enables next
generation algorithms and software for computational chemistry and expands the
boundaries of molecular simulation. The system enables advances in density
function theory, enhances studies of crystal defects and nanostructures, and
injects novel use of machine learning techniques in computational chemistry. It
also fosters the development of data science methodologies to identify building
blocks of materials at multiple scales, thus significantly reducing the
development and deployments cycles for new materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.