* 1828053
* MRI:  Acquisition of an FEI Apreo Scanning Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Catharina Alves-de-Souza, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 611,130.00

An award is made to the University of North Carolina Wilmington to acquire an
FEI-Apreo Scanning electron Microscope (SEM). The SEM will be a cornerstone of
the undergraduate curriculum in introductory and advanced cell biology teaching.
The educational benefits will be further extended to pre-college students
through collaboration with the UNCW STEM Learning Cooperative, with a special
focus on girls from underrepresented communities. The SEM will be used to
conduct an integrative multi-year project that involves graduate and
undergraduate students developing 3D visualization methods for microscopic
specimens and production of 3D printed replicas of these specimens. Students
will collaborate with pre-college teens to image, explore and produce models
that can be used as educational material in their own schools. The SEM will
provide regular outreach opportunities for science fairs, college open days, and
life-long learning events that engage the general public in microscopy-based
STEM. The award will therefore enable continued implementation of The University
of North Carolina Wilmington's high-impact education and public outreach
activities that are crosscutting, from K-12 through
Ph.D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will allow for high resolution imaging and
microanalysis of surface structures of cells and tissues, biominerals,
geological and paleontological samples, manufactured materials, and
nanoparticles. Specifically, five thematic clusters of research will be
supported: (1) Cell biology, taxonomy, and diversity of marine algae, (2) marine
invertebrate and microbial symbiont diversity, (3) angiosperm functional
diversity and biogeography, (4) morphology and microstructure of cetaceans and
their parasites, and (5) archeology, marine palentology, and sedimentary
petrology. In addition to these research themes, many other projects, new
research initiatives, and national and international collaborations will be
facilitated by this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.