* 1828154
* MRI: Development of a Programmable Ion-Trap Quantum Computer
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Jungsang Kim, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,120,000.00

Quantum computers enable calculations that are impractical on even the largest
digital supercomputer. Current quantum computers are too small for us to show a
clear advantage over conventional computers. This project will build a 32 qubit
quantum computer that will enable scientists and computer scientists to test new
algorithms for scientific computing and develop new software tools for
optimizing and controlling quantum computers. This research instrument will
enable the discovery of methods for scaling a future device to 100 qubits, where
a clear advantage of quantum computers over conventional computers is expected
to be demonstrated. It will also provide training opportunities for junior
scientists and engineers needed for the growing quantum information
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 32 qubit quantum computer will be constructed
from trapped atomic ions. The qubits will be stored in the long coherence
hyperfine states of Ytterbium ions and the ions will be held using a surface
electrode ion trap. All qubits will be individually addressed and two-qubit
gates will be possible between any pair forming a fully-connected quantum
computer. The instrument design builds off previous experience at Duke
University and the University of Maryland constructing ion trap experiments. The
instrument developed in this project will allow for automated execution of
algorithms and will serve as a research tool for physicists, chemists, and
materials scientists interested in testing models of scientific computing with
quantum computers and for computer scientists and system engineers to test
programming methods and quantum abstractions. The research device will give
users complete access and enable the development of novel user interfaces that
would be difficult to test and implement on commercial quantum information
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.