* 1828506
* MRI: Acquisition of a Lumick's SuperC-TRAP correlative optical tweezers and Fluorescence Microscope (CTFM) system
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jeffrey Ruberti, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,077,500.00

An award is made to Northeastern University (NEU), with participants from New
England Biolabs (NEB), Bridgewater State University, and Wellesley College, to
purchase a Lumicks SuperC-TRAP correlative optical tweezers and fluorescence
microscope (CTFM) for single-molecule research to manipulate and observe
biological interactions at the molecular level. The projects using this
instrument will introduce a diverse group of researchers in the laboratories of
the participants, including undergraduate co-op researchers at NEU and NEB, to
cutting edge interdisciplinary science. Due in part to the participation of
major users from Wellesley College and Bridgewater State University, women and
researchers from underserved communities will gain access to new research
experiences. The CTFM instrument will be incorporated into two major
undergraduate courses at NEU, in which students will have the opportunity to use
the CTFM instrument and to design and test mutations on DNA-interacting motor
proteins. Biannual workshops to attract and train regional users will be run by
Lumicks and hosted by Northeastern, and the instrument will be advertised
widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CTFM instrument will allow users to measure and
apply tension to single biomolecules with sub-picoNewton resolution, and to
detect the presence, number, and position of individual fluorescently labeled
molecules during these measurements in real time. This allows users to push or
pull on biological systems and observe the reaction of the systems to force by
using fluorescent labels. Simultaneously, the users can "feel" the reaction of
the systems to these inputs through measurements of force or extension changes
as the system responds to these inputs. Importantly, these observations reveal
interactions at very small length scales, revealing activities of single
proteins interacting with a substrate. Innovative projects at the forefront of
interdisciplinary science will be enabled by this instrument, including projects
to study how cellular DNA replication and repair of DNA damage occurs, how
retroviruses copy their genomes, and how DNA is packaged (and can be unpackaged)
in cells. Studies on collagen will probe how force affects tissue repair, while
studies on polymer dynamics will use force to observe and direct protein
assembly. The results of these studies will allow observation of real-time
biological dynamics at the single molecule level, providing significant new
insights into the functions of the biological systems
probed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.