* 1828166
* MRI: Acquisition of a Dynamic Imaging Particle Analyzer for Characterization of Particulate Matters in Engineered and Natural Water Systems at Montclair State University
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Meiyin Wu, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2021
* USD 192,212.00

This award is to purchase a Dynamic Imaging Particle Analyzer (DIPA) for
research and training associated with particles in water at Montclair State
University (MSU). The DIPA is capable of accurately and rapidly counting and
characterizing particles in water. It will serve as a core instrument for two
MSU's existing research areas: 1) the development of innovative water treatment
technologies for the removal of various water pollutants and 2) the
identification and characterization of algae in natural freshwater. Furthermore,
the DIPA will be used to open new research opportunities for MSU, including the
measurement of storm water runoff particulates related to soil erosion and the
development of emergency water treatment for natural disasters. The DIPA will be
shared among MSU faculty, research staff, and students across different
departments and programs. The instrument will also be used for educational and
outreach purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Particulate matters (PMs), such as clays
and algal cells, can significantly degrade the quality of engineered and natural
water systems. Occasionally, PMs (e.g. flocs from coagulant addition) are
intentionally produced for removing undesirable water contaminants (e.g.
colloids). Accurate and rapid analyses of these PMs are key to the success of
MSU's core research areas in water treatment and freshwater phytoplankton. The
proposed DIPA will provide a real-time and non-invasive way to image, count, and
characterize PMs in water. This instrument will enable new research
opportunities for multiple programs at MSU, particularly environmental
engineering, environmental science, ecology, biology, and chemistry. The
instrument will also be used for the Passaic River Institute's public education
on recreational water safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.