* 1828477
* MRI: Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for Multidisciplinary Research and Education in Materials Science, Biology and Anthropology
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Erin Iski, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2021
* USD 509,815.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) is
central to the study of micrometer- and nanometer-sized features across a wide
range of materials and objects. Access to TEM instruments is critical for
conducting modern materials science research and for pushing the limits of
understanding in other fields as diverse as biology and archeology. Specific
projects that this instrument supports include microelectronics, self-healing
materials, alternative energy sources, and semiconductor physics. Acquisition of
this new TEM finalizes the creation of a regional electron microscope facility,
available for use by educational and research institutions in the area and by
regional companies and industries such as oil and gas, aerospace and advanced
manufacturing. A new course focused on the theoretical and practical aspects of
electron microscopy provides critical education and training to students.
Outreach activities involve primary, secondary and four-year college students
across the State of Oklahoma through a web-based tele-microscopy program. This
student population includes many from traditionally under-represented groups in
science and technology disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation award is for
acquisition of a 120 kV transmission electron microscope with digital imaging, a
high-resolution objective lens, energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDS), and
scanning transmission electron microscopy (S/TEM) at The University of Tulsa.
This TEM system enables research projects such as studying how nano-batteries
can increase their capacities, self-sensing mechanisms of composite materials,
bioengineering of microalgae for enhanced biofuel production, prehistoric
evidence for the invention of cooking, molecular assembly of amino acids for
sensing and medical treatments, properties of nanocrystals formed under
electrochemical bias, and polarization coupling phenomena in ferroelectric
heterostructures. The TEM also creates the potential for unique and potentially
transformative research on the preservation and analysis of cultural heritage
artifacts. The goal of this TEM acquisition is to integrate the new instrument
into the Micro and Nano Fabrication and Characterization Laboratory (Nano Lab)
at The University of Tulsa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.