* 1828267
* MRI: Acquisition of an EyeLink 1000 system to promote oculomotor research at a primarily undergraduate institution
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Jessica Hill, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 55,527.00

This NSF Major Research Instrumentation award supports the acquisition of an
EyeLink 1000 Plus integrated eye tracking system (S-R Research) in the
Behavioral Science Department at Utah Valley University (UVU), a primarily
undergraduate institution, with a high proportion of first-generation, minority,
and non-traditional students. The speed, accuracy, and precision of this
equipment is enabling the Behavioral and Cognitive Neuroscience Lab to conduct
cutting-edge eye tracking research in a number of vital areas. For example, the
eye tracking system, which detects subtle differences in eye movements by
recording up to 2,000 distinct data points per second, is being used to
distinguish subtypes of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) in
children. Other research is using an innovative methodology to assess how
individuals with dyslexia deploy their attention while reading. Results of this
study will lay a foundation for designing reading interventions for beginning
readers with dyslexia, a disorder that affects 10-15% of children in the U.S.
The acquisition of the EyeLink 1000 Plus system is significantly expanding both
basic and applied research and research training opportunities for UVU faculty
and students alike, and opening doors to interdisciplinary collaborations with
faculty at UVU and other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned
research investigates visual attention in several areas: ADHD, dyslexia,
comparative cognition, and two-dimensional visual perception. It will contribute
to a substantially growing body of research examining the development of
oculomotor control in atypical populations by attempting to distinguish eye
movements across ADHD subtypes. Using the EyeLink 1000 Plus system to record
high-resolution data on simple oculomotor tasks has the potential to identify
core cognitive impairments in a more clear-cut manner than existing approaches.
The research includes six oculomotor versions of traditional neuropsychological
tests to examine common areas of executive deficits seen in ADHD: activation,
attentional orienting, set shifting, spatial working memory, stimulus
suppression, and response suppression. This basic attentional work will provide
a foundation for applied clinical investigations by other researchers. In order
to better assess how individuals with dyslexia deploy their attention while
reading, children and adults with dyslexia are being exposed to a series of
single sentences that will include dynamic changes of upcoming words not
currently fixated (i.e., within the parafoveal). The results of this work will
inform revisions of models of normal reading to accommodate dyslexia and provide
recommendations for creating standardized stimuli for future dyslexia reading
research. The instrument will also enable research related to the perception of
perspective within two-dimensional representations. The long-held assumption is
that orthogonal lines drive the movements of the viewer's eyes. The research is
testing this claim by recording eye movements of novice and expert art viewers
as they view photographs and paintings with strong or weak depth cues.
Researchers will test the hypothesis that experience rather than the lines
themselves direct the eyes. The opportunity to participate in cutting-edge,
transformative research facilitated by the acquisition of the EyeLink Plus 1000
system will be extended to women and minority students, who participate in high
numbers in the behavioral sciences at UVU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.