* 1828565
* MRI: Development of A Novel Instrument that Minimizes Uncertainties in Airborne Measurements of Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andrew Heymsfield, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 991,762.00

Weather radar, satellites, and numerical models all require accurate knowledge
of the properties of cloud and precipitation particles. The atmospheric science
field has spent decades conducting airborne field measurement campaigns with the
goal of collecting as much data as possible to characterize the distribution of
droplet and crystal sizes and shapes. However, fundamental limitations of
aircraft probes have left many unanswered questions and uncertainties. This
award is for the development of a new airborne probe that will enhance the
observational research community's efforts to characterize cloud and
precipitation particles. The potential societal impacts of this award will be
through more accurate precipitation measurements from radar and satellites, and
improvements in inputs to weather and climate models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Major Research Instrumentation development award is for the design and
construction of the fourth generation High Volume Precipitation Spectrometer
(HVPS-4) for measurement of cloud and precipitation particles. The HVPS-4 will
provide orthogonal digital images of cloud and precipitation particles at 50 and
150-micron pixel resolution. The orthogonal views will reduce uncertainties in
particle shape, aspect ratio, volume, and mass. The HVPS-4 could be mounted on
the NCAR G-V and C-130 research aircraft, or other aircraft that regularly carry
particle probes. The instrument has the potential to: 1) Lead to better
understanding of cloud microphysical processes and improved estimates of ice and
liquid water content in clouds and precipitation, 2) Improve remote retrievals
from ground and space-based radar, and 3) Improve microphysical and hydrological
parameterizations in weather and climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.