* 1828270
* MRI: Acquisition of a Low-Temperature High-Magnetic-Field Multifunctional Scanning Probe Microscopy System
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Xiaoshan Xu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2021
* USD 330,530.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;One of the core elements of modern science
is to acquire structural information from a broad range of length scales
including the scale of atoms, molecules, and nanostructures to solar systems and
galaxies. Imaging methods in real space play an ever-increasing role in
structure analysis. From the acquired information, it is then possible to build
theoretical models that can explain the underlying phenomena. In the case of
nanoscience and materials research, imaging structures and properties has led to
revolutionary progress in nanotechnology, information technology, and
biotechnology, particularly after the invention of electron and scanning-probe
microscopy, for which Nobel prizes were awarded in 1986. This grant allows
purchase of a cutting-edge microscopy system with extreme sample environments to
further advance the boundary of science in terms of elucidating the underlying
mechanisms of complex material properties on the nanometer scale. The outcome of
the research carried out using the microscopy system is expected to have
important impacts on the applications of many mechanical, electrical, magnetic,
and energy materials. The microscopy system also provides training opportunities
on the state-of-the-art microscopy instrument for a large group of graduate and
undergraduate students and postdoctoral researchers and help promote public
awareness of the importance of nanoscience and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This
project acquires a state-of-the-art, multifunctional, low-temperature, high-
magnetic-field scanning probe microscopy system at the University of Nebraska-
Lincoln and enables broad usage of the system for nanoscale science and
engineering research. The system is capable of characterizing spatially resolved
conductivity, magnetic force, piezoresponse force, and topography down to the
nanoscale. The system is equipped with an ultra-low-vibration sample environment
that offers a wide range of temperature and magnetic fields. Building on the
versatile capabilities of the system, this instrument enables research projects
that explore: 1) the morphology, electric transport, magnetism, and
ferroelectricity on nanoscale and low-dimensional materials; 2) the coupling
between these properties; 3) material properties that emerge only at extreme
conditions, as well as the related thermodynamic phase transitions; and 4)
quantum phase transitions in electric and/or magnetic
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.