* 1828666
* MRI: Development of a 100 kHz, Ultrafast Interfacial-Specific Two-Dimensional Vibrational Spectromicroscope
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Vicki Grassian, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Tanya Whitmer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 428,357.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Wei Xiong from
University of California San Diego and colleagues Vicki Grassian, Neal Devaraj
and Ping Liu have developed an ultrafast, one-dimensional/two-dimensional sum
frequency generation (1D/2D SFG) spectromicroscope. The microscope employs a
laser to probe a sample. This produces a signal (or image) observed by the
microscope. The spectral image provides information on the physical and chemical
properties of the sample. It is used to probe interfaces, for example, the
surface of aerosol particles. Another use is to study the structure of water in
confined spaces such as in water purification materials. It is used to pinpoint
domains where ice nucleation occurs. Development of artificial retinas and
wearable solar cells are applications which can benefit from this instrument.
Investigation of these and other processes leads to a better understanding of
how to improve them or ameliorate undue consequences. Graduate students are
involved with development and application of the instrument, receiving training
in an important skill sought by commercial instrument firms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument is used in a variety of investigations.
Water purification materials are being studied. The electrochemical interface of
energy storage devices (for example, lithium batteries) is being explored.
Aerosols surfaces are receiving attention to understand formation mechanisms.
Materials which have heterogeneous surfaces are better understood using the
microscope, for example biological fibrils. It is being used to study artificial
cells and neural networks. Investigators at the University of California, Irvine
and Spelman College have projects using the
instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.