* 1828168
* MRI Consortium: Development of a Wide Field-of-View Camera for the Schwarzschild-Couder Gamma Ray Telescope
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Francesco Giordano, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Darren Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,365,719.00

Observations of very-high energy gamma-ray light offer a window on some of the
most energetic environments in the Universe, where gamma-rays are produced as
particles are accelerated under extreme conditions produced by strong
gravitational or magnetic fields. This award will support the construction of a
wide-field camera for a ground-based gamma-ray telescope with a novel optical
design that is located on the site of the VERITAS gamma-ray observatory in
Arizona. This new technology will dramatically improve the optical performance
of ground-based Imaging Atmospheric Cherenkov Telescopes for gamma-ray
astrophysics. Next generation scientific studies will be enabled through this
award, including multi-wavelength observations, and rapid follow up of transient
sources. The camera and telescope will also serve as a prototype for the
Cherenkov Telescope Array, a new gamma-ray observatory under development by an
international consortium. The award will provide the opportunity for integrated
research and education for a large number of undergraduate students. Data from
the camera will be used in citizen science projects hosted on the Zooniverse
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The wide-field camera, featuring 11,328 channels
of imaging and readout electronics, will be installed on a prototype
Schwarzschild Couder telescope that is currently nearing completion in Arizona.
It will provide coverage of an 8-degree field of view, allowing rapid
observations of the sky around transient and multi-messenger alerts, and fully
exploiting the optical performance of the Schwarzschild-Couder design. The
telescope will be operated in concert with the existing VERITAS array, providing
cross-calibration and enhancing the scientific capabilities of both
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.