* 1828540
* Berry College MRI:  Aquisition of a Flex Real-Time PCR System for Undergraduate Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Angela Poole, Berry College
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 99,645.00

An award is made to Berry College to increase the research productivity of
faculty and enhance undergraduate research and teaching through the acquisition
of an Applied Biosystems QuantStudio 7 Flex Real-Time PCR system. Over the
three-year grant period, the QuantStudio 7 will enable faculty to engage an
estimated 77 undergraduate research assistants and 312 undergraduates in
coursework, teaching them modern molecular techniques and comprehensively
preparing them for graduate school and careers in science. This instrument will
create opportunities for undertaking new laboratory exercises and engaging in
research within the classroom in a diverse set of courses, including Molecular
Biology, Developmental Biology, Genetics of Domesticated Animals, and Chromatin,
Epigenetics, and Gene Expression. The QuantStudio 7 will also facilitate
partnerships between Berry and other institutions, including Dalton State
College (an HSI) and Colorado State University. In partnership with Armuchee
High School (serving economically diverse students) and the Georgia Governor's
Honors Program (a summer program held on the Berry campus that serves Georgia's
top science students from diverse backgrounds), Berry will provide an estimated
348 high school students with early exposure to molecular research
instrumentation and methods, which will help build their confidence in their
ability to pursue STEM majors and careers. Given the impact of Berry's
activities using the QuantStudio 7, as well as the research and training planned
by shared users in the Northwest Georgia region, this instrument will play a
role in producing the qualified STEM workers the state needs to meet projected
STEM employment growth. It will also further Berry's strategic goal to graduate
students who are "life ready" prepared to be agents of improvement through the
integration of rigorous academic learning with meaningful applied learning
experiences and a heart for service. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The QuantStudio 7
will foster and facilitate the OneHealth approach to research, i.e.,
transdisciplinary collaborations between physicians, veterinarians,
epidemiologists, ecologists, climatologists, medical researchers, and numerous
other specialties, as dictated by the specific problem being studied. In the
immediate future, the QuantStudio 7 will bring together the project's four PIs a
diverse group that includes three early-career investigators and other faculty
who collectively are studying coral reef ecosystem health, wildlife and
domesticated animal health, and parasites related to human health. With access
to a modern real-time PCR system, the PIs' research will advance understanding
of a broad spectrum of molecular mechanisms. Specifically, the PIs will use the
instrument to study potential immune genes and endocrine disruption in
cnidarians to better understand how these organisms respond to a changing
environment; develop an ideal method for cryopreserving eggs, sperm, and embryos
of goat and deer species for agricultural purposes and wildlife conservation;
and determine how genetic variants affect early pregnancy and thus facilitate
genetic selection programs to improve cow fertility. The PIs will disseminate
their research findings through submission of papers to peer-reviewed journals
and presentations at national and international meetings. Overall, the
QuantStudio 7's robust capabilities will advance future investigations in
interconnections between human, animal, and environmental
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.