* 1828019
* PREM: Partnership between CSUN and Princeton for Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Gang Lu, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Debasis Majumdar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,810,000.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;California State University
Northridge (CSUN) is one of the largest universities in the US with annual
enrollment over 40,000 students and is classified as both Hispanic-serving and
Minority-serving institution. More than 50% of the students who indicated
ethnicity are from underrepresented groups (URGs). Approximately 46% of the
total student population is of Hispanic background. CSUN ranks 13th in awarding
bachelor's degrees to underrepresented minority students and 7th in bachelor's
degrees to Latino students in the US. This Partnership in Research and Education
for Materials (PREM) project strives to expand and strengthen the research and
educational activities at CSUN by forming a long-term partnership with Princeton
Center for Complex Materials. The vision of the PREM is to establish a joint
research powerhouse on quantum materials, to increase recruitment, retention and
degree attainment by members of URGs and to impact broadly on materials
research, education and outreach. Multipronged strategies will be carried out to
recruit students from URGs. It is anticipated that 15-20 graduate and 30-35
undergraduate students - most of them from URGs - will be involved in cutting-
edge materials research mentored by the faculty and will graduate with M.S. and
B.S. degree, respectively. Summer research training programs for undergraduates
and high school teachers will be organized at Princeton, while nano-science
summer camps for high school teachers will be organized at CSUN. A new set of
experimental courses preparing the students for research will be developed.
Partnership with industry and national laboratories for student training and
internships will also be developed. The integration of research and education
will enable students to make informed career choices and improve their ability
to participate in post-graduate education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PREM aims to address fundamental problems in
quantum materials that have vital scientific and technological importance as
well as economical and societal impacts, such as renewable energy,
nanotechnology, spintronics and quantum computing. A multidisciplinary team with
coordinated and complementary skills is assembled into two interdisciplinary
groups (IRGs) and one seed project. IRG1 will tackle frontier problems in
quantum and topological materials, including spontaneous fractional topological
quantum Hall effect in frustrated materials, fractional topological physics in
periodically driven systems, and detecting fractional statistics for quasi-
particles in interaction driven systems. Along with the fundamental advance,
this IRG will also explore computational discovery of novel topological
materials. IRG2 will focus on energetics and dynamics of excited states in
quantum materials, including organic materials for singlet fission, two-
dimensional (2D) semiconductor heterostructures, and 2D hybrid perovskites for
photovoltaic applications. The seed project will address surface science and
defect physics problems relevant to photocatalytic splitting of water on anatase
titania and 2D materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.