* 1828211
* MRI:  Acquisition of an advanced imaging system at a primarily undergraduate institution to promote research, teaching, and science outreach
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Shawn Pfeil, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2022
* USD 462,940.00

An award is made to West Chester University of Pennsylvania to support the
acquisition of a confocal imaging and total internal reflection microscopy
(TIRF) system. This imaging system will enable researchers at West Chester
University and other regional institutions to perform cutting-edge research,
provide transformative undergraduate research experiences, and promote STEM
career advancement for trainees. The new system will ensure that faculty can
expand their research focus, publish in high quality journals, and remain
competitive for external funding opportunities. Importantly, the PIs on this
grant are committed to training undergraduates in confocal/TIRF microscopy to
ensure their students remain competitive in academic and professional fields.
The new microscope will be integrated into independent undergraduate research
projects, Biology or Physics lab courses, and outreach programs that focus on
engaging underrepresented groups in the sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research
projects enabled by the new confocal system include: (1) using in vivo
approaches to study how folic acid, an essential vitamin, affects embryonic
development, (2) biophysical in vitro studies on the folding of a novel nucleic
acid structural motif in the presence and absence of molecular crowding, (3)
discovering novel mechanisms of mitochondrial dynamics and cell adhesion in
single-celled parasites, and (4) using ex vivo explant cultures to examine cell
sorting behavior and changes in cell-cell adhesion during early embryonic
development in Xenopus laevis. The imaging system will enhance faculty research
capabilities, serve as a catalyst for future initiatives, and promote
interdisciplinary and cross-institutional research among its broad user base.
Data and analyses from these studies will be published in peer-reviewed
scientific journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in both
educational and public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.