* 1828454
* MRI: Acquisition of a Raman Imaging - Scanning Electron Microscope / Focused Ion Beam Instrument for Correlative Analysis of Materials Across Multiple Length Scales
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Melissa Krebs, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2020
* USD 999,700.00

This Major Research Instrumentation project supports acquisition of a unique
instrument for studying a variety of materials across multiple length scales -
from one millimeter down to near the atomic scale. In particular, this
instrument probes information about the chemical bonding and mechanical strain
in materials while also evaluating the shape and composition of these materials
at the same location in three dimensions. The instrument directly supports areas
of scientific and national interest such as mineral resource extraction, energy
generation and storage, and biomaterial development. Broader benefits of this
acquisition include: (1) providing a managed, easily accessible correlative
analysis capability to a large number of researchers in diverse scientific
disciplines, (2) advancing technical training of and access to a state-of-the-
art instrument for undergraduate and graduate students at Colorado School of
Mines and other institutions, and (3) attracting K-12 students to science and
engineering fields through hands-on activities.

The acquisition of a Raman imaging - scanning electron microscope / focused ion
beam instrument by the Colorado School of Mines provides an open facility for
the correlative analysis of advanced functional inorganic, organic, biological,
and geological samples across length scales that meets the distinct needs of
academic, national laboratory, and industrial research projects. This is the
first such instrument in the world openly available to academic researchers. Its
usage spans multiple disciplines and many types of materials. Raman
spectroscopic imaging enables bonding, phase, and strain identification down to
a few hundred nanometers. Scanning electron microscopy enables surface
morphology imaging and compositional analysis at the nanometer resolution. The
focused ion beam presents the opportunity to access three-dimensional
compositional and structural information, as well as preparing samples for
further analysis using other techniques such as transmission electron microscopy
and atom probe tomography. The whole instrument facilitates unprecedented access
to three-dimensional phase, bonding, structure, morphology, and compositional
relationship analysis spanning many orders of magnitude in length.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.