* 1828508
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope and Energy Dispersive Spectrometry Attachment for High Resolution Imaging at Skidmore College
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* David Domozych, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Charlotte Roehm
* 09/30/2021
* USD 621,026.00

An award is made to Skidmore College to acquire a Field Emission Scanning
Electron Microscope (FESEM) for support of multiple ongoing research projects
and the development of new research initiatives in the life and physical
sciences. The FESEM will significantly enhance student-faculty collaborative
research at the College, provide a powerful new tool for science courses
requiring high resolution surface imaging, and will directly contribute to
active collaborations between Skidmore scientists and researchers from around
the world. This instrument will also be used to enhance early student engagement
in science and technology via the Skidmore Scholars in Science and Mathematics
(S3M) and the Higher Education Opportunity Program (HEOP), and for community
outreach programs, including the Johns Hopkins Center for Talented Youth and the
annual Skidmore Science and Math Open House. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FESEM is a
powerful tool in high-resolution imaging of surfaces and the capabilities of
this instrument will be directly applied to active and planned research in such
diverse areas as plant cell biology, the development of water contamination
assessment technologies, animal developmental biology, environmental chemistry,
organic matter decay, plate tectonics, fossil ultrastructure and archaeology.
Its versatility in imaging a wide variety of samples ranging from hydrated
biological samples to airborne particles to archaeological artifacts makes it
powerful instrument with application in wide ranging research programs. This
instrument will allow for the development of new and sophisticated experiments
in the study of plant cell wall polymer interactions, microfluidics, fly ash
chemistry, fish ionocytes, fossil deposits, crustal evolution and archaeological
artifacts. The Energy Dispersive Spectrometry attachment (EDS) will provide a
high-throughput and high-sensitivity tool for chemical and materials analyses.
Data and utilization protocols generated through the multidisciplinary use of
the FESEM will be employed in research-based laboratory projects in advanced
courses such as Biological Electron Microscopy, Inorganic Chemistry, Advanced
Analytical Methods in Art, Archaeology and Forensics, and Physical Chemistry
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.