* 1828736
* MRI: Development of a High-Performance Low-Field MRI for Dynamic Imaging
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Dani Byrd, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,482,272.00

This project features the development of a novel, high-performance, low-field
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) system. The system is designed to enable
groundbreaking research in imaging technology, as well as in the science and
technology of human spoken communication and the science of sleep, that is not
possible with any conventional MRI configuration. The work includes developing
signal processing methods for MRI that enable rapid imaging in low signal-to-
noise ratio environments. This will alleviate artifacts that occur at air-tissue
interfaces, which will make it possible to track tissue boundaries with high
precision during dynamic imaging studies, particularly those adjacent to air
space such as the tongue, velum, and pharyngeal airway, which are not easily
accessible by other instrumentation. The new MRI system will also have a much
lower level of acoustic noise than conventional systems, making it possible to
perform real-time conversational speech studies and studies during natural
sleep. It is anticipated that the new system will advance the field of speech
research, by enabling direct investigation of the dynamic human vocal tract
during communication, and will support innovative research in speech
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamic imaging research is deeply
multidisciplinary and connects computational and informational sciences with
physics, biology, linguistics, communication, and engineering. The deployment of
a novel magnet dedicated to dynamic imaging on the host campus represents a
contribution to infrastructure for research and teaching. Data from the new MRI
system will be used in a course that teaches basic physical reasoning and
quantitative thinking by using theoretical and empirical descriptions of the
physical mechanisms of speech.&lt;br/&gt;The course uses dynamic MRI data to
allow students to understand speech production of vowels and consonants. The new
system will allow for data of higher quality and, for the first time, acoustic
recording of analyzable speech audio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.