* 1828251
* MRI: Acquisition of a Rheometer to Enhance Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Research and Education at Murray State University
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Robert Johnson, Murray State University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2020
* USD 147,455.00

This award from the Major Research Instrumentation program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) provides Murray State
University (MSU) with funds to purchase a rheometer to enhance undergraduate
research and education in the Department of Chemistry and in the Institute of
Engineering. The instrumentation will be used to study the rheological (stress-
deformation) properties of polymers and plastics, polymer solutions, fluids,
resins and other soft materials. Research teams in the Department of Chemistry
conduct research to gain an understanding of the fundamental rheological
properties of charge-containing plastics and materials critical to the
advancement of applications in energy storage, electronic devices and 3D
printing. The rheometer enhances significantly the instrumentation available for
an expanding, multi-disciplinary program in polymer and materials science at
MSU. The "hands-on" training that undergraduates will receive will lead to the
improvement of up to five lecture and/or laboratory courses across chemistry and
engineering. Since many of these students are from the rural counties of far-
western Kentucky, northwestern Tennessee and southern Illinois, this cutting-
edge experience will not only deepen their understanding of polymer and
materials science but also increase the likelihood that these students gain
meaningful employment in STEM-related careers in the region and/or better
prepare them for pre-professional school. Finally, the rheometer will enhance
MSU's ability to partner with regional R&amp;D/manufacturing facilities thereby
strengthening existing collaborations and enabling new
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of a new rheometer complete with
environmental testing chamber, UV accessory and dielectric capabilities is
supported jointly by the Major Research Instrumentation Program and the EPSCoR
program. The rheometer will enhance a rapidly growing undergraduate research and
educational program in polymer and materials science at Murray State University.
It will enable real-time and post-cure rheological analysis of polymers, polymer
solutions, fluids, resins and other soft materials. Specific projects that would
be enhanced include the elucidation of in situ and post-cure rheological
properties of poly(ionic liquid) networks (PILs) prepared by thiol-ene/yne
"click" photochemistry, the determination of dielectric properties of these PIL
networks (including insights into chain dynamics and ion mobility), exploration
of dynamic polymeric systems, and the analysis of resins for 3D printing. For
all of these projects, the acquisition of rheological data, in particular those
obtained using the UV light guide and dielectric accessories, will provide
structure-activity information critical to advancing several on-going and future
application interests, including gas/ion separation/absorption membrane
technologies, microfluidics, electrospinning and other electroactive devices.
The rheometer will also allow for the educational advancement of students in
several courses between the Department of Chemistry and the Institute of
Engineering: Polymer Chemistry, including the development of a brand new Polymer
Chemistry Laboratory course, Instrumental Analysis, Mechanics of Materials and
Mechanics of Materials Laboratory. Beyond teaching and research, addition of the
rheometer will further facilitate an active collaboration with a regional
chemical company in order to improve several current commercial product
lines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.