* 1828421
* MRI: Development of a time-resolved, high resolution nonlinear optical microscope for interfacial studies
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Hai-Lung Dai, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Carter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,074,510.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI), the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) and the Chemical Measurement and
Imaging (CMI) Programs. Professor Eric Borguet from Temple University and
colleague Hai-Lung Dai have developed a time-resolved, high resolution optical
microscope. This microscope employs a laser to probe samples such as protein
membranes in living cells or nanomaterials such as the surfaces of gold
nanoparticles. The interaction of the laser with the sample produces an image of
the material under study. Being able to image interfaces with time resolution
and molecular specificity is important to the understanding of a wide variety of
biological, chemical and materials systems. For example, it is an important
approach for examining interfacial water molecules. This new microscope affords
the capability to record images illustrating water structure at the interface
between a biological cell and a substrate which is information critical for
understanding cell adhesion. It is used to monitor molecular adsorption (for
example drugs) and transport at membranes of living cells. Graduate students are
involved in the development and testing of the instrument, receiving training in
an important skill sought by commercial instrument firms. Once the instrument is
available for use, undergraduates will receive training in its usage in
laboratory courses. Multiple investigators from various universities are
utilizing this resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is aimed at
enhancing research and education at all levels. The microscope records images of
samples at millisecond time intervals and with submicron spatial resolution
producing second order nonlinear optical signals. This microscope uses an
optical fiber based laser system which provides high repetition rate, high pulse
energy, ultrafast laser pulses in a broad wavelength range in the visible, and
IR to facilitate resonantly enhanced second harmonic generation (SHG) and sum
frequency generation (SFG) from a variety of materials and molecules at
surfaces/interfaces. The microscope enables imaging of molecular transport with
region-specificity at living cell membranes. In addition, it permits examination
of non-specific cell adhesion using nonlinear vibrational microscopy and the
observation of molecular interactions at the surfaces of colloidal objects. The
instrumentation is also used for the study of two-dimensional materials at
interfaces using nonlinear optical microscopy and for determining inner and
outer nuclear membrane protein orientation and distribution in live cells. The
microscope also serves researchers probing surface-bound ligands on gold
nanoparticles and visualizing electronic symmetry breaking in quantum materials.
It is also being used for the evaluation of cartilage tissue engineering
strategies by IR imaging, and for imaging of leukocyte-endothelial interaction
in a novel organ-on-a-chip system using time-resolved, high-resolution
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.