* 1828155
* MRI:  Development of Ultrafast Near-Field Scanning Optical Microscope
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Thomas Murphy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 606,237.00

Many phenomena in natural and engineered systems are both spatial and temporal,
meaning that they involve dynamical changes and movements of nonuniform
patterns. Examples include wave propagation, heating and cooling, chemical
reactions, and diffusion. The ability to visualize these phenomena is
fundamentally limited both by how fast they are and how small they are. Science
has made remarkable improvements in the spatial resolution of microscopes, which
has enabled the now-mature field of nanotechnology. At the same time, pulsed
laser systems can resolve dynamical processes with femtosecond resolution -- far
faster than even the best electrical detectors or cameras. This project aims to
develop a novel instrument that will combine the spatial capabilities of a near-
field microscope with the temporal resolution of a femtosecond laser, which is
currently not available in commercial instruments. This tool will be capable of
resolving nanoscale spatial structure, while simultaneously measuring ultrafast
effects with femtosecond resolution in systems ranging from nanoelectronic
devices to metallic nanostructures and solar cells. The unique instrument will
provide valuable training for scientists and students at all levels, who will
both develop and utilize it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of two
different technologies, the femtosecond laser and the near-field microscope,
will require significant engineering research, iteration, optimization, and
system integration over the three-year period of this project. The proposed
instrument will replace the continuous-wave laser typically used in a near-field
scanning optical microscope with an ultrafast tunable pulsed laser, in order to
produce an intense spatially and temporally localized optical stimulus that can
excite nonlinear effects in the material or device at the nanoscale. A second,
weaker temporally-delayed optical pulse will then be used to probe the
properties and dynamics with femtosecond resolution. The proposed system will
allow for time-resolved and spatially-resolved measurements at wavelengths
ranging from 340 nm to 12,000 nm. The new instrument will enable the study of
hot-carrier dynamics in metals and two-dimensional (2D) materials, investigation
of the dynamic electrical response of perovskite materials for advanced
optoelectronics, direct imaging of nanophotonic devices and resonant structures,
and observation of heterogeneous surface chemistry and grain boundaries in
transition-metal oxides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.