* 1828430
* MRI: Development of an in-situ controlled Atomic Layer Deposition Tool (iCALD) for the Preparation of 3D Photonic Materials with Ultrahigh Aspect Ratios
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Thomas Suleski, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 440,546.00

Optical materials composed of three-dimensional structures with ultra-high
aspect ratios and coated with ultra-thin conformal layers enable a vast array of
active and passive devices and components operating in the infrared and
terahertz spectral range. Applications for these materials include environmental
sensors with unprecedented sensitivity and multifunctional coatings to enhance
three-dimensional micro-optical structures. The proposed in-situ controlled,
atomic layer deposition (iCALD) instrument which will be developed at the
University of North Carolina (UNC) at Charlotte and integrated in the cleanroom
facility of the Center for Optoelectronics and Optical Communications will
enable the fabrication of these optical materials. The ability to conformally
coat structures with virtually arbitrary geometries enabled by the iCALD
instrument will transform the use and scope of materials, structures, and
optical devices, synthesized and fabricated using the existing cleanroom
facilities. The iCALD instrument will enable research by over 40 faculty members
from five departments across the UNC Charlotte campus, their students, and
national and international collaborators. In addition, this unique instrument
will be accessible for research organized in two NSF-funded Industry/University
Cooperative Research Centers (I/UCRCs), the Center for Metamaterials and the
Center for Freeform Optics. Through these Centers the iCALD development will
lead to new opportunities for industry funded research projects and directly
benefit more than 30 industry partners nationwide. The Optics Center together
with the two I/UCRCs create an environment where the developed iCALD instrument
will have a very significant impact due to its potential for commercialization
of research results, along with enabling advanced training of MS and PhD
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to develop this unique iCALD
instrument for the synthesis of three-dimensional photonic materials. This new
class of materials is composed of three-dimensional structures with ultra-high
aspect ratios, coated with ultra-thin conformal layers. The preparation of
conformal coatings for such structures and surfaces using atomic layer
deposition (ALD) techniques requires the precise control of numerous crucial ALD
process parameters to ensure quality, thickness, and conformity of the ultra-
thin films. It is therefore imperative to control the ALD process parameters
using layer thickness and conformity information obtained from non-contact, in-
situ, measurement techniques. The iCALD instrument will allow in-situ monitoring
and control of the layer-by-layer deposition process by using an innovative in-
situ Mueller matrix ellipsometer operating at infrared wavelengths. The iCALD
instrument will enable the accurate control of ultra-thin coatings, with sub-
nanometer accuracy, deposited onto structures with feature sizes on the order of
several hundred nanometers. The iCALD instrument thereby will allow the
fabrication of novel infrared and terahertz photonic materials with
unprecedented accuracy. Based on these novel three-dimensional photonic
materials, a vast array of active and passive devices and components operating
in the infrared and terahertz spectral range can be made. In addition, the iCALD
instrument will provide valuable insights about layer-by-layer deposition onto
structures with arbitrary geometries, which have not been demonstrated
experimentally yet. The controlled deposition and in-situ monitoring
capabilities developed by this project will further expand crucial understanding
of the atomic layer deposition process required for the fabrication of
structures with ultra-high aspect ratios. Significant improvement of the optical
material properties of three-dimensional photonic materials enabled by this
instrument is anticipated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.