* 1828765
* A Multi-User Cryo-Electron Microscope for the Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences Community in the Northern Rocky Mountain Region
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mark Young, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,421,477.00

An award is made to Montana State University and collaborating institutions to
support the acquisition of a new 200kV cryo-electron microscopy system. The last
decade has seen a revolution in cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM). With
increasing frequency, single particle analysis (SPA) is providing cryo-EM maps
at resolutions on par with X-ray crystallography, resulting in atomic models for
a growing number of macromolecular assemblies - ribosomes, transcription
complexes, proteasomes, viruses, integral membrane proteins and CRISPR/Cas
targeting complexes - all directly from cryo-EM data. Cryoelectron tomography
(CET) can now provide 3D images of cellular structures at 2-5 nm resolution, and
in favorable cases to sub-nanometer resolution. The new multi-user 200 kV cryo-
electron microscope will serve the regional cellular and molecular life sciences
community in Montana and the surrounding states. The new system will immediately
benefit investigators in at least 5 different departments on two different
campuses within the Montana University System (UM and MSU), as well as
investigators at regional institutions in a five-state area. In addition, the
system will have a significant impact on undergraduate, graduate and post-
doctoral education, allowing emerging scientists in the Northern Rockies to
develop expertise with modern cryo-EM techniques. Finally, it will greatly
enhance K-12 teacher education and outreach programs by MSUs Thermal Biology
Institute, the Center for Biofilm Engineering, the Chemistry and Biochemistry
REU program, and outreach to Montana's Tribal Colleges through MSU's MAP and
Bridges to Baccalaureate Programs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent technical
advances in cryo-EM allow the structures of macromolecular complexes to be
modeled at the atomic level by SPA, and observation of these structures within
the native cellular environment with CET. Combined, SPA and CET provide profound
biological insight into the biochemical activities and mechanisms of cellular
machinery. Toward this end, investigators across the Northern Rockies have
initiated cryo-EM studies of CRISPR/Cas targeting complexes, G-protein coupled
receptor signaling pathways, archaeal viruses in the "3rd domain" of life, new
world hemorrhagic viruses, and iron transport in mammals and pathogenic
bacteria. The new 200 kV cryo-EM in the Northern Rockies region will enable
groundbreaking investigations of macromolecular and cellular structures at
ultrahigh resolution. Data and analyses from these studies will be published in
peer-reviewed scientific journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in
both educational and public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.