* 1828348
* MRI: Acquisition of a Cryogen-Free Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS DynaCool)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* David Mitzi, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2021
* USD 488,600.00

Many of the pressing challenges that technologies are facing today in moving
toward manufacturing the next generation of supercomputers or advanced
communication tools can be solved with the targeted control of materials
functionalities (e.g., electrical, magnetic or thermal properties). Measuring
physical properties of materials under accurately controlled conditions plays a
key role in understanding atomic scale properties of the new materials and
accessing their utility for technical applications. The acquisition of the
cryogen-free Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS DynaCool) empowers
researchers at Duke University to measure a wide range of materials properties
with a high sample-throughput rate, without the need for any liquid cryogens.
This state-of-the-art instrument not only enables the research training of
students and postdoctoral associates, but it also benefits undergraduate and
graduate engineering and science laboratory courses, and the extensive education
outreach programs focused on materials research that are already in place at
Duke for high school students, high school teachers, and undergraduates. This
instrument is also available to the broader Research Triangle community,
furthering the goal of developing a more diverse scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;----------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) is an important addition to Duke
University?s materials research infrastructure and will greatly impact many
areas of scientific inquiry, ranging from fundamental studies of quantum
magnetism, topological effects and emergent critical phenomena, to electrical
transport in nanomagnets and superconducting nanostructures, to designing and
evaluating molecular, nanoscale and macroscopic materials, to studies of
electronic correlations in carbon nanotubes and graphene, to characterization of
novel organic semiconductor and hybrid materials for energy applications, to
synthesis and characterization of high-temperature superconductors. The PPMS is
equipped with an integrated conduction-cooled superconducting 14 Tesla magnet.
This system provides seamless temperature transition and is capable of cooling
the sample chamber from room temperature to 1.8 K and stabilizing to better than
0.001 K in under 45 minutes. A dilution refrigerator insert provides the
capability to conduct measurements down to 50 mK, essential for probing quantum
mechanical phenomena in materials. The sample chamber accommodates a wide range
of measurement inserts, all of which allow fully automated data acquisition
under computer control over the full range of magnetic field and temperature. A
multi-function probe accommodates custom experiments, and a horizontal sample
rotator allows magnetoresistance measurements as a function of sample
orientation relative to magnetic field. This system provides the capability to
measure electrical resistivity, thermal conductivity, specific heat, Hall
Effect, and other thermoelectric properties, as well as susceptibility and
magnetization. The cryogen-free feature of this system ensures cost-effective
and reliable long-term operation of the equipment, enabling it to accommodate
the large user base it will serve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.