* 1828363
* MRI: Development of an Information Assurance and Performance Infrastructure for the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Xubin He, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 432,000.00

This project, developing an Information Assurance and Performance (IAP)
Infrastructure for the Internet of &lt;br/&gt;Things (IoT) in which sensing and
actuation is embedded in everyday objects connected via the Internet, has
&lt;br/&gt;the potential to support an increased level of intelligent, dynamic
decision making across a wide array of &lt;br/&gt;domains, such as smart cities,
intelligent agriculture, and emergency response management. IAP is expected
&lt;br/&gt;to enable projects in IoT security and performance and related
technologies (e.g., robust data storage schemes and elastic provisioning
algorithms for cloud based systems). The infrastructure consists of
&lt;br/&gt;mobile and embedded IoT devices, IoT edge computing servers, software
defined networking (SDN) switches, &lt;br/&gt;high performance and reliable data
storage, software components implementing research communication protocols,
elastic algorithms, and computational offloading in IoT systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects are enabled by the construction of the
testbed hardware, algorithms/protocols/schemes, and the corresponding software
implementation. The projects described should result in the exploration of:
&lt;br/&gt;scalable &amp; trustworthy architectures &amp; networking protocols
for IoT systems,&lt;br/&gt;role-based behavioral threat detection approaches for
IoT systems, &lt;br/&gt;elastic provisioning algorithms for cloud-based centers,
and &lt;br/&gt;risk-aware failure identification for expedited
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.