* 1828481
* MRI:  Acquisition of a Zeiss 880 Multiphoton and AiryScan Microscope System as a Shared Instrument for the Washington University Research Community
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ram Dixit, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 649,918.00

An award is made to support the acquisition of a multiphoton confocal microscope
to address the research needs of a large, diverse group of researchers in
multiple departments at Washington University and in the St. Louis area. The new
system will be housed in the Biology Department Imaging Core and will be readily
accessible to university and regional users. The new imaging capabilities of
this instrument will enable cutting edge multidisciplinary research and promote
a well-prepared, diverse STEM workforce including students in underrepresented
groups. The microscope will enhance the hands-on training of undergraduates
through existing courses, in addition to the many Independent Study
undergraduates that already use the Core. Furthermore, the instrument will
enable the development of new teaching modules for other undergraduate biology
classes where the need to procure data for many students in a short time frame
precludes the use of existing instruments. This instrument will also have a
large impact on underrepresented students involved in the Science Career
Explorations programs, YMCA campus Y program for inner-city school children, and
ENDURE program for underrepresented students entering neuroscience graduate
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of live cell imaging has recently enabled
researchers to resolve physiological and molecular events in cells deep within
tissues with micron- and millisecond-resolution. The new multiphoton system will
provide deep, fast and super-resolution imaging technology for the first time to
users in the departments of Biology, Physics, and Engineering at Washington
University and from area institutions. Initial research uses for the new system
will include work on cortical microtubules in plant cells; analysis of
biosensors in root cells and pollen dynamics. Other researchers working with
animal systems will study neuronal cell populations, tendon fascicles, and a
range of other topics. Results from these studies will be published in peer-
reviewed scientific journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in both
training and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.