* 1828802
* MRI: Acquisition of a micro-CT for broad integrative biology use and building resources towards the Imaging Center of the Pacific
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Megan Porter, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 335,578.00

An award is made to the University of Hawai'i at M&amp;#0257noa to purchase a
micro-computed tomography (&amp;#0181CT) instrument. This type of instrument has
become an important and widely-used used technology in basic research due to its
ability to generate fast, reproducible, non-destructive 3-D imaging of a broad
range of tissues. The new &amp;#0181CT system will significantly enhance a broad
spectrum of local research programs, enabling researchers to initiate, continue,
and expand studies of taxonomy in corals, insects and mollusks; sensory system
evolution in arthropods and fish; morphology and physiology in frogs and sea
spiders; and the impacts of ocean acidification on corals, among many others.
This new imaging instrument will be accessible to life science researchers
across campus, as well as graduate and undergraduate students, promoting the
training of young scientists in advanced 3D imaging technologies. By partnering
with &amp;#0181CT users from both the University of Hawai'i and the Bernice
Pauahi Bishop Museum in Honolulu, the PI and co-PI will build a Virtual Museum
of 3D models of native Hawaiian biodiversity that will be accessible online to
the general public and to researchers around the world. These 3D scans of native
fauna will also be used to create large scale, 3D models for biodiversity
exhibits at the Bishop Museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new &amp;#0181CT
imaging system will be added to the University of Hawai'i at M&amp;#0257noa
Center of Advanced Bioimaging Research (CABR) to develop a comprehensive, multi-
modality research facility that will serve the local Hawaiian, and broader
Pacific, research community. The location of the instrument affords researchers
access to fast, affordable, easy-to-use, non-invasive imaging techniques in one
of the premier hotspots of island biodiversity, allowing for studies of the
unique, endemic, and rapidly declining fauna found in Hawai'i. The new
instrument will support 3D microscopy of hard and soft tissue imaging, capable
of mapping genome-phenome interactions, physiology, metabolism, and molecular
interactions in living animals, and enhancing efforts to conduct place-based
research. The new instrumentation builds on the initial strong investment by UH
administration in imaging technology and will support interdisciplinary
research, education, and training. The multimodality capability created by the
addition of a &amp;#0181CT imaging system to the University of Hawai'i imaging
resources will make it unique among bioimaging facilities across the nation
because of the access afforded to researchers and students engaged in basic
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.