* 1828779
* MRI: Acquisition of a High-Performance Computing Cluster for Research and Teaching at UC Irvine
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Filipp Furche, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

This acquisition provides a modern, energy-efficient, campus-wide, High-
Performance Computing Community Cluster (HPC3) enabling research and research
training in areas ranging from elementary particle physics and quantum chemistry
through earth-system modeling and engineering to social ecology. HPC3 is
expected to deliver a combination of high flexibility and user friendliness with
high efficiency for both massively parallel and shared memory applications that
is not always achievable by centralized supercomputing or cloud computing
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition is a mixed CPU/GPU cluster that
provides substantial computing power to a diverse, high-performance computing
(HPC) community of 13 major user research groups as well as other researchers
and students at the institution and three local partnering campuses of
California State University. The acquisition will also be used by researchers
across the Nation by virtue of HPC3's integration with the Open Science Grid
(OSG) and eXtreme Science and Engineering Discovery Environment (XSEDE).
Examples of research projects that will use HPC3 include: new elementary
particle discovery, first-principles simulations of high-temperature
superconductors and quantum spin liquids, simulations of warm dense matter,
electronic structure of small-gap compounds, nonadiabatic molecular dynamics
simulations of photocatalysts and light-driven materials, Monte
Carlo&lt;br/&gt;simulations of crowded protein solutions, thermodynamic
properties of pharmaceuticals, RNA sequencing, alignment of biological networks,
ice-sheet modeling, global climate modeling including cloud effects, geophysical
climate data analysis, multiscale materials modeling, and simulations of
turbulent flow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All partnering universities are Hispanic-
serving institutions, and minorities underrepresented in the Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields will be actively
recruited through mentoring and outreach on campus and to local high schools in
underserved areas. HPC3 will also support the development of highly optimized
HPC software used by scientists worldwide for simulations in condensed matter
physics, quantum chemistry, computational fluid dynamics, and earth system
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.