* 1828705
* MRI STROBE CONSORTIUM: Development of a Hybrid Photon-Electron Microscopy System for Functional Imaging of Multi-Scale Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Margaret Murnane, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,246,000.00

Microscopic imaging is critical for discovery and innovation in science and
technology, accelerating advances in materials, biological, nano and energy
sciences, as well as nanoelectronics, data storage and medicine. However, many
advanced materials are non-uniform and complex in structure and behavior. As a
result, it is very challenging to understand how these materials work, or to
implement smart design in order to harness their rich technological potential.
Moreover, many nanoscale imaging techniques alter samples due to the need for
extensive sample preparation, and each imaging method provides only a limited
view of the material. To address these challenges, researchers at the STROBE
Science and Technology Center are developing a new hybrid microscope to
implement a new imaging modality: real-time imaging of nanostructured and
complex materials using ultrafast illumination beams spanning the
electromagnetic spectrum from the terahertz to the soft X-ray regions, as well
as ultrafast pulses of electrons. This project also provides a unique
opportunity for a large group of students and postdocs to do cutting edge
research in imaging science, as well as experience how to translate advanced
imaging concepts into a working microscope. After commissioning, more than 100
faculty, graduate students, and national lab and industry users will benefit
from the new microscope, in research areas spanning physics, chemistry,
materials science, mechanical and aerospace
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) project are to development a hybrid photon-electron
functional microscope system and to implement a new imaging modality: real-time
multimodal imaging of nanostructured materials using ultrafast excitation,
combining illumination beams from the terahertz to X-ray, as well as ultrafast
pulses of electrons. This unique microscope enables high spatial and temporal
resolution, non-destructive, 3-dimensional imaging of nanostructured and low-
density materials; functional imaging of buried interfaces; and multimodal
imaging of common nanostructured samples, necessitating the use of common
registration and sample manipulation to correlated information from different
imaging modalities. Key features of the microscope include the ability to
dynamically image charge/spin/energy transport and couplings at surfaces using
nano-optical and low-energy electron imaging, as well as thick samples using
X-ray and high-energy electron imaging, with nanometer spatial and femtosecond
time resolution. Access to these new capabilities allow better understanding of
charge and thermal transport in advance nanomaterials, as well as understanding
how structure impacts new emergent physical phenomena in
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.