* 1828935
* IRES Track II: Advanced Study Institute: Field Studies of Convection in Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Kristen Rasmussen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2020
* USD 145,568.00

Sixteen graduate students will be recruited to participate in a 21-day Advanced
Study Institute (ASI) in Argentina in conjunction with the NSF-sponsored
RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) field campaign
from 30 October thru 19 November 2018. The ASI program will provide a dynamic
and highly collaborative research experience by focusing on five key elements:
(1) intensive field research with active field campaign instrumentation
platforms under the guidance of the instrument PIs; (2) recruitment of a diverse
set of graduate students who would not otherwise have opportunities to
participate in intensive field research; (3) an ASI curriculum focused on
scientific understanding of cloud and mesoscale processes of the atmosphere and
professional/academic development topics; (4) outreach to local K-12 schools and
organized cultural activities; and (5) building a collaborative international
research network between the U.S., Argentina, and Brazil to promote weather and
climate research. These five elements serve to increase motivation and improve
self-confidence of students to participate in scientific research and field work
with goals of increasing retention in STEM graduate programs and advancing the
careers of students from underrepresented groups. The experience for
participating advanced graduate students is intentionally designed by the multi-
cultural and international ASI organizing committee to develop a wide variety of
professional skills to prepare the students for the transition to their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI-team will conduct an Advanced Study
Institute (ASI) in Argentina for three weeks in conjunction with the NSF-
sponsored RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) field campaign
that will support the participation of sixteen highly motivated and diverse
advanced graduate students from the U.S. This region arguably has among the most
intense convective systems in the world with respect to the frequency of large
hail, high storm tops, and extreme lightning activity, yet the processes that
give rise to such extremes are unclear because of a scarcity of observations.
The ASI will be coordinated by international and U.S.-based atmospheric
scientists involved in RELAMPAGO. The ASI program will provide a dynamic and
highly collaborative research experience by focusing on five key elements: (1)
intensive field research with active field campaign instrumentation platforms
under the guidance of the instrument PIs; (2) recruitment of a diverse set of
graduate students who would not otherwise have opportunities to participate in
intensive field research; (3) an ASI curriculum focused on scientific
understanding of cloud and mesoscale processes of the atmosphere and
professional/academic development topics; (4) outreach to local K-12 schools and
organized cultural activities; and (5) building a collaborative international
research network between the U.S., Argentina, and Brazil to promote weather and
climate research. These five elements serve to increase motivation and improve
self-confidence of students to participate in scientific research and field work
with goals of increasing retention in STEM graduate programs and advancing the
careers of students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.