* 1828628
* MRI: Acquisition of In-Situ Electron Microscopy Instrumentation to Monitor Kinetic Processes in Complex Materials and Molecules
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Lior Sepunaru, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 09/30/2021
* USD 700,000.00

Although nanometer-scale kinetic and dynamic processes in liquids are a unifying
feature of industrial chemistry, advanced materials and biology, our measurement
capabilities to directly visualize and quantify these processes are usually
limited to large objects and slow behavior. Recent technological advances in
electron microscopy instrumentation, including ambient liquid sample holders and
fast cameras that detect electrons directly, have overcome these limitations to
provide a previously unobtainable feat - direct, high-frame rate and high-
spatial-resolution video electron microscopy of fluids, soft materials and
interfaces between different materials. This project involves the acquisition of
these combined instrumental capabilities for incorporation with a state-of-the-
art electron microscope at the University of California, Santa Barbara. Combined
with advanced dynamic image analysis methods, these new capabilities provide a
foundational tool for fundamental studies of kinetic and dynamic processes in
liquids at the single-molecule and single-particle level and establish core
expertise in dynamic liquid nanostructure visualization on the campus. The new
capabilities also inspire a new generation of researchers to push the boundaries
of liquid electron microscopy and the science it
enables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Major Research Instrumentation
grant allows acquisition of an in-situ liquid cell holder with on-chip
temperature, flow and electrochemical control, together with a third-generation
direct electron detector. Combined with a newly installed state-of-the-art
electron microscope, ThermoFisher/FEI Talos F200X G2, this acquisition allows
for direct visualization of liquids with high spatial (0.2 nm) and temporal
(above 1 kHz) resolution under a range of ambient conditions and applied
electrical fields through on-chip high-field circuitry on the liquid cell. The
ability to modify the sample-cell interface in the liquid cell and use flow to
rapidly exchange fluids help realize unprecedented experiments to directly
observe a wide range of physicochemical processes in unconfined, nano-confined
and interfacial fluids including phase transformations, molecular motions and
interactions, as well as chemical and electrochemical reactions. The large data
sets from these experiments benefit from a suite of newly developed video
microscopy analysis tools to resolve and quantify the complex and often subtle
features of kinetic and dynamic processes in nanoscale liquids. These powerful
new tools are deployed to address some of the most impenetrable and vexing
scientific challenges in materials science and structural biology, including (i)
metastable and unstable phase separation during nanoconfinement and nanomaterial
synthesis, (ii) single-molecule electrochemical characterization of catalytic
materials, and (iii) fundamental mechanisms of aggregation and coacervation in
disordered biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.