* 1828479
* MRI Acquisition-Advancing plant and fungal research at NYBG with a modern Scanning Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Fabian Michelangeli, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2021
* USD 162,275.00

An award is made to the New York Botanical Garden (NYBG) to support the
acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) and associated
instrumentation for shared use by a large number of research curators, students,
interns, and visiting scientists. Scanning electron microscopy can produce
striking images that are able to convey the complexity of life easily to
researchers and the general public. Images and descriptive text will be posted
quarterly on NYBG's social media platforms and on NYBG's Tree of Life Exhibit in
the Britton Gallery that houses public science exhibits. These images will
illustrate how microscopic characteristics help to infer relationships among
groups of plants and fungi. In addition, a display case will use objects (stubs
of prepared samples, used targets, etc.) and images to explain SEM and its uses
to the general public. The new system will also be important for training the
next generation of scientists and graduate students doing work at
NYBG.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Scanning electron microscopy is a key component of
botanical and fungal research at NYBG which is focused on identifying species,
determining the evolutionary relationships among species, and comparing the
development of species to better understand their evolution. NYBG researchers
are working to understand the evolution and systematics of plant and fungal
species ranging from ferns to redwoods and from truffles to orchids. The
research involves detailed analyses of structural features of leaves, flowers,
pollen, roots, and even associated symbiotic organisms (e.g., fungi) in
specimens collected from all over the world. The new variable pressure SEM will
facilitate examination of these delicate samples at a wide range of
magnifications, and using multiple imaging modes (e.g., backscatter and
secondary detection). This new equipment will allow researchers to capture high-
resolution images of coated and uncoated specimens as well as the ability to
merge detector images. It also allows for imaging under a variety of pressure
and voltage conditions. The associated software will allow researchers to
efficiently and effectively stitch together multiple high-resolution images and
to 3D map captured images, providing new means of understanding and documenting
plant and fungal diversity. The instruments will be housed in a core facility
for shared use by a large number of research curators, students, interns, and
visiting scientists. Results from these research efforts will be published in
peer-reviewed scientific journals, presented at scientific meetings, and used in
public outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.