* 1828492
* Collaborative Research: NRT: Cyber-Physical-Social System for Understanding and Thwarting the Illicit Economy
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Brian Logue, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 540,085.00

The negative societal impacts of counterfeiting are widespread, touching nearly
every economic sector, including health care, and threatening our national
security. The explosion of the illicit economy can be traced to the growth in
online commerce and an "abuse ecosystem" of rogue internet actors, direct-to-
consumer courier delivery services, and the lack of product protective measures
to counteract counterfeiting. This increase is further fueled by new digital
tools available to counterfeiters, such as higher resolution digital printers.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) collaborative award
to four South Dakota universities (South Dakota School of Mines and Technology,
University of South Dakota, South Dakota State University and Dakota State
University) will provide graduate students with the scientific knowledge and
professional skills and training needed to become next-generation leaders in the
fight against counterfeiting. Participants will receive professional and
leadership training within the framework of a unique cyber-physical-social
model. This model takes a comprehensive approach that factors in not only the
technical aspects of the cyber strategies and physical methods used to combat
counterfeiting, but also whether these strategies and methods are compatible
with human behavior. This model will allow trainees to solve complex problems,
where the solutions must tightly integrate cyber, physical, and social
interactions in real-time. The project anticipates training forty-five (45)
Ph.D. and M.S. students, including thirty (30) funded trainees, from physical
science, engineering, computer science and behavioral
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will be immersed in a mission-driven
framework to conduct research across three collaborative research areas: (1)
nano-photonics for anti-counterfeiting and authentication, (2) identification
and detection of counterfeit chemicals/pharmaceutics, and (3) internet-based
investigations, digital forensics and the cyber/physical interface. The
education and training program encompasses two overarching themes: (1) active
learning and (2) translational understanding of the illicit economy and the
technologies needed to mitigate it. Embedded within these themes is a leadership
component involving explicit training in entrepreneurship and communication.
Additional highlights of the program include an internship experience with
leading private/public sector organizations that will allow trainees to quickly
gain a contextual understanding of the counterfeiting epidemic and technology
landscape; an integrated and multi-level mentorship program to provide trainees
with ongoing feedback and guidance, promoting retention and timely
matriculation; and engagement of a broader audience through creation of outreach
and certificate programs for the general public. These program features will
ensure trainees emerge as highly-trained STEM leaders, engaged in a wide array
of important interconnected issues, and able to tackle complex socio-technical
challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is co-funded by the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). EPSCoR co-funds
projects that advance excellence in science and engineering research and
education. Fostering sustainable increases in research, education, and training
capacity and competitiveness within EPSCoR jurisdictions will enable EPSCoR
participants to have increased engagement in areas supported by the
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.