* 1828159
* MRI:  Development of a Programmable Power Supply for the Wisconsin Plasma Physics Laboratory (WiPPL)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* John Sarff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

This project will enable the construction of a highly flexible, modular power
supply for the Wisconsin Plasma Physics Laboratory (WiPPL), a basic plasma
physics user facility at the University of Wisconsin-Madison. The focus of WiPPL
is the science of plasmas, the fourth state of matter. Comprised of two large
plasma research devices, the Big Red Ball (BRB) and the Madison Symmetric Torus
(MST), the vision for WiPPL is to experimentally advance the fundamental
understanding of terrestrial, space, and astrophysical plasmas, thereby
advancing a major physics frontier. The addition of the new power supply
provides for substantially more flexible and sophisticated plasma experiments at
WiPPL. Hence, the facility will be able to push even farther into the frontiers
of plasma science, attracting users from the U.S. and abroad. A power supply of
this design could also serve as an invaluable tool in other laboratories, given
the supply's flexibility and modularity. The strong local enhancement of the
research infrastructure afforded by this power supply is matched by the equally
important enhancement to education of the UW-Madison's diverse community of
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows at WiPPL.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new power supply is digitally programmable and
feedback controlled, and it has a wide array of both present and future
applications for WiPPL, providing electrical current of varying magnitude and
virtually arbitrary waveform. This current will drive electromagnets that help
confine and control the BRB and MST plasmas, but the current will also be used
to create, sustain, heat, and manipulate the plasmas themselves. Some
experiments will be accomplished much more readily and quickly with this supply,
but it also enables other experiments that would range from difficult to
impossible without it. The research on WiPPL includes the plasma generation of
magnetic fields, plasma-driven tearing of magnetic field lines, and charged
particle acceleration. These processes and others occur in both terrestrial and
non-terrestrial plasmas, and much of the research at WiPPL is inspired by
astrophysical and space plasma phenomena. Hence, this research will help bridge
the gap between plasma science in the laboratory and astrophysical and space
plasma science. This new power supply will substantially enhance and broaden the
basic plasma science research that can be carried out at
WiPPL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.