* 1828679
* MRI: Acquisition of an integrated AUV system for observations of physical and biogeochemical interactions in the Northern Gulf of Mexico ecosystem across spatiotemporal scales
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Beth Stauffer, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 456,593.00

The project will support researchers and students at the University of Louisiana
at Lafayette and other research centers across Louisiana in acquiring Autonomous
Underwater Vehicle (AUV) technology in the northern Gulf of Mexico (nGoM)
ecosystem. Recent technological developments in AUVs have created unprecedented
opportunities for underwater research, which will allow researchers to study
ecosystem processes, as well as ecological connectivity, in both coastal and
deep ocean waters. An integrated AUV Seaglider system will be equipped with a
sound listening system, which allows for detection of marine mammals and other
sound-emitting animals; a suite of oceanographic sensors, which allow for
mapping of fundamental changes in coastal and Gulf oceanography as a function of
both natural and human-caused changes; and a unique cNODE Package, which
provides the latest advancements in underwater real-time communication and data
harvesting from other deployed sensors in the study area. Seagliders will
provide data of higher resolution in time and space than currently possible with
shipboard surveys or fixed-station buoys at a fraction of the costs. Acquisition
of the AUV instrumentation will considerably enhance the outcomes of ongoing,
collaborative and discipline-specific ecosystem research and provide training
for undergraduate and graduate students to use cutting-edge robotic
technologies. Building on existing research excellence in underwater acoustics,
biological oceanography, and geophysics at UL Lafayette, the new system will
allow researchers to maintain a leading role in GoM research. Students and
postdoctoral fellows will acquire a unique set of skills in mission planning,
field deployment and piloting, and will be at the forefront of mining,
processing and integrating multi-sensor cross-disciplinary data using advanced
computational techniques. The AUV system will also enhance ongoing educational
and outreach initiatives engaging high-school teachers and students. The
datasets collected by the AUV system will provide critical information about the
GoM ecosystem that is of value to a broad community of scientists across
disciplines, local industry, resource managers, and policy-makers, and will be
made publicly available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use AUV
technology to study status of and changes in ecosystem function of the GoM
across multiple spatial and temporal scales in an effort to assess ecosystem
health, sustainability, and risk of future environmental hazards. The data
collected by AUVs will assist in developing complex ecosystem models predicting
how alterations to the physical environment affect marine organisms at different
trophic levels in the biological system, including commercially-important fish
species and marine mammals. Such models are necessary for agencies and decision-
makers in charge of protecting marine resources as well as those that are
charged with restoring and preserving marine and coastal habitats in the most
sustainable fashion. Data will be used to understand: drivers of marine organism
distributions, behavior, and stress responses; the evolution of ocean
soundscapes; phytoplankton and zooplankton dynamics; contaminant fate and
effects; submarine landslide dynamics and tsunami risk assessment; and
environmental change, including ocean acidification and hypoxia. Data will also
provide a new perspective on the biological connectivity in the GoM and
important interconnections in the ecosystem. These datasets will advance
observations, interpretations, and predictions of both naturally and
anthropogenically-driven changes in the GoM ecosystem and will aid in advancing
current models of ecosystem dynamics and population trends. These data will
contribute to monitoring risks associated with extreme weather events in near
real-time to assure safety of industrial operations, coastal communities, and
marine resources. The many federal and state agencies and other stakeholders
involved in the protection of marine resources and engaged in coastal
restoration require more complete information on short- and long-range
connectivity of the northern Gulf of Mexico and on how coastal restoration
actions and industrial activities are affecting oceans across a variety of
spatial and temporal scales. These end-users will benefit from research results
derived from the information collected by the new
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.