* 1828010
* NRT: Citizen-Centered Smart Cities and Smart Living
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Sethuraman Panchanathan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,997.00

Cities are facing new demands as their urban populations rapidly grow. Smart
City initiatives are being developed to address issues of mobility,
infrastructure, security, and safety, while enhancing the quality of life of
citizens. One-size-fits-all solutions are not viable. Instead, the diversity of
a city's residents, including life experiences, cultural backgrounds, needs, and
behaviors, must be taken into account to achieve transformative, citizen-
centered solutions. Engineers, scientists, policy makers, entrepreneurs, and
thought leaders must be prepared to tackle future Smart City challenges, and
address knowledge barriers in understanding the needs of citizens across age,
occupation, financial standing, disability, and technology savviness. This
National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the Arizona
State University addresses this need by training the next generation of MS and
PhD students for careers in Smart Cities-related fields. The project anticipates
training thirty-eight (38) MS and PhD students, including twenty-four (24)
funded trainees, from the following degree programs: Human and Social Dimensions
of Science and Technology; Public Affairs; Computer Science; Civil,
Environmental, and Sustainable Engineering; Mechanical &amp; Aerospace
Engineering; and Applied Engineering Programs. In addition to trainees, it is
envisioned that over 300 other MS and PhD students in STEM disciplines will
participate in opportunities made available through this traineeship. The
knowledge and technologies developed from this project will contribute toward
improving the quality of life for all of society through interdisciplinary,
citizen-centered Smart City solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An integrated
education-research-practice model focused on the technological, societal, and
environmental research aspects of citizen-centered solutions for Smart Cities
will be employed to instill trainees with transdisciplinary skills and knowledge
through cross-disciplinary courses; experience with leading collaborative, use-
inspired research projects; applied learning through internships with partners
and teaching opportunities; research experiences through service learning and
leadership; and entrepreneurial education. Trainees will pursue research thrusts
in Citizen-Centered Design; Smart City Infrastructure and Dynamics; and Socio-
Environmental Practices and Policies. These thrusts are embedded in integrative
priority application areas of Transportation and Accessibility; Safety,
Security, and Risk Reduction; and Engagement and Education. Research efforts
will significantly advance data-enabled citizen engagement; urban informatics;
Internet-of-Things technologies; inclusion and accessibility; urban
infrastructure; transportation systems; cybersecurity; swarm robotics; urban
sustainability; quality of life and equity for citizens; hazards management and
risk reduction; and societal concerns and ethics of emerging Smart City
technologies. Focused efforts will be made to recruit underrepresented
minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities, in order to tap
underutilized talent, equip them to address the needs of their communities, and
increase involvement of these groups in Smart Cities-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs. This project was co-funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.