* 1828387
* MRI: Acquisition of a Physical Properties Measurement System for Research, Education, and Outreach
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Asghar Kayani, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2022
* USD 621,618.00

This award from the Division of Materials Research supports the acquisition of a
Quantum Design Physical Properties Measurement System (PPMS) at Western Michigan
University. The instrument provides a powerful new capability for measurements
of the electrical, magnetic, thermal, and optical properties of a wide variety
of materials under different conditions. Materials are being studied which may
enable the following: improved electrical transmission and energy storage,
quantum computing, molecular electronics, more efficient refrigeration, printed
electronics, and new lower cost methods of solar energy conversion. In addition
to benefiting four departments in science and engineering at Western Michigan
University, the instrument will serve as a local resource for a research hub
including five nearby colleges and universities. Students at all these
institutions will gain valuable experience using a state-of-the-art instrument
for their research and education. Community outreach will engage local high
school students in long-term research projects, helping spread the excitement of
science to the next generation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With this
award from the Division of Materials Research, researchers at Western Michigan
University will acquire a system to enable measurements of resistivity, carrier
concentration, specific heat, optical properties, and magnetization as a
function of temperature (0.05-400K) and magnetic field (0-14T). One major use
will be for studies of high temperature and exotic superconductivity. Studies
will explore superconductivity in doped lead chalcogenides, Bi based topological
superconductors, and determine how to improve critical current densities in
commercial high temperature superconducting wires using vortex pinning.
Additional research projects include characterizing the properties of doped lead
perovskite semiconductors, exploring the interplay of structure and composition
on the magnetocaloric effect in Ni-Mn Heusler alloys, measuring the relation
between the magnetic and structural properties of molecular magnets, determining
optical properties of nitrogen vacancy centers in diamond, and studying the
electrical and magnetic properties of metallic inks for printed electronics.
These research projects will benefit society by advancing fundamental
understanding of technologically important phenomena. This instrument will
significantly improve the education and training for future scientists,
engineers, and teachers, including those from underrepresented groups. The
project includes local collaborations for research and education for
undergraduates and faculty from five nearby universities. The resulting regional
research community will benefit smaller institutions where faculty have limited
instrumentation and few or no institutional colleagues in their research area.
Outreach activities will also provide research opportunities for talented high
school students, including populations traditionally underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.