* 1828570
* MRI: Development of a broadband terahertz electron paramagnetic resonance spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Keith Nelson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 528,546.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation, the Chemistry
Research Instrumentation and the Chemical Measurements and Imaging programs.
Professor Keith Nelson from MIT and colleague Robert Griffin have developed a
broadband terahertz (THz) electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectrometer.
The terahertz energy is also known as submillimeter radiation, terahertz waves,
which have an extremely high frequency that falls in between infrared radiation
and microwave radiation in the electromagnetic spectrum. The new instrument is
capable of measuring both linear-response EPR spectra and nonlinear EPR spectra
including two-dimensional (2D) spectra. It uses an amplified femtosecond (one
millionth of one billionth of a second) laser system and a 9.4 Tesla cryomagnet
(a magnet that operates a low temperatures) to increase sensitivity. The
measurements are conducted using THz fields that use a unique waveguide-based
THz signal generation and readout platform. In general, an EPR spectrometer
yields detailed information on the geometric and electronic structure of
molecular and solid-state materials. It is also used to obtain information about
the lifetimes of free radicals, short-lived, highly reactive species involved in
valuable chemical transformations as well as the initiation of possible
pathological growth. These studies impact many areas, from the synthesis of
inorganic and organic molecules to the development of new solid-state materials
to compounds of magnetic and biological interest. Employing examples inspired
from ongoing research, this instrument is an integral part of research and
teaching at the undergraduate and graduate levels at MIT. It is also used by
researchers at many collaborating institutions such as the University of
California at Berkeley and the University of California at
Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new spectrometer has capabilities not yet
available in any commercially available instrument. This EPR spectrometer
supports research using steady-state THz EPR spectroscopy of molecular magnets
and time-resolved THz EPR spectroscopy of transition metal photochemistry (UC
Berkeley) and zero-field and high-field THz EPR of metalloproteins. It is also
used to test heterometallic oxido models for oxygen-evolution reaction catalysts
(UC Davis) and for studying quantum spin liquid state. The new spectrometer is
essential to evaluate compounds that provide information on fractional spin
excitations in a 1D Ising chain, where Ising represents a mathematical model of
ferromagnetism used in statistical mechanics that allows the identification of
phase transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.