* 1828061
* MRI Consortium: Development of magneto-ellipsometer for the MET beamline of the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS-II), Brookhaven National Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Tao Zhou, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 09/30/2023
* USD 800,000.00

A consortium between New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Columbia U., and
the National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS-II) will develop a new scientific
instrument for advanced optical experiments at Brookhaven National Laboratory.
Synchrotron radiation at the MET beamline of NSLS-II will be used as a light
source to illuminate samples. Polarization of the light that is reflected from
or transmitted through the samples will be analyzed to determine the sample
properties and their changes under extreme conditions imposed by the external
magnetic field, low temperatures, and high hydrostatic pressure. The new
instrument will qualitatively improve understanding of material behavior under
extreme conditions and will facilitate invention of materials with desired
properties for nanoelectronics and spintronics. This instrument will become
available to research groups from multiple universities thus promoting the
progress in the field of materials spectroscopy. Distinguishing features of this
Project include the integration of fundamental research with the education of
undergraduate and graduate students and training of the new generation of the
scientific instrument developers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A consortium
between New Jersey Institute of Technology (NJIT), Columbia U., and the National
Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS-II) will develop a multi-User facility for low-
temperature ellipsometry and transmission/reflection polarimetry in high
magnetic fields. The setup will be installed at the new synchrotron radiation
source: the Magnetospectroscopy, Ellipsometry and Time-Resolved Optical
Spectroscopies (MET) beamline of NSLS-II, Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL).
Full Mueller matrix spectroscopic ellipsometry and polarimetry will be available
in the spectral range between 10 cm-1 and 10,000 cm-1. The setup will have
magnetic fields of up to 7 T with a capability to switch between the exact
Faraday and Voigt configurations of the direction of the magnetic field with
respect to the sample. The pump-probe capability at MET will be integrated in
the setup to study changes of materials' properties induced by photo-induced
carriers. Optics for reflectivity measurements under high hydrostatic pressure
in the magnetic field will be also included. The proposed instrument will
facilitate research activities aimed at better understanding low-temperature and
magnetic effects in quantum materials, such as single crystals and thin films of
multiferroics, superconductors, and topological insulators as well as in the
related area of the non-trivial light propagation in magneto-electric media.
Distinguishing features of this Project include the integration of fundamental
research with the education of undergraduate and graduate students, training of
the new generation of the scientific instrument developers, and their close
collaboration with NSLS-II. The instrument will be offered to the external Users
through the proposal-based General User access system at NSLS-
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.