* 1828136
* MRI:  Acquisition of a laser scanning confocal microscope within a core facility for research and training at Illinois State University
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kevin Edwards, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Weller
* 09/30/2022
* USD 661,326.00

An award is made to Illinois State University (ISU) to acquire a multichannel
laser scanning confocal microscope. The instrument will provide advanced imaging
capabilities to ISU students and faculty in Physics, Chemistry, and Biological
Sciences, as well as institutions across the Midwest region. As the centerpiece
of the ISU Biological Sciences Microscopy Core Facility, the microscope will
greatly enhance ISU's research infrastructure, enabling high-resolution three
dimensional reconstructions of cells and tissues, time-lapse imaging of dynamic
cellular processes in live samples, and advanced fluorescence techniques. ISU's
diverse population of undergraduates will be able to use the facility as part of
mentored independent research projects; over 50 undergraduate researchers per
year are projected to learn widely useful STEM skills through this training.
K-12 students will be exposed to concepts in cells, tissues, light microscopy,
biotechnology, and neuroscience, through several ongoing outreach programs such
as the Illinois Summer Research Academy. Students from groups underrepresented
in science will be recruited for training via ISU's Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation. Future and current K-12 science teachers will train on
the instrument to gain practical research experience, for example in the NSF-
funded project "Noyce Scholarships for STEM Teachers of Under-Represented
Groups". 20-30 graduate students/year will use the facility to pursue new
avenues of research, ultimately contributing new skills to the Illinois STEM
workforce. Positive societal impacts of the project also include agricultural
and environmental advances. It will promote the USDA-funded development of
pennycress as a new winter cover crop, reducing soil erosion and nitrogen runoff
from barren fields while profitably producing oilseed for generating
biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microscope will support the projects of seven
main research labs, advancing knowledge in genetics, cell biology, development,
neuroscience, and plant science. Projects include: regulation of protein quality
control in response to aging and oxidative stress; interactions among proteins
that control directional growth of plant cells; mechanisms of gene silencing and
meiotic drive in fungi; effects of newly synthesized chemicals on parasitic
Leishmania; how nematode worms detect and respond to magnetic fields; in vivo
roles of the cell's cortical cytoskeleton in organismal development and tissue
maintenance; and regulation of neural activity by sensory inputs and
neuromodulators. New capabilities provided by the award will allow users to
expand the scope of their research; the system will feature a broad range of
excitation wavelengths; rapid scanning; high-sensitivity, low noise photon
detectors; sub-200 nm spatial resolution; and fluorescence lifetime data. The
users engage in nation-wide and international research collaborations, which
will be expanded and strengthened by the added
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.