* 1828179
* MRI: Acquisition of An Isothermal Titration Calorimeter for Studying Ligand-Macromolecule Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Liang Xue, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 140,256.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Liang Xue from the
University of the Pacific and colleagues Andreas Franz, Jerry Tsai and Xiaoling
Li have acquired an isothermal titration calorimeter (ITC). This technique is
used to determine the thermodynamic parameters of interactions in solution. The
instrument consists of two cells enclosed in an adiabatic jacket that does not
allow transfer of heat between the system being studied and its surrounding,
thus the name isothermal meaning same temperature. Thermodynamics is the branch
of chemical physics concerned with heat and temperature and their relation to
energy and work. The calorimeter is used to study the binding and interaction of
a ligand with a substrate. In one experiment the ligand is a small organic
molecule and the substrate is DNA. The thermodynamics of the interaction is
measured. Such binding data may be useful in investigating possible medicinal
targets. The various research projects are undertaken by undergraduate students
as well as high school students during the summer. Students from Delta College,
a community college, are also being trained to use this modern instrumentation
useful in the chemical and biochemical fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
instrument is used in research and education at all levels, particularly by
undergraduate students. It is being used to understand G4 ligands binding to
G-quadruplex DNA which are secondary structures formed in nucleic acids by
sequences rich in guanine. The instrument is also employed to validate the knob-
socket protein packing statistical model which considers how protuberances fit
into voids. The conformational changes of glycan and water liberation upon
protein binding is being studied. Data are obtained to understand the structures
of small molecules that stabilize the transport protein transthyretin that
serves as carrier of the thyroid hormone. The instrument is also used in
experiments designing peptides for targeting the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.