* 1828467
* MRI: Development of An Instrument for Secure Cyber Physical Systems Analytics
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alvaro Cardenas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 601,797.00

This project aims to develop a secure and scalable instrument that can
efficiently perform big data analytics on data collected from Internet of Things
(IoT) devices while providing tools for preserving data security and privacy.
IoT devices are monitoring and controlling systems that interact with the
physical world by collecting, processing and transmitting data using the
internet. IoT devices include home automation systems, smart grid,
transportation systems, medical devices, building controls, manufacturing and
industrial control systems. With the increase in deployment of IoT devices, the
amount of data generated by these devices also increases. There is thus a need
for large-scale, and secure data processing systems to process and extract
information for efficient and impactful decision-making. The issue of
trustworthiness in computation and data security arises when the IoT data
contains sensitive information. For example, data collected using the home
health devices such as a wireless blood-pressure monitor may need to be analyzed
and correlated with other information. In these cases, data owners may need to
protect their data and demand guaranties about data security and integrity.
Development of this instrument will enable new research projects that require
efficient and secure processing of IoT data. Consequently, this may allow the
creation of novel IoT data processing tools and services which are not feasible
today due to security and privacy concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
instrument will integrate two important components in a novel and unique way.
First, an IoT data gathering component that can collect various data from IoT
devices including the industrial IoT (IIoT) devices, will be developed. This
component will create the necessary data gathering part of the instrument. It
will allow researchers to adjust data collection frequency and granularity to
enable different types of data collection activities for various research
projects. The second component of the instrument will be the secure data
analytics layer that can process the potentially sensitive IoT data including
the network packets, sensor data, etc. As part of this component, recently
developed secure data processing techniques which leverage trusted execution
environments (TEEs) will be implemented. In addition, these TEE-based techniques
will be tailored for different types of IoT data to increase their efficiency
and limit any sensitive data leakage. During this project, these components will
be integrated using custom developed software which will be open sourced at the
final stage. Furthermore, these components will be integrated to test various
research tools with respect to scalability, security and data privacy. The
developed instrument will be made available to our collaborators and larger
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.