* 1828799
* MRI: Acquisition of a laser scanning robotic total station with differential GPS capability
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Ken Hon, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 09/30/2019
* USD 135,944.00

Hawaii is a world-class setting for exploring changes associated with lava
flows, ecological invasions, landscape disturbance, and sea level rise, but
local researchers often lack access to data of sufficient resolution and
positional accuracy to quantify changes of interest. This Major Research
Instrumentation (MRI) award will make the acquisition of a laser scanning
robotic system with differential GPS capability possible. This system can
collect dense three-dimensional environmental datasets with survey-grade
positional accuracy to measure environmental processes and changes that cannot
presently be detected. The system will improve the accuracy and performance of
existing instrumentation, including small unmanned aerial systems, and will also
allow a rapid response to record changes produced by episodic events like
earthquakes, landslides, and tsunamis. This system will advance current
knowledge in Hawaiian terrestrial ecology, geomorphology, marine science,
geology, and anthropology, with direct impacts on research, education, and
interdisciplinary collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The acquisition of this
laser scanning robotic total station system with differential GPS capability and
computational will allow repeat collection and processing of precise and
accurately geo-located fine-scale spatial data This instrument can generate
dense (10^6+), survey-grade, three-dimensional point cloud measurements and
imagery of the landscape with sub-centimeter accuracy. This degree of accuracy
is required for detecting fine-scale changes relating to geomorphology,
vegetation dynamics, volcanology, archaeology, and sea-level rise, and is well
beyond current institutional capacity. This instrument will boost the
sensitivity and overall utility of existing instrumentation for spatial data
collection, including the use of small unmanned aerial systems for high
resolution mapping. The equipment and resulting datasets will be housed and
maintained by the University of Hawaii at Hilo and will be made available to
researchers at this institution as well as to the broader research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.