* 1828149
* NRT-HDR: Intersecting computational and data science to address grand challenges in plant biology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Carol Buell, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,999,967.00

Plants are indispensable for life on earth, providing food, energy, and oxygen,
as well as the basis for many man-made products. A better understanding of plant
science will lead to more secure plant resources, which is even more important
given the rapidly increasing global population. Genomics research has
significantly advanced our understanding about how plants function, with the
application of genomics yielding datasets that could revolutionize plant science
and lead to safe, reliable, and sustainable production of food and biofuels. To
achieve these outcomes, there is a critical need for scientists with both an
understanding of plant biology and computational skills. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Michigan State University will
address this demand by training doctoral students who can employ advanced
computational and data science approaches to address grand challenges in plant
biology. The project anticipates training approximately seventy (70) PhD
students, including thirty-eight (38) funded trainees from plant biology and
computational data science programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees will engage
in research and coursework that emphasize tackling "grand challenge" questions
in plant biology by leveraging computational approaches. Training will go beyond
the traditional genomics and bioinformatics approaches in plant biology to
include the advanced training in computation and modeling required to handle
increasingly heterogeneous, multi-scale data from the molecular to ecosystem
levels. This type of training will allow students to tackle complex questions
such as investigating genotype-phenotype relationships across the Plant Tree of
Life or machine learning for high-dimensional plant data. In addition, the
traineeship features professional development opportunities, outreach
activities, and industry/governmental internships that serve to broaden
trainees' career options while also improving their ability to communicate with
a wide range of audiences. Upon completion of the training program, trainees
will have a core understanding of plant and computational sciences, excel in
interdisciplinary biological and computational research, and possess effective
communication, leadership, management, teaching, and mentoring skills. Trainees
will be co-advised by experts in plant science and computational/data science.
To accomplish the training goals, trainees will participate in a program
consisting of: (1) curricular and research activities that will create a cohort
of trainees with dual expertise in computational sciences and plant biology, (2)
a biweekly forum to encourage scientific interactions, (3) a trainee-led annual
symposium that engages a wider scientific audience and builds organizational and
leadership skills, (4) internship opportunities in industry and government
agencies, (5) professional development activities tailored to individual career
goals, including entrepreneurship, and (6) public engagement through outreach
activities, further bolstering the ability of trainees to communicate with a
wide range of audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.