* 1828334
* MRI: Acquisition of a Surface Plasmon Resonance Microscopy System for Interdisciplinary Research and Research Training
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jamil Momand, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 209,745.00

This award is supported by the Major Research Instrumentation (MRI) and the
Chemistry Research Instrumentation (CRIF) Programs. Professor Yixian Wang from
California State University Los Angeles and colleagues Jamil Momand, Edith
Porter, Jing Zhao, as well as Fangyuan Tian from California State University
Long Beach have acquired a surface plasmon resonance microscope (SPRM). This
microscope can be used to study, for example, how proteins bind to the membrane
of a single cell. The microscope operates by shining a light source at a sensor
chip or metal plate. The light interacts with the metal plate to excite
electrons and modify the light which is reflected to a detector. This is the so-
called surface plasmon signal. When a sample to be studied is added, the surface
plasmon signal is changed and data such as the interaction of a protein with a
cell membrane can be evaluated. This technique can also be used to study how
nanomaterials interact with cancer cells. It can shed light on drug delivery
systems. Other applications range from environmental science to food quality and
safety. The instrument is used by undergraduates and graduate student in their
research projects providing training in future careers in chemical and
biological analysis. This is the first SPRM instrument in the Los Angeles area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award of this surface plasmon resonance microscope is
aimed at enhancing research and education at all levels. It especially aids
studies of protein binding kinetics studies at multiple and single cell
membranes and the search for real-time interaction between antimicrobial
effector molecules and bacterial surfaces. The microscope is essential for the
exploration of medicine delivery on iron-containing metal-organic framework thin
films and for engineering nanomaterials interaction and uptake in cells. It also
helps investigators in the determination of real-time electrochemical, redox
active species release from cells and protein arrays during exocytosis and in
rice protein arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.