* 1829513
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: The Origin of Aeolian Dunes (TOAD)
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* James Best, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 03/31/2021
* USD 29,913.00

Aeolian (wind-blown) sand dunes occupy 10% of the Earth's surface, both in vast
desert sand seas and as important natural defenses against flooding along
coasts. Despite extensive study of mature dunes, the question of "How do wind-
blown dunes form?" remains unanswered, yet it is central to understanding dunes
as major geological units, particularly given their increasing occurrence in
desert regions of the United States and their adverse impact on water and
vegetation supplies. This research will examine the key inter-relationships
between airflow, surface properties, changes in sand transport and bedform shape
that lie behind a meaningful understanding of how nascent dunes emerge. The
project will promote international collaboration among the United States, the
United Kingdom, and Namibia. It will generate public educational materials about
desert landscapes and geomorphology, foster partnerships with National Parks in
both the United States and Namibia, and provide quality scientific training and
field experience to students.

Field monitoring of surface properties and bedform change at high resolution
will be performed at three carefully chosen locations of known dune development.
Complementary laboratory experiments will enable accurate characterization of
flow very close to the 3D surface of modelled dunes that, together with the
field datasets, will drive a computer model to test the sensitivity of dune
initiation and growth to different controls in a range of environmental
conditions in deserts, coasts and on other planets. In concert, this approach
represents an opportunity to overcome an enduring plateau for understanding the
origins of one of the major terrestrial landform systems. The team will work
with staff at Great Sand Dunes National Park in the United States and the Namib-
Naukluft National Park in Namibia to create broadly accessible public engagement
materials. At a dedicated impact workshop in Gobabeb, Namibia, the team will
showcase to interested local Namibian and international delegates the project
findings and how these findings could be used to influence societal and economic
issues. The project will engage undergraduate and graduate students in Namibia
and give them valuable experience that could inspire them to pursue careers in
science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.