* 1829245
* NSF-RISE: Enhancement of Research and Education Infrastructure in Nanobiomaterials, Biophysics, Biochemistry, and Environmental Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Marvin Wu, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Luis Cubano
* 06/30/2022
* USD 999,918.00

Enhancement of Research and Education Infrastructure in Nano biomaterials,
Biophysics, Biochemistry, and Environmental Science and
Engineering&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Historically Black Colleges and
Universities - Research Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE)
program supports the development of research capability at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities that offer doctoral degrees in science and engineering
disciplines. Supported projects have a unifying research focus in one of the
research areas supported by the National Science Foundation, a direct connection
to the long-term plans of the host department, institutional strategic plan and
mission, and plans for expanding institutional research capacity, as well as
increasing the production of doctoral students, especially those
underrepresented in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National Science Foundation support,
North Carolina Central University will conduct a project entitled "Enhancement
of Research and Education Infrastructure in Nano biomaterials, Biophysics,
Biochemistry, and Environmental Science and Engineering". The project will
elevate the current doctoral program at North Carolina Central University to a
leading research and education program focused on development of advanced
nanomaterials for biological applications. The project will: a) establish
additional doctoral concentrations in biophysics, biochemistry, and
environmental science; b) introduce new courses in Nano biomaterials,
bioinstrumentation, and interactions between nanostructures and biological
materials; and c) provide financial and research support to doctoral students
and research faculty involved in these new
concentrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will expand the scope of the
Integrated Biosciences doctoral program at North Carolina Central University
through the addition of new research and educational programs focused on the
intersection between nanoscale materials and biosciences. Project activities
include studies on applications of nanoscale materials in the life sciences and
medicine, specifically: 1) development of a new generation of biochemical
sensors based on quantum confinement and tunneling between nanostructures; 2)
development of plasmonic nanostructured devices to improve selectivity and
sensitivity in optical skin cancer screening and treatment; 3) design and
development of novel multifunctional quantum dots for biological applications;
4) imaging of exosomes using colocalized Raman-scanning force microscopy and
reduced graphene based fluorescence imaging marker materials for biological
applications; 5) development of smart hybrid nanostructures for biochemical
filters, adsorption and isolation of substances and piezoelectric hybrid
materials for pressure, temperature and optical sensing devices; 6) quantum
calculations to improve understanding of charge transfer and interactions
between nanostructures, nanostructures and biological molecules, and between
diverse biological molecules; and 7) interaction of nanomaterials and
biomaterials, and the impact of nanomaterial on the environment and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision of this project is to leverage existing
resources to provide new pathways for North Carolina Central University students
to participate in high impact research as part of the Integrated Bioscience
doctoral degree program. This project will broaden the scope of the program,
making it accessible to students from a wider range of disciplines, and
transform the program into a more comprehensive multidisciplinary research
program that will prepare students for an increasingly competitive domestic and
international research environment. This project will have a substantial impact
on the research and education infrastructure at North Carolina Central
University through support for faculty and student researchers and extensive
curriculum development across STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.