* 1829979
* Flows Around Curves in Estuaries: Dynamics and Impacts
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* James Lerczak, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 484,013.00

Most estuaries have natural bends that flows must navigate around. Various
studies have documented the circulation and stratification variability unique to
flows of homogenous and stratified waters around bends in estuaries and rivers.
However, none have attempted a systematic study in order to understand the
dependence of the dynamics and impacts on a range of relevant estuarine
parameters. This project will be a comprehensive study of the dynamics and
regulation of flows (longitudinal and lateral) around channel bends in
estuaries, the overall impact of these flows on salt transport, horizontal
dispersion, and estuarine structure, and how this impact is dependent on
estuarine regime. The project will engage a young audience through social media
and science writing to convey the value of the physical ocean sciences. The
training of a graduate research assistant and an undergraduate researcher in
quantitative research is included. Several education and training opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students are planned. The project will
additionally enhance collaborations and partnerships with scientists and
stakeholders with interests in resource management and restoration of Yaquina
Bay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lateral (cross-channel) flows driven by a range of
mechanisms (for example, differential advection, Coriolis forcing, asymmetric
mixing, mixing over sloping bottoms) have been shown to interact strongly with
the longitudinal estuarine currents, and have a fundamental impact on momentum
budgets, dispersion of tracers and residence time in estuaries. This research
would constitute the first systematic study of the dynamics of flows around
curves in estuaries and will quantify the significance of these flows (relative
to secondary flows driven by other mechanisms) and their impact on estuarine
structure and function. The approach will include both idealized and realistic
numerical simulations and analysis of previously collected data in estuaries
that vary in channel size, curve structure and estuary regime
classification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.