* 1829701
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: CIU: Towards Distributed and Scalable Personalized Cyber-Training
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Blake Joyce, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 60,631.00

This project is addressing the challenge of providing distributed, scalable, and
personalized training of cyberinfrastructures - systems that offer state-of-the-
art cloud services for storing, sharing, and processing scientific data. Today,
personalized training of these rapidly evolving, and hence relatively
undocumented, systems requires trainer-supervised, hands-on use of these
systems. These training sessions require trainees and trainers to be co-located
and provide personalized training to a relatively small number of trainees. The
project is developing new (a) domain-independent technologies in distributed
collaboration and machine learning to reduce all three problems in a concerted
manner, and (b) domain-dependent training material targeted at trainees in
statistics, physical sciences, computer science, humanities, and medicine. It,
thus, serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the
progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key technical insight in this work is that a
cyberinfrastructure should not only support data science, but also make use of
data science. The project is exploring two related innovations based on this
insight: (1) Collaboration technologies that log, visualize and share the work
of remote and local trainees to allow trainers to determine the need for remote
or face-to-face assistance. (2) Machine-learning technologies that mine trainee
and trainer interactions so that trainees can be automatically instructed on how
to solve their problems based on similar problems that have been previously
solved by trainers and other trainees. The project is leveraging existing
technologies and training techniques developed for a widely used NSF-supported
cyberinfrastructure, called CyVerse. This system is domain-independent, but so
far, its training material has been targeted mainly at plant-science research.
The project is extending the command interpreters and GUIs provided by CyVerse.
The extended user-interfaces allow (a) trainees to announce difficulties and
request recommendations, and (b) trainers to be aware of the progress of remote
and local trainees, and remotely intervene when necessary. The functionality
behind the user-interfaces is implemented by CyVerse-independent servers based
on a general model of cyberinfrastructures, which includes the concepts of
sharing and visualization of protected files, creation and execution of
parameterized commands composed in workflows, and shareable, persistent work
spaces. The project is adapting the CyVerse training material to cover new
research domains including Geoscience, Political Science, and Biomedical
Engineering. This expanded training material is being used to evaluate the
proposed training technologies through training sessions for (a) students in a
Statistics, Computer Science, Political Science, and interdisciplinary course,
(b) attendees at three conferences targeted at Geoscientists, women, and
Hispanics and Native Americans, respectively, (c) subjects in controlled lab
studies, and (d) members of research groups at multiple institutes. The proposed
qualitative and quantitative evaluation data gathered from these sessions are
being used to assess not only the proposed technologies and training material,
but also CyVerse and cyberinfrastructures in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.