* 1829612
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the relative importance of small vs large particles as sources of nutrition to abyssal communities
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Craig Smith, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,070,925.00

The abyssal plains of the oceans cover roughly half of the earth's surface, host
enormous reservoirs of biodiversity and mineral resources, and play important
roles in nutrient recycling and carbon sequestration. The most important process
controlling the structure and function of these ecosystems is the quantity and
quality of food (mostly sinking organic particles) that reaches the deep-sea
floor. However, we do not fully understand the processes provisioning this vast
ecosystem. We propose to evaluate the relative importance of small and larger
"marine snow" particles that sink to deep-sea benthic communities by using the
stable isotope signature of amino acids within various food sources and trace
their consumption by fauna on the seafloor. This project compares ecosystems
from the productive waters off California with the nutrient poor central
Pacific, north of Hawaii. This project provides novel insights into how surface
ocean processes are coupled to food-webs at the deep ocean seafloor and how
changes in food sources potentially impact deep-sea communities. This project
also provides excellent training opportunities for graduate students, a
postdoctoral researcher, and undergraduates at UH and USC, particularly
underrepresented minorities who pursue majors in the geosciences. The project
will sponsor an annual G6-12 teacher workshop to inform Hawaii educators about
the deep sea and broadly disseminate knowledge to the community. All results are
communicated broadly to inform the public as concerns regarding abyssal
ecosystems are rising due to interests in deep-sea mining.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important process controlling the structure and
function of abyssal ecosystems is the quantity and quality of organic material
that ultimately reaches the deep-sea floor. Despite the strong relationship
between euphotic zone export flux and benthic ecology, studies of abyssal
ecosystems have observed a deficit between food supply and benthic community
demand. Additional work is therefore needed, particularly with regards to
understanding the sources of nutrition to the deep-sea benthos. Recent evidence
suggests that small particles may be significant contributors to carbon export,
increasing in relative importance with depth in the mesopelagic and reaching the
abyssal seafloor. This project is to evaluate the relative importance of small
and larger "marine snow" particles to deep-sea benthic communities using a
combination of particle flux measurements and state of the art compound specific
stable isotope analysis of amino acids (AA-CSIA) at two abyssal locations that
contrast in overlying productivity, seasonality, and export magnitude. Time
series measurements at these locations (Sta. M off California and Sta. Aloha off
Hawaii) provide a rich context for the work. In the mesopelagic central North
Pacific larger particles (&gt;53 um) can be resolved from microbially reworked,
smaller (0.7-53 um) particles using AA-CSIA. This project is characterizing the
isotopic compositions of key individual compounds in a continuum of particle
sizes (&lt; 1.0 um suspended particles to large sinking particles &gt;53 um)
collected using in situ filtration near the seafloor and bottom-moored sediment
traps, thereby defining source-specific isotopic signatures that can be traced
into benthic fauna and sediments (that are collected by ROVs and epibenthic
sleds). This research to understand pelagic-benthic coupling from particles to
megafauna using isotopic measurements at the compound-level will yield novel
insights into the importance of small microbially reworked particles to deep-sea
benthic food webs. This will more precisely couple surface ocean processes to
food-webs at the deep ocean seafloor with implications for understanding climate
change effects and the efficiency of energy transfer to higher trophic levels.
Furthermore, isotopic measurements can also be used to further parameterize
ecosystem models by quantifying trophic position across size classes and thus
estimate predator-prey mass ratios in relation to variation in body size
spectra, functional type, and ultimately to carbon flux and remineralization.
Finally, the results will help refine interpretations of deep-sea paleorecords
of past nitrogen dynamics by calibrating potential changes in organic matter
isotope values between the surface and seafloor
archives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.