* 1829414
* Studies of memory reactivation during sleep using intracranial recordings
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ken Paller, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 396,646.00

Sleep is crucial to the body's ability to function but scientists have yet to
uncover all the reasons for why we sleep. Recent evidence shows that sleep
contributes to memory, although how that happens is not yet well understood.
This project explores the idea that the ability to remember depends on sleep-
based changes in how memories are stored. The investigators have the special
opportunity to obtain recordings of brain activity from sensors placed inside
the human brain. In some patients with frequent epileptic seizures, when
pharmacological treatments are ineffective, a surgical treatment can greatly
enhance quality-of-life. Sensors placed in selected brain locations can isolate
the source of abnormal activity, after which this brain tissue can be removed.
These patients are usually willing and able to help the investigators understand
what happens during sleep to preserve memories. The investigators will explore
how the reactivation of new memories during sleep improves the ability to
remember the information. This type of memory processing during sleep could
constitute an essential ingredient for learning. Results from this project may
have implications for educational advances and for approaches to improving
memory across the lifespan. The investigator plans activities to increase public
understanding of science and to bolster recognition of the vital benefits of
sleep.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key hypothesis in the field is that a brain region
known as the hippocampus functions during sleep to help consolidate memories.
This can entail linking anatomically disparate components of a memory, gradually
integrating new knowledge with prior knowledge, securing memory storage, and
potentially transforming what is stored. The investigators will analyze
recordings of brain activity from functional brain tissue to determine how
memory storage is altered when audio input during sleep promotes memory
reactivation. Brain oscillations identified previously (so-called slow
oscillations, sleep spindles, and hippocampal ripples), and their precise
temporal interrelationships, are hypothesized to be critical. Analyses of these
signals obtained during memory reactivation are thus positioned to provide new
knowledge about neural mechanisms of sleep-based memory improvement, thus
advancing fundamental understanding of what allows a small subset of the massive
number of memories people acquire each day to survive for the long
term.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.