* 1829338
* VLBA Operations and Reintegration into NRAO
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Anthony Beasley, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph E. Pesce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 33,273,127.00

Associated Universities, Inc. (AUI) through the National Radio Astronomy
Observatory (NRAO) will manage the Very Long Baseline Array (VLBA) from October
1, 2018 to September 30, 2026. The research community will be provided cutting-
edge capabilities of micro-arcsecond astrometry, the highest resolution imaging
telescope at any wavelength. The VLBA will operate with state-of-the art
instrumentation, advanced data processing, and broad user support, enabling the
entire astronomy community to address key problems in astronomy and
astrophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INTELLECTUAL MERIT: The opportunities for
astronomy and astrophysics research have never been richer. The VLBA will
complement the next generation of large ground based optical telescopes and
space-based facilities covering the entire electromagnetic spectrum. Together
they comprise a comprehensive suite of powerful tools to probe and decipher the
full range of outstanding problems, from the origin of planets, stars, quasars
and galaxies, to the structure of the Universe and the nature of dark matter and
dark energy. Observations with VLBA will shed new light on exoplanets, and
planetary and stellar formation and evolution. Microarcsecond astrometry is
making possible a new class of precision measurements of the parallax of pre-
main sequence stars, recoil motions of stars in response to exoplanets, the
structure of the Galaxy and the dynamics of the Local Group of galaxies. Multi-
epoch high resolution images will lead to a better understanding of relativistic
jets from micro-quasars and supermassive black holes found in Active Galactic
Nuclei, along with the nature of gamma-ray bursts seen by the GLAST satellite.
Observations will provide the angular-diameter distance determination of
galaxies in the Hubble flow, leading to a more accurate determination of the
Hubble Constant, higher precision determination of cosmological constants, and
better constraints on the equation of state of dark energy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BROADER IMPACT: NRAO facilities are used by more than one
thousand scientists each year and are available to all scientists based on the
intellectual merits of the proposed studies, independent of institutional or
national affiliation. NRAO will provide end-to-end user support at its science
centers, enabling easy access to its telescope and their data by the entire
astronomical community. Calibrated images will be made available in archives
accessible to both the broad research community and the public. Astronomy is an
important element in meeting national goals related to diversity, science and
technology education, and increased U.S. competitiveness. NRAO is attracting an
increasingly diverse staff. Through the undergraduate Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) and co-op programs, resident graduate fellowships and
external student grants, Green Bank and Socorro summer schools, and competitive
postdoctoral Jansky Fellowships, it continues to help train the next generation
of scientists. The Green Bank Science Center, the VLA Visitors Center, US-Chile
teacher/student exchange programs, and teacher and K-12 education programs,
further serve to create a science-literate public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.