* 1829698
* CyberTraining CIP: Cyberinfrastructure Expertise on High-throughput Networks for Big Science Data Transfers
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Nasir Ghani, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,959.00

This project establishes the Cyberinfrastructure Network of Expertise (CNE) for
teaching, training, and research on networking technologies including Science
Demilitarized Zone (Science DMZ). The Science DMZ is a network specifically
designed to facilitate the transfer and sharing of very large scientific data
(big data) across geographically separated sites. The project serves the
national interest, as it addresses the shortage of skilled research personnel
with specialized skills to support networks carrying big science data among
research institutions, universities, and national laboratories. This initiative
also fosters skills toward the development of a national "cyber-highway" system
to better facilitate the sharing of big science data, hence promoting
collaboration and national competitiveness in science and engineering, aligned
with NSF's mission. CNE is composed of universities, industry organizations,
national and state agencies in multiple states, and a national laboratory. This
broad initiative ensures a strong adoption of best cyberinfrastructure (CI)
practices in sharing terabytes of data and more, thereby enabling new modes of
discovery and collaboration. Additionally, the project develops advanced
instructional material for Science DMZ, which is being integrated into
undergraduate courses in information technology, computer science, and
engineering in multiple universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNE is anchored at
the University of South Carolina (USC) and has several thrusts. First, the
instructional material is enriched with a large number of virtual laboratories
(vLabs), designed in partnership with domain experts and the Network Development
Group (NDG), a company in virtualized training. The material covers key aspects
of the Science DMZ, including wide area networks, routers and switches, TCP
attributes for big data transfers, and cybersecurity for friction-free
environments. Second, the CNE partnership also includes Florida Atlantic
University (FAU) and University of South Florida (USF), which are incorporating
the vLabs and companion material into their degree programs. These enriched
programs provide skills to fulfill pressing demands in both South Carolina and
Florida. Third, in conjunction with local industry and Savannah River National
Laboratory, CNE incorporates internships and industry-sponsored capstone
projects in student training to strengthen the cooperation between academia and
industry and to bolster national security related to big data transfers. Fourth,
CNE organizes workshops to provide critical training and education on Science
DMZs in partnership with Internet2 and state agencies, namely South Carolina
Cyber (SC Cyber) and the Florida Center for Cybersecurity (FC2). Finally, by
leveraging the extensive dissemination channels of all project partners, CNE
plans to make vLabs and manuals available to the wider CI community for online
self-paced self-training delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.