* 1829144
* I-Corps Sites:  Type I - Texas State University I-Corps Site for Entrepreneurship
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Jennifer Irvin, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 04/30/2023
* USD 355,259.00

This project, from Texas State University's (TSU) aims to further
entrepreneurial excellence by creating an NSF I-Corps Site through the Materials
Science, Engineering and Commercialization (MSEC) Program. NSF Innovation Corps
(I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSEC accomplishes cross-campus
synergy by bringing various entrepreneurial units' efforts together on common
projects. With the assistance of this Site grant, MSEC strengthens the
innovation ecosystem across the university, grows the commercialization culture
at TSU and increases diversity. MSEC will use the five-year I-Corps Site funding
to firmly embed an I-Corps environment across TSU, coalescing the efforts of
various units across campus into a cohesive entrepreneurial resource for the
university. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MSEC is an integrated effort based on the
university's College of Science and Engineering (COSE) and McCoy College of
Business Administration (MCBA), bringing scientists and engineers together with
experts in entrepreneurship to ensure success of the I-Corps Site. With an
emphasis on under-represented students, staff, and faculty, the I-Corps Site
provides resources to individuals and teams in the form of entrepreneurial
mentoring, curriculum, and intellectual property guidance needed to transition
technology into the marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.