* 1829609
* Conference Proposal: 6th National Center for the Integration of Research, Teaching and Learning Forum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Adam Fontecchio, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2021
* USD 144,985.00

Educating a well-prepared STEM workforce is a national priority that underlies
progress in science and contributes to national prosperity. A contemporary
challenge for colleges and universities is the need to accelerate adoption of
effective teaching and learning practices at scale and to create inclusive
learning environments. Meeting this challenge involves preparing current and
future faculty members to create more inclusive STEM learning environments. The
proposed project will fund the sixth National Center for the Integration of
Research, Teaching, and Learning (CIRTL) Forum. CIRTL is a network including 41
major research universities that are committed to transforming STEM
undergraduate education through innovative approaches that prepare future STEM
faculty members for careers of both research excellence and evidence-based
teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-day gathering will have approximately
400 attendees and is designed to foster professional development and networking
among current faculty, future faculty, and administrators focused on improving
undergraduate STEM education. Targeted invitations and speaking opportunities
will focus on: shifting the conversation on graduate education towards training
doctoral students to be effective undergraduate STEM instructors; promoting
diversity in STEM through evidence-based pedagogy; and change leadership in
undergraduate STEM education. The event is designed to create significant
opportunities for idea exchange, networking, and learning about best practices.
Workshop assessment will be conducted using pre- and post-event surveys designed
to identify participant interests and understanding of meeting-related topics.
The ultimate goal is to enhance the professional development and future work of
all participants towards promoting effective teaching and learning of all STEM
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.