* 1829135
* Online modules for quantitative skill building: Exploring, adaptation and adoption
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Leamon, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 05/31/2024
* USD 290,940.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by introducing faculty to the use of online resources to teach
quantitative literacy and studying the effect of that implementation on the
participating faculty. This IUSE project, anchored at Carleton College and
Williams College and building on two NSF-funded projects (MathBench and The Math
You Need When You Need It), will increase use of online modules that improve
students' quantitative skills (QS) at the ten liberal arts colleges comprising
the Liberal Arts Collaborative for Digital Innovation (LACOL), a consortium with
a collective undergraduate enrollment of 18,500 and faculty base of 2,400. The
online modules will help students develop QS necessary to succeed in
introductory STEM courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance
research into adaptation and adoption of face-to-face and online pedagogies for
teaching quantitative skills. Specifically, the project will improve LACOL
faculty and staff members' understanding of best practices for the QS module
development and use throughout the undergraduate STEM curriculum. This knowledge
will be valuable within LACOL and across the undergraduate STEM education
community. More specifically, first the project will develop a model for
collaboratively adapting disparate research-based online resources into discrete
modules, by faculty and staff in the LACOL. Second, the project will foster
research, conducted by participating faculty and staff as well as educational
researchers at the Science Education Resource Center, on what motivates or
inhibits faculty to adapt and adopt these modules. By improving understanding of
how face-to-face and virtual communities impact the effectiveness of change
strategies and how consortia such as LACOL can disseminate best practices, this
project will have reach beyond LACOL campuses. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.