* 1829169
* 2018 Solid State Chemistry Gordon Research Conference: Designing, Discovering, and Understanding the Functional Materials of the Future
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Patrick Woodward, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2019
* USD 26,340.00

NON TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
and Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) entitled Designing, Discovering, and
Understanding the Functional Materials of the Future, is funded in-part by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program. It will be held at Colby-Sawyer
College in New London, New Hampshire, beginning with the GRS on July 21-22,
immediately followed by the GRC which runs from July 21-27, 2018. The inclusive,
collegial atmosphere of the GRC, and the emphasis on sharing previously
unpublished information, enables the cultivation of innovative approaches to
address the most important challenges facing our world. By including a mixture
of students, postdocs, early career investigators, and distinguished veteran
scientists the meeting will explore exciting new directions in the field,
leverage the expertise of those with decades of experience, and inspire and
educate future leaders. The meeting is structured to promote the exchange of
ideas and the building of partnerships between researchers from academics,
industry, and government laboratories. The GRS, which is a meeting solely for
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, will promote an environment to
introduce new graduate students into a conference atmosphere, allow all students
and fellows to present their work in a low stress environment, and promote
networking among peers. The organizers are committed to a meeting that promotes
diversity, with particular attention placed on encouraging participation of
women, underrepresented minorities, and people with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid state
chemistry plays a key role in the design, discovery, and optimization of new
functional materials to meet ever-growing societal demands for smaller, faster,
cleaner, and more sustainable technologies. The Gordon Research Conference on
Solid State Chemistry is a unique meeting that brings together a diverse group
of scientists investigating solid state materials and their applications. This
conference will provide perspectives from industry, national laboratories, and
universities throughout the world on the most promising research directions in
solid state and materials chemistry. An emphasis will be placed on exploring the
synergies between computations and theory, synthesis, and advanced
characterization methods to discover and develop the materials of the future.
Applications of these materials span many fields including energy conversion and
storage, electronics, and quantum computing, among others. Speakers and poster
presenters are explicitly encouraged to emphasize advances, unpublished results,
and new ideas. The organizers strongly encourage active contribution to
discussions and participation in poster sessions, which offer an excellent
opportunity for presenting and learning about new and exciting
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.