* 1829290
* Building a corpus of phonemic lexicons to study information theoretic universals
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Uriel Cohen Priva, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/29/2024
* USD 391,055.00

Human language use reflects the nature of human communication. For instance,
frequent words tend to have fewer sounds than infrequent ones, which facilitates
quick production and understanding. However, little is known about more fine-
grained distinctions. For instance, English has more /k/ than /p/ sounds. Does
that reflect a property of human language and its physiological and perceptual
nature or a historical accident? Answering such questions requires comparative
data on the frequency and phonological makeup of words in many languages. This
project will build on existing textual sources and word frequency lists to
provide the phonological makeup of words in close to 200 low-resource languages.
The phonological word lists will provide an invaluable resource to the
understanding of human language and provide much-needed linguistic resources to
low-resource languages. The outputs of the project will be made public and
easily accessible, thereby assisting in documenting and teaching the processed
languages, and in building computational linguistic resources such as text-to-
speech engines.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research team, including trained
undergraduate and graduate students, will create rules to translate alphabets to
phonemic representation for multiple languages. The team will then collect
textual resources and word frequency lists from publicly available sources such
as online Bibles, newspapers, and movie subtitles. The rules will be applied
separately to each source and the resulting phonological representations will be
made publicly available, such that not only researchers but also the general
public will be able to use and interact with the data. The researchers will
proceed to use the data to investigate whether the information theoretic
properties of sounds have distributional universality: do sounds tend to provide
similar amounts of information cross-linguistically, and if so, does their
information content correlate with their phonetic properties? Universality is an
age-old question, and the similarities and differences of properties across
language can provide new insights into language use. Specifically, the
researchers will use information theoretic properties to predict whether low
information or other previously studied phonological properties are likely to
promote consonant weakening in those languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.