* 1829442
* RAPID: Post-fire lidar change detection, Eagle Creek fire, Columbia River Gorge, Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Joshua Roering, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 10/31/2018
* USD 13,406.00

Increased wildfire activity in the Western U.S. significantly increases the
likelihood of rapid, highly destructive debris flows as well as contributes to
rapid soil erosion and rockfall. Debris flows emanate from steep catchments
where they entrain sediment and debris before entering adjacent lowlands, and
thus, they pose an increasingly significant threat to human life and
infrastructure. In September 2017, the Eagle Creek fire complex burned nearly
50,000 acres of steep, forested terrain along the southern margin of the
Columbia River Gorge in Oregon. Data and field observations necessary to
determine the relevance of post-fire geomorphic responses in the Eagle Creek
fire region are lacking. This project responds to the severe urgency to collect
data and field observations following the fire, and could impact management
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will inform process-based
geomorphic models of debris flow potential and provide important constraints on
the contribution of extreme events to regional erosion and sediment yield. The
work plan includes raster and point-cloud based change-detection with lidar
datasets. Lidar analysis documenting changes in the forest and sub-canopy
structure between 2014 and 2018 will enable the team to quantify how the
disturbance of different components of the vegetation mosaic contribute to
sediment transport. Analysis of post-fire land surface change will enable the
team to test how grain size and slope angle regulate transport distances owing
to disturbance. Fieldwork in summer 2018 will occur before mitigation activities
overprint post-fire geomorphic change. The team will identify hillslope sites
with thick sediment accumulation that are likely to produce debris flows and
identify damage to infrastructure. Various state and federal agencies are
involved and a graduate student will receive training from experts in lidar
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.