* 1829315
* Using stable isotopes to discern the advantages of tool-mediated shellfish exploitation in a monkey model system
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Nathaniel Dominy, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 137,716.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A preference for high quality
protein may have contributed to key changes in our early human ancestors.
Researchers have hypothesized that early modern human consumption of marine
protein (e.g., shellfish) aided the rapid dispersal of hominins from Africa, and
that early stone tools enabled greater access to animal protein and fat that
fueled the energetic demands of brain growth and cognition. Testing hypotheses
about the importance of marine protein for early human population movements and
biological adaptations has been difficult given the dearth of suitable model
primate systems. However, this project has identified one such model system, a
unique population of macaques that use stones to extract and eat shellfish, with
individual monkeys differing in tool-use abilities. The investigators will
measure relationships among shellfish consumption, protein levels in individual
monkeys, and tool use, to determine how variation in technical competence with
stone tools may influence protein intake. The project has broader impacts at the
local, national, and international levels, including training and professional
development for underrepresented students, international research collaborations
with Chulalongkorn University, educational outreach in K-12 settings, and the
dissemination of research findings beyond academia through various media.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will begin to explore the fitness
consequences of individual variation in stone tool use and shellfish
exploitation. The investigators will use carbon and nitrogen stable isotope
analysis to measure the contribution of protein from shellfish consumption to
the hair protein of individual monkeys within a stone-tool using population of
long-tailed macaques in Koram Island, Thailand, and quantify the benefit of tool
use to protein assimilation. These objectives will be achieved by 1) measuring
the carbon and nitrogen stable isotope composition of macaque hair and all food
sources, and 2) combining isotopic data with behavioral data on foraging (as
informative priors) in a Bayesian stable isotope mixing model to estimate the
proportional contributions of protein sources to hair as a direct function of
stone tool use and technical proficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.