* 1829573
* IRES Track III: Penn State - American Ceramics Society - University of Kiel (PACK) International Research Experience
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Marcus Fish, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This IRES program addresses the national priority for research in understanding
and imaging brain functionality and in developing engineered materials and
mechanisms that provide brain-like processors. PACK fellows have the opportunity
to conduct cutting-edge research on magnetic field sensing, biomedical systems
and neuromorphic computing with involvement of more than thirty faculty members
and over hundred students and postdoctoral fellows at University of Kiel (U
Kiel). In order to support this research program, U Kiel is providing dedicated
infrastructure with several specialized equipment. This support provides
tremendous opportunity for US students and faculty to build a partnership with
an excellent cluster of scientists and engineers at UKiel and through them
collaborations throughout Europe. Over the course of the program, a substantial
number of German students will be visiting US universities, funded through
universities in Germany. The US students are drawn from various institutions
around the country. The American Ceramic Society (ACerS) is administering the
program, managing the student selection process, international network formation
and collaboration, and sustainability of the PACK Fellowship. Several student-
organized activities are built-into the program, such as retreats, workshops,
and lab tours, in order to increase the interactions and provide opportunity for
new collaborations. Team of faculty and consultant are providing the support for
training PACK fellows on entrepreneurship, social media networking, and career
counselling. Sustainability of the peer-to-peer relationships is being ensured
through ACerS membership program, participation in annual symposia organized
jointly by ACerS and partnering institutions, social media and dedicated PACK
webpage, and PACK fellow?s alumni association. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PACK
fellows have the opportunity to form an international network in the emerging
field of biomagnetic field sensing and its implications towards solving complex
human diseases through improved diagnosis and analysis. Different sensor
approaches based upon magnetoelectric sensors are being designed and
manufactured with the ability to reach a limit of detection suitable for
biomagnetism resulting in the development of closed-loop, uncooled, biomagnetic
interfaces for diagnostics and immediate treatment. Ongoing programs at U Kiel
are providing opportunity to systematically investigate nanocomposite and thin
film composite materials that can respond to small magnetic signals emitted from
brain and heart, release drugs for treating brain diseases and provide
memristive devices for neuronal systems. Extensive research on materials design,
nanotechnology and surface sciences is being conducted by PACK fellows. Magnetic
measurements promise improved diagnosis, for example in relation to spatial
resolution and/or for examinations over a long period of time as a supplement or
alternative to the established electrical measurements ? such as the
electroencephalography (EEG) or the electrocardiography (ECG). This is rich area
for interdisciplinary student training activities covering materials, signal
processing, computation and biology. Based upon the understanding of neural
functioning, memristive controllers are being designed to provide ultra-low
power computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.