* 1829943
* An experimental investigation of the effects of wind and wave on the impact of raindrops on water surface
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* James Duncan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 584,345.00

The air-sea boundary layer generated by rainfall over the ocean plays an
important role&lt;br/&gt;in the transfer of mass, heat, energy and momentum
across the air-water interface. This air-sea boundary layer in the rain field
includes secondary droplets, stalks, crowns and surface waves that are generated
by the impacts of rain drops. Experiments with various rain rates, rain drop
diameters and spatial distributions of rain on the water surface will be carried
out in two different facilities (rain tower and wind-wave tank) in a laboratory
under various conditions of wind and waves. Since rainfall over the ocean makes
an important contribution to air-sea transfer processes that affect weather and
climate, the research will have a broad impact. The project will contribute to
the education of students in the sciences by supporting one graduate student and
two undergraduate students. The PIs will also introduce the research to
undergraduate classes and give approximately one talk or host one field visit to
their research laboratory for local area high school students each semester in
order to introduce them to the subject area of this research. It is hoped that
this may foster interest in pursuing oceanography in their university studies.
Also, results from this research will be posted on the web and photographs and
videos and will be submitted to the Gallery of Fluid Motion of the American
Physical Society (APS). Winners of this Gallery are published and posted on the
web of the APS Division of Fluid
Dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Measurements will include the profile
histories of stalks, crowns and surface waves at the center plane of the rain
field using a cinematic laser induced fluorescence technique, the sizes and
trajectories of both rain drops and secondary droplets using a holographic
technique, and radar backscattering from the water surface in the rain zones
using a pulsed ultra-wide band radar system. The goal of the laboratory
experiments is to investigate the effects of wind and waves on the flow
properties and mixing characteristics of the air- sea boundary layer in a rain
field. The radar backscattering signatures in response to the changes of the
air-sea boundary layer in the rain field will be investigated as well. Efforts
to model air-sea transfer process are critically dependent on humidity and
evaporation which are in turn greatly enhanced by rainfall. By using the physics
learned from the proposed experiments, this study aims to produce important
advancement in knowledge and understanding of how wind and waves affect the
marine-atmospheric boundary layer in a rain field and make an important
contribution that numerical modelers will find useful. Finally, advances in
techniques for the measurement of rain impact on the water surface will result
from the proposed work and will be applicable to similar measurements in other
fields related to fluid mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.