* 1829278
* I-Corps Sites: Type II - University of Nevada Las Vegas (UNLV) Lean Entrepreneurship Advancement Program (LEAP)
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Brendan O'Toole, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 162,498.00

This project, from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, extends their NSF
I-Corps Site for scale up to their next phase of support for innovation and
entrepreneurship. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors. This is
a proposal for a Type II I-Corps Site. Type II proposals are submitted by
institutions that have already received a Type I award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
University of Nevada, Las Vegas continues operation of the Lean Entrepreneurship
Advancement Program (LEAP) to aid commercialization of student, faculty and
community innovations. The I-Corps Site committee utilizes the resources and
expertise of the Troesh Center for Entrepreneurship and Innovation (TCFEI), the
Division of Research and Economic Development (DREC), and the Mendenhall
Innovation Program (MIP) to execute the LEAP at UNLV. Type II funding will allow
the program to fund the increasing number of I-Corps teams due to the rapidly
changing commercialization environment at UNLV and the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.