* 1829255
* Collaborative Research: US Forest Service Decisions and Innovations
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Dockry, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2023
* USD 374,239.00

Effective public decision-making requires an evidence-based approach, and
leading scientists frequently call for producing policy-relevant science, yet
little is known about how government officials use science in their day-to-day
work. This project will fill this gap by conducting a systematic analysis of use
of science in thousands of decisions about environmental policy made at multiple
levels of the US federal government. We focus on the contents of Environmental
Impact Statements (EISs) prepared by the US Forest Service (USFS) under the
National Environmental Policy Act. Providing a more detailed picture of how
scientific information is used in government decision-making will enable
government agencies to improve the processes through which they incorporate
scientific information. At the same time, providing details of what types of
scientific information are utilized in public decision-making processes will
help scientists, universities, and funding agencies prioritize science that is
policy-relevant. To forward these goals, the project will publish an index that
will assist scientists in comparing the policy impact of different publications
and will conduct outreach activities with environmental planners to help them
understand the implications of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use web scraping and computational text analysis to collect and analyze the
use of science in all USFS EISs produced between 2006 and 2018. These EISs
record the scientific basis for at least 2,000 decisions made about public land
management in a wide variety of contexts. The project has two objectives: (1)
Understand what drives the inclusion of innovative scientific information (data,
facts, evidence) in USFS EISs; and (2) Understand what drives the adoption of
innovative scientific practices (operating procedures, protocols, norms) by USFS
decision-makers preparing EISs. Using computational text analysis and machine
learning tools, we will measure various aspects of the scientific content of
each document such as citations, key concepts, and analytical practices. We will
combine this information with publicly available data about the scientific
information in each document, such as place of publication, employer of the
scientists producing the document, extent of public participation in the
document's preparation, and the government office using the scientific
information. This analysis will help in understanding how characteristics of
scientific information and characteristics of government offices influence how
science is used in public decision-making processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.