* 1829394
* Sensory-Biased Working Memory &amp; Attention Networks in the Human Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* David Somers, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 630,988.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans experience the world via multiple sensory
modalities -- we see, we hear, and we touch. Each sensory modality has unique
strengths and weaknesses in its ability to represent the world around us. Our
minds are able to flexibly recruit visual or auditory brain structures when
their strengths correspond to the task at hand. In addition, our experience at
any moment depends both on sensory input and on working memory and attention
mechanisms in the brain. These mechanisms have very limited capacities, which in
turn limit cognition. The overarching goal of this project is to examine the
human brain mechanisms that support attention and working memory in vision,
hearing, and touch. The research team will perform functional MRI experiments to
study the brain activity of healthy adults while they perform demanding sensory
working memory tasks. Preliminary studies by the research group suggest that
there are extensive brain networks, extending into the frontal lobes of the
cerebral cortex, that are specialized for each sensory modality, as well as a
shared network that supports and unifies these three senses. The current
research program will examine individual differences in working memory
performance and brain network organization. It will also develop advanced
computational models that can predict the functional organization of an
individual's brain from their unique pattern or 'fingerprint' of brain
connectivity. The project will facilitate other research efforts through the
dissemination of new models and computational tools, and will recruit and train
young scientists, including members of groups that are under-represented in
STEM, in cognitive neuroscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal has
4 primary intellectual goals: (1) identify the fine-scale organization of
tactile, visual, auditory, and modality-independent attention &amp; working
memory (WM) regions within human cerebral cortex; (2) reveal the specificity of
coding of WM information across cortical regions for each modality; (3) detail
the network organization of attention &amp; WM circuits; and (4) test hypotheses
about content-specific WM mechanisms and cross-modality WM coding. Individual
subject fMRI analyses permit fine-scale observation of distinct functional
regions. Drawing on subject-specific maps of cortical organization, the research
group will re-examine the highly debated question of which brain structures
support stimulus-specific working memory for each modality. It will investigate
the specificity of sensory modality biased regions by examining functional
networks in the resting-state within individual participants. The research team
will leverage its findings to probe these networks in 1200 subjects from the
Human Connectome Project dataset. The research group will also test and validate
a machine-learning approach, Connectome Fingerprinting, for predicting the
location of modality-specific working memory regions in individual brains from
their unique functional connectome. Vision excels in coding spatial information,
but codes timing less reliably; conversely, the auditory system performs high-
fidelity temporal coding but coarse spatial coding. The research team has
observed cross-modal recoding of WM information into cortical structures that
prefer the 'appropriate modality' - auditory spatial WM recruits visual-biased
regions and visual temporal WM recruits auditory-biased regions. To probe
content-specific WM mechanisms, the researchers will examine interactions
between sensory modality WM and space/time WM. The research group hypothesizes
that visual and spatial WM stores are distinct, but that auditory and timing WM
stores are shared. Collectively, these studies will elucidate the human brain
networks and mechanisms that support sensory working
memory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.