* 1829945
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the trophic roles of epipelagic ctenophores
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Brad Gemmell, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 287,766.00

Ctenophores are gelatinous predators found throughout the world's oceans, and
their predatory impacts can profoundly affect planktonic communities. A variety
of methods employed marine scientists have converged to demonstrate the key
roles these animals play in determining planktonic composition and energy flows
in coastal systems. The role of oceanic ctenophores, however, is still sparsely
documented. Oceanic ctenophores are characterized by more delicate gelatinous
bodies that usually do not survive capture by conventional nets and do not
perform naturally when transferred from their wall-less oceanic environment to
shipboard bottles and containers. The difficulty in obtaining quantitative
measurements on feeding by oceanic species has limited the ability to understand
the role of these organisms in oceanic systems. This project will transform the
capabilities to quantify key processes of oceanic ctenophores with in situ
studies. However, ctenophores are not the only delicate oceanic animals that
will benefit from developing advanced in situ methods. Similar techniques and
approaches can be applied to other groups such as cnidarian siphonophores,
pelagic molluscs, marine snow and large protists such as radiolarians.
Additionally, successful application of these methods by divers will open the
path for applications on Remotely Operated Vehicles (ROVs) and other
submersibles that can greatly extend the depth and range of the techniques.
Training of new scientists will involve postdoctoral, graduate and
undergraduates. The investigators will broaden public science outreach by using
contacts with media and aquariums involved in public education to communicate
new findings to a wide public audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
address the challenge of obtaining information about the role and activity of
pelagic oceanic ctenophores by adapting methods developed in the laboratory and
employing them in a field setting. The investigators have adapted high-speed,
high-resolution imaging and fluid-mechanics methods to the animal?s in situ
environment. These methods are particularly appropriate for field measurements
of animals that are intractable for controlled laboratory studies and must be
studied in situ, such as oceanic ctenophores. The goal in this project will be
to apply high-speed, in situ particle image velocimetry (PIV) and bright field
imaging systems to study a suite of oceanic ctenophores possessing distinct
morphologies with potentially variable trophic roles to quantify: a) their flow
and feeding mechanics; b) their ingestion rates and prey selection; and c) their
trophic impacts. The results will enable inclusion of about the activities of
these widespread and important animals in models of epipelagic food web
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.