* 1829273
* Laboratory Technician Support: Experimental Mineral Physics and Petrology Facilities at the University of Hawaii at Manoa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Murli Manghnani, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 726,752.00

Geoscientists have long recognized the importance of generating extreme
conditions of pressures and temperatures to reproduce in laboratory settings the
conditions present in planetary interiors. Such high-pressure experiments on the
properties, transformations, and behavior of principal planetary materials
provide the basis for understanding the nature and mechanisms of dynamic
processes taking place within deep interiors of Earth and other planetary
bodies. The many laboratories of the Mineral Physics and Experimental Petrology
Laboratory (MPEPL or MPL) at the University of Hawaii at Manoa (UHM) are
equipped for measurements of physical, chemical, spectroscopic, microstructural
and nano-structural properties of minerals, advanced ceramics, and ceramic
composites, single-crystalline and poly-crystalline minerals, silicate glasses
and melts, as well as syntheses of minerals and materials under extreme
conditions. This award will fund a laboratory technician in the MPL, who will
play a critical role in maintaining and supporting the unique state-of-the-art
experimental facilities and educational infrastructure, training students and
visiting researchers, and providing technical support to the principal
investigators and users of the facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lab
technician will provide critical technical support for the research and
educational agendas of the MPL. (1) The Multi-Anvil Press Laboratory (MAPLab)
led by the lead investigator has been commissioned to become a research and
teaching/training ex-situ large volume press facility for high-pressure sample
syntheses and experimental petrology research. The MAPLab facilities offer a
valuable platform for training junior researchers in a laboratory setting and
enrich the curricula for high-pressure geosciences education. (2) The X-ray
Atlas Lab led by one of the co-investigators that is engaged in cutting-edge
crystallographic research focused on characterization of discontinuous
structural transformations that silicates undergo as a function of depth, and
has been leading the field in the development of innovative solutions in
hardware, measurement methodology and data analysis software for high-pressure
research. The X-ray Atlas lab provides state-of-the-art X-ray analytical
capabilities for in situ and ex-situ characterization of geologic samples at
both extreme and ambient conditions for broad research community on campus and
off campus. The X-ray Atlas lab also features spectroscopic and laser-heating
instrumentation for high-pressure and high-temperature research. (3) The Laser
Spectroscopy Lab led by another co-investigator has been commissioned for
measuring vibrational properties by Raman spectroscopy, Brillouin Scattering,
and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, as well as high-temperature
sample syntheses and measurements by laser heating. The lab technician will be
actively involved in the research activities of all three investigators, and
help to commission, maintain, and support the experimental facilities. The
experimental facilities at the MPL provide opportunities for the student
researchers to build their scientific resume in geoscience using the state-of-
the-art multi-scale laboratories and facilities. The lab technician's active
involvement in the day-to-day training of junior researchers at the UHM will
have a great impact on the overall quality of graduate and undergraduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.