* 1829168
* Collaborative Research: Revisiting the Dynamics of Scientific  Influence: Measures and Applications
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Russell Funk, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 276,845.00

Universities, states, and the federal government invest millions of dollars in
scientific research, and are eager to assess its impact. Researchers who study
science are also interested in explaining how and why some research is
particularly influential, and how scientific research evolves over time. Meeting
these goals requires detailed yet scalable measures of scientific influence.
Building on recent developments in network science, this project will develop
and evaluate a novel measure of scientific influence -- the CD index. The CD
index characterizes how scientific works (e.g., published journal articles)
alter the use of the knowledge upon which they build. Some articles build on and
therefore consolidate (C) previously published research, whereas other articles
depart from and therefore destabilize (D) existing knowledge. This measure
offers a new, systematic way of identifying breakthrough scientific discoveries
that open up novel fields, and differentiating them from more incremental, but
also important, contributions that develop established areas. Results from this
project should be useful to individuals involved in research policy development
and implementation. For example, university administrators are moving away from
a focus on sheer quantity of scientific output toward a greater appreciation for
quality and impact. Results from this project will allow administrators to not
only identify research that is influential in different (consolidating or
destabilizing) ways, but to foster the conditions (e.g., an optimal team
composition, or interdisciplinary approaches to scholarship) that promote such
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prominent theories in the economics, philosophy,
and sociology of science suggest that scientific influence is a complex and
multidimensional phenomenon, with different types of works potentially having
different types of effects on the course of science. However, despite growing
availability of data and computing power, efforts to incorporate these important
theoretical insights into empirical work have been scarce. Most large-scale
studies rely on quantitative bibliometrics, using journal impact factors and
citation counts to proxy the amount of scientific influence exerted by a given
paper or patent. But such proxies are crude and are unable to distinguish
between qualitatively different types of influence. Methodologically, the
measurement approach developed and evaluated in this project will more closely
align empirical and theoretical work on scientific influence. Substantively, the
project argues that better, more nuanced measures of scientific influence will
help provide clearer and more robust answers to pressing science policy
questions. To date, much of the scholarship on scientific influence is quite
conflicted. Are women or women dominant teams more likely to produce influential
science? Do interdisciplinary efforts facilitate transformative, influential
research? The literature is rife with contradictory answers to these important
questions. Applying the novel CD index to two entire corpora (JSTOR and the Web
of Science)-- as this project will do -- should help resolve
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.