* 1829717
* CyberTraining:CIU:Computational and Data Science Literacy Curriculum Exchange
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Linda Akli, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 499,734.00

There is a well-established national need for a research workforce with suitable
knowledge of computational and data science (CDS). Although, some strides have
been made in integrating CDS competencies into the university curriculum, the
pace of change has been slow. Department boundaries, course requirements for
STEM majors, and resource constraints all contribute to the slow pace of CDS
curriculum implementation across STEM disciplines. Ohio Supercomputer Center
(OSC) in collaboration with Bethune Cookman University (BCU), Clark Atlanta
University (CAU), Morgan State University (Morgan), Southeastern Universities
Research Association (SURA), Southern University and A&amp;M College (SUBR), and
the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez (UPRM) are implementing a pilot
Computational and Data Science (CDS) Curriculum Exchange (C2Exchange) to address
the challenges experienced by resource constrained institutions and, in
particular, those faced by Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs). This project
serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the
progress of science and to serve the national health, prosperity, and welfare by
advancing STEM education and improving the computational and data science skills
of our future research workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The curriculum exchange
approach is intended to minimize the faculty preparation time required to
deliver new and updated courses, increase the number of CDS courses offered at
each institution, and allow courses to be offered that may not initially have
large enrollments at an individual institution by drawing students from all of
the participating institutions. This pilot develops the foundation for a CDS
Curriculum Exchange that can increase the capacity of small under-resourced MSIs
to deliver undergraduate CDS curriculum, minors, and certificates with low
investment and be extensible for future participation by additional resource
constrained institutions. Students in these institutions will benefit by having
access to a broader selection of computational science courses. Training in
these highly sought after skills aims to increase their chances of being part of
the STEM workforce or continuing on to graduate school and becoming effective
researchers. Each academic institution is contributing and receiving courses,
such as Introduction to Modeling and Simulation, Computational Chemistry, as
well as Data Visualization, with the goal of providing a sequence of CDS courses
that can form part of a certificate or minor program at each institution. The
consortium delivers courses through a blended online learning model that has
been tested and shown to be effective for technical subjects. This model is
flexible enough to reduce preparation time for local instructors, respond to
students' difficulties with material, and to accommodate institutions' varied
schedules. If successful, this exchange model of instruction will be extensible
to a wide range of institutions as well as to specialized instruction at the
graduate level. The project explores important insights into both the
institutional and pedagogical questions associated with the implementation of
shared course networks in resource constrained
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.