* 1829325
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Yelin Kim, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2019
* USD 12,500.00

This is funding to support participation by about 10 graduate students from U.S.
educational institutions, along with 5-6 senior members of the ICMI community
(faculty members and industry researchers) who will serve as mentors, in a
Doctoral Consortium (workshop) to be held in conjunction with and on the first
day of the 20th International Conference on Multimodal Interaction (ICMI 2018),
which will take place October 16-20, 2018, in Boulder, Colorado, and which is
organized by the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM). The ICMI conference
series is the premier international forum for multidisciplinary research on
multimodal human-human and human-computer interaction, interfaces, and system
development. The conference focuses on theoretical and empirical foundations,
component technologies, and combined multimodal processing techniques that
define the field of multimodal interaction analysis, interface design, and
system development. The theme of the ICMI 2018 conference is "Multi-modal
Understanding of Multi-party Interactions." During the conference, multiple
events will be planned towards this direction. The conference will also feature
workshops and grand challenges. ICMI 2018 will feature a single-track main
conference which includes: keynote speakers, technical full and short papers
(including oral and poster presentations), special sessions, demonstrations,
exhibits and doctoral spotlight papers. The ICMI 2018 proceedings will be
published by ACM Press and included in the ACM Digital Library. As a further
incentive for high-quality student participation ICMI 2018 will be awarding
outstanding paper awards, with a special category for student papers. The goal
of the ICMI Doctoral Consortium is to provide PhD students with an opportunity
to present their work to a group of mentors and peers from a diverse set of
academic and industrial institutions, to receive feedback on their doctoral
research plan and progress, and to build a cohort of young researchers
interested in designing multimodal interfaces. The organizers will take steps
proactively to achieve a diversity of research topics, disciplinary backgrounds
and methodological approaches among the students. Special consideration will be
given to women and under-represented minorities, including students who have not
previously attended ICMI. To further increase diversity, the organizers have
committed that no more than one student will be invited from any given
educational institution. More information about the conference may be found
online at http://icmi.acm.org/2018/.

Student participants in the Doctoral Consortium will present their ongoing
thesis research as a short talk at the Consortium and also as a poster at the
conference Doctoral Spotlight Session. Following the fruitful experiences from
prior year ICMI conferences and doctoral consortia, and with the goal of
providing more opportunities for interaction between the students and senior
members of the field, the program will once again include a lunch on the day of
the workshop for students and mentors, a career panel that will provide the
students and mentors the opportunity to ask and answer questions and discuss
challenges and opportunities in the field, and a dinner that will provide the
students with the opportunity to hold informal conversations among themselves as
well as with the organizers and mentors. The Doctoral Consortium will give
student participants exposure to their new research community, both by
presenting their own work and by observing and interacting with established
professionals in the field. It will encourage students at this critical time in
their careers to begin building a social support network of peers and mentors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.