* 1829644
* CyberTraining: CIC: Widening the CI Workforce On-ramp by Exposing Undergraduates to Heterogeneous Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Apan Qasem, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 241,791.00

In keeping with NSF's mission of promoting scientific progress, this project
strengthens the workforce of future cyberinfrastructure researchers and
professionals by preparing undergraduate students to program and employ
heterogeneous computing systems. The need for increased performance per watt and
demands of processing diverse workloads have triggered a major industry shift
towards systems containing different kinds of specialized components. These
heterogeneous architectures are quickly becoming the dominant platform in high-
performance computing (HPC), cloud computing, and Internet of Things (IoT)
networks. As such, it is imperative that the scientific workforce in advanced
cyberinfrastructure have a deep understanding of heterogeneity in computing
systems. Current undergraduate computer science curricula lack sufficient
coverage of heterogeneous computing concepts and there is an imminent risk that
tomorrow's scientific workforce will be ill-equipped to program the complex
heterogeneous systems of the future. This project addresses this by developing
and disseminating modules covering heterogeneous computing concepts. Module
development is complemented with out-of-class training camps that will serve as
a springboard for undergraduates to pursue further training and career
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes an early-and-often,
module-driven approach to curricular integration. A collection of modules is
being designed to cover a range of heterogeneous computing concepts including
heterogeneous architectures, hybrid algorithms, and heterogeneous programming
models such as CUDA and OpenCL. For easy adoption, modules are designed to be
self-contained with all requisite teaching material including in-class
interactive exercises, problem sets and solutions, and pedagogical notes. Each
module is designed to exploit heterogeneous context within the curriculum and
introduce topics at an appropriate level of abstraction. The summer training
camps are designed to be immersive experiences for undergraduates that (i)
reinforce and extend the material covered in the modules, (ii) present the role
of cyberinfrastructure in advancing scientific research, and (iii) expose
students to opportunities in the fields of computational and data science. A key
component of this project is forging alliances with industry partners, who are
engaged throughout the design process. A detailed evaluation plan is in place to
evaluate student learning outcomes and engagement. Both internal and external
evaluators are involved in carrying out the evaluation plan. The modules and
training activities are expected to impact over 1,100 computer science
undergraduates enrolled at Texas State, Knox College, and Concordia University
Texas. Extensive dissemination efforts through faculty training workshops are
expected to further broaden the impact of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.