* 1829156
* I-Corps Sites:  Type II - University of Minnesota Innovation Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2022
* John Stavig, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 191,999.00

This project, from the University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, extends this
institution's NSF I-Corps Site for scale up to their next phase of support for
innovation and entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation Corps (I-Corps)
Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to
nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their technology
concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources,
networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to
transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team
applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and
contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since June 2014, the
University of Minnesota (UMN) Innovation Corps (MIN-Corps) program provided
infrastructure, resources, networking opportunities, training, and NSF-supported
project funding to UMN students, faculty, and staff pursuing commercialization.
As of December 31, 2017, MIN-Corps had hosted over 1,000 participants - more
than half of whom were women - in its courses, seminars, or outreach events.
Over 180 innovation teams trained with MIN-Corps, leading to seven participants
in the national I-Corps Teams program, 12 licenses of UMN intellectual property,
and a dozen startups and other continuing projects that have received over $8
million in commercialization grants and/or investor funding.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals for the next funding cycle are to
increase the quantity and quality of technology commercialization across UMN,
increase program participation and commercialization activity by women and
under-represented minorities, extend programming to UMN campuses in under-
resourced communities outside the Twin Cities, and contribute to the vitality of
the Midwest and national technology entrepreneurship and commercialization
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.