* 1829264
* Laboratory Technician Support: Enhancing Access to the John W. Handin Laboratory for Experimental Rock Deformation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Andreas Kronenberg, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 655,452.00

This award will support a new full-time technical position in the John W. Handin
Laboratory for Experimental Rock Deformation at the Center for Tectonophysics,
Texas A&amp;M University, with the goal of enhancing research and education
opportunities in experimental rock deformation. Experimental rock deformation
has played a crucial role in evaluating many scientific and engineering problems
that involve mechanics of the Earth. The five-year technician support will let
them expand their testing capabilities, increase the impact of laboratory
discoveries, and broaden and diversify laboratory users and visitors in
research, education and outreach opportunities. Improved technical support will
facilitate new collaborations to tackle the most significant problems of our
research of earthquake mechanics, plate tectonics, and the character of the
Earth's lithosphere, with societal applications to understanding and evaluating
natural hazards. The new education and outreach program we envision, facilitated
with the new technical position, will advance the transfer of knowledge, help
foster critical research to meet the needs of society in the years to come,
introduce students to the STEM fields of experimental rock and sediment
mechanics, and define career paths in the Earth Sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The John W. Handin Laboratory for Experimental Rock
Deformation at the Center for Tectonophysics, Texas A&amp;M University has a
long history of education and research in experimental rock deformation, and has
contributed to understanding the mechanical behavior of lithospheric faults and
shear zones by making use of a wide array of deformation apparatus designed to
simulate conditions of the Earth's interior. However, the extent of
collaboration and use of our laboratory by new users outside their program and
from other institutions has been limited by the technical investment and
training needed to perform experiments effectively and safely. The new
laboratory technician will provide laboratory oversight and training of
visitors, assist in development of online preparatory courses, and digital data
archiving. Specifically, the new technician will be engaged in projects to (1)
enhance utility and maintenance of laboratory facilities, (2) develop new
methods and technology, (3) help develop on-line training courses on
experimental methods of rock deformation for visiting researchers and students,
(4) help expand education/outreach of experimental rock deformation to other
programs at Texas A&amp;M and to geoscientists at other institutions, and (5)
enhance data management of open-access archives of digital experimental data and
technical drawings of apparatus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.