* 1829214
* Oceanographic Instrumentation - 2018
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* David Fisichella, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2019
* USD 29,773.00

A request is made to fund Oceanographic Instrumentation on R/V Atlantis, a 274?
general purpose research vessel, and R/V Armstrong, a new 238? multidisciplinary
vessel. Both are operated by WHOI as part of the U.S. Academic Fleet which is
scheduled by the University-National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS).
Both are owned by the U.S. Navy, have state-of-the-art instrumentation and
support all disciplines of oceanographic research. The vessels work in all the
world?s oceans supporting science funded primarily by U.S government agencies.
R/V Atlantis is specifically outfitted for launching and servicing Alvin, the
human occupied submersible as well as other vehicles of the National Deep
Submergence Facility (NDSF). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2017, R/V Atlantis
completed 297 days at sea. NSF funded projects accounted for 69% of the total
sailing schedule (205 days). In 2018, Atlantis is scheduled for 303 days with
NSF accounting for 236 of those or 78%. R/V Armstrong sailed 230 total days in
2017 and 71 of these, 31%, were for NSF. Additionally, 73 days (32%) were for
NSF-OOI. The vessel is scheduled for 251 days in 2018, 52% of which (129 days)
are for NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanographic Instrumentation requested in
this proposal includes:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Sonardyne USBL Tracking Beacons
$29,750 &lt;br/&gt;2) Seabird CTD and Rosette Connector Upgrades $149,812
&lt;br/&gt; $179,562 &lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact
of the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.