* 1829192
* I-Corps Sites: Type I - University of Maine I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Renee Kelly, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 180,152.00

This project, at the University of Maine, establishes an Innovation Corps
(I-Corps) Site at this institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps
(I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an I-Corps Sites
designation at the University of Maine, its Foster Center builds upon the
programming and the university's research and development activities to support
campus-based teams. The Site's innovation training supports the
commercialization of natural resource-based technologies that can have a
significant impact on rural communities. Maine relies on a natural resource-
based economy and the state adopts unique tactics to remain innovative.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UMaine I-Corps Site program fills a critical gap
between awareness and training and more intensive support programs. Involving
teams in the I-Corps Site at an early stage in the commercialization pathway
increases the likelihood of success as these teams move into more intensive
accelerator and incubation programs and the next step in the commercialization
pathway. The Site acts as a "pre-accelerator" helping them understand the market
opportunities for their technologies through customer discovery and competitive
and patentability analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While supporting rural economic
growth, the I-Corps Site also supports the full inclusion of women in
entrepreneurship with a campus research center focused on recruiting, retaining,
and advancing women faculty. Campus resources for women researchers are utilized
and expanded with resources from I-Corps. The Foster Center incorporates
training to help women entrepreneurs reach commercialization. The Foster Center
has a strong history of promoting female entrepreneurship, and four out of five
teams currently participating in the Center's Accelerator program are led by
women. Notably, the I-Corps Site will be led by two successful and experienced
female innovators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.