* 1829340
* I-Corps:  A Simulated Radiation Detector using RFID and GPS Technologies
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Robert Stump, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that it
provides structure and equipment for simulation and training of low-level to
lethal radiation. Simulated training for this type of infrequent, but high
societal-cost disaster is critical to our national safety and homeland security.
This project's solution can be used for training the military, industry, fire
and police departments, bomb squads, HAZMAT teams, paramedics, and emergency
medicine physicians. The device may be ideal for training anyone who comes into
contact, or who has the potential to come into contact with radiation. Training
saves lives and money. This device allows safe training for events that might
include loss of high intensity industrial radioactive sources (orphan sources)
used in the oil drilling industry, radiological dispersal devices (RDD),
radiological exposure devices (RED), nuclear accidents, or improvised nuclear
devices (IND).

This I-Corps project uses RFID (radiofrequency identification) tags in
combination with GPS (global positioning satellite) technology to mimic low-
level to absolutely lethal level radiation without use of dangerous
radioisotopes. This is important because the vast majority of radiation training
in the past has used low level actual radiation sources. These sources pose both
health and security risks. A time-honored maxim in the radiation industry is
ALARA ("as low as reasonably achievable"). Simply stated, radiation exposure
should be a low as possible - ideally, it should be zero. This project's
technology uses no ionizing radiation, and therefore is always as low as
possible. This technology replicates high-intensity lethal radiation events that
appear to be real on entry of first responders from a distance. It also can
mimic highly contaminated victims that require immediate medical treatment. This
allows simulation of events for the entire chain of first responders to
physicians that treat the victims. This is a disruptive change in the training
for these incidents.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.