* 1829803
* Collaborative Research: Aerosols, Nitrogen Oxides, and Ozone at the Mt. Bachelor Observatory
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Qi Zhang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 90,126.00

This project supports the continuation of atmospheric measurements at Mt.
Bachelor Observatory (MBO) in Central Oregon. The MBO is a high elevation (2.8
km above sea level) observatory that has been utilized for atmospheric chemistry
research for the past 15 years. This project will build on the extensive
knowledge base of past observations from MBO to examine key controls on western
U.S. air quality in the spring, when natural and international anthropogenic
sources of O3 and aerosols dominate, and summer, when wildfire smoke is a major
driver of regional air pollution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continuous measurements
will be made at MBO of O3, CO, CO2, aerosol mass, scattering and absorption
coefficients and meteorology. Three specific hypotheses will be addressed in
this research: (1) Daily variations in baseline O3 are driven by large scale
dynamics and transport including the El Nino-Southern Oscillation, the Pacific
Decadal Oscillation, and the changing climate. The variations in O3 that can be
observed in data from both MBO and the TEMPO satellite and are important for
downwind air quality in the western U.S. (2) Nitrogen oxide chemistry in biomass
burning plumes is controlled by both initial emissions and chemical processing
enroute. Production of nitrous acid from aerosol nitrates (organic and
inorganic) is an important NOx recycling mechanism and a source of hydroxyl
radical. (3) Aerosol properties depend on chemical composition and aging. Light
absorption by brown carbon can be comparable or exceed absorption by black
carbon and can be linked to specific chemical components or chromophores.
Organic aerosol volatility decreases with aging and
oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.