* 1829905
* Collaborative Research: Viral induced chemotaxis mediating cross-trophic microbial interactions and carbon flux
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sheri Floge, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 709,360.00

Drifting photosynthetic microbes in surface ocean waters carry out nearly half
of global carbon (C) fixation, both supporting the marine food web and reducing
atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) levels. The fate of C in ocean ecosystems is
controlled by myriad individual interactions within a highly interconnected
planktonic food web, the sheer complexity of which has hindered predictive
understanding of global C cycling. Chemical cues govern microbial interactions,
and during infection, marine viruses manipulate the metabolism of phytoplankton
and bacteria, facilitating the release of dissolved organic matter from infected
cells. This research aims to determine how viral metabolic reprogramming of and
organic matter release from intact, infected phytoplankton influences microbial
interactions and C cycling. The interdisciplinary, collaborative nature of the
project will enable direct training of two postdoctoral researchers, one
graduate student, and undergraduate students in viral ecology, microfluidics,
and metabolomics. An educational outreach program that engages middle school
students in hands-on, high speed imaging of microbes will be expanded, and the
project will culminate in a three-day workshop to advance the application of
microfluidic devices and mass spectrometry analyses in microbial
ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching hypothesis behind this research is
that viral infection alters the chemical landscape of intact, infected
picophytoplankton cells, attracting neighboring chemotactic bacteria and
protistan zooplankton, and altering C flux pathways. To test this idea, a series
of linked multi-scale laboratory-based experiments will be run to 1)
Characterize the response of diverse model marine microbes to dissolved organic
matter (DOM) released from intact, virus-infected picophytoplankton using
microfluidics-based chemotaxis assays, 2) Identify key viral-derived DOM
compounds eliciting chemotactic responses using stable isotope labeling,
metabolomics analyses, and chemotaxis assays, and 3) Quantify micron-scale
cross-trophic encounter dynamics and evaluate their impact on bulk-scale C
cycling using liter-scale measurements of C dynamics linked to high
spatiotemporal resolution live imaging of microbial food webs. The ultimate goal
of the project is to develop a mechanistic understanding of the role of intact,
virus-infected cells in oceanic C cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.