* 1829721
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: CIU: Hour of Cyberinfrastructure: Developing Cyber Literacy for Geographic Information Science
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Anand Padmanabhan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 22,375.00

Cyberinfrastructure empowers the growing knowledge economy in the United States,
and plays a role in defense, homeland security, agriculture, and commerce by
providing powerful computational resources to support data analytics and
modeling. However, many scientific disciplines currently face the question of
how to seamlessly integrate cyberinfrastructure training in their educational
programs. Students and researchers in these disciplines thus often lack
experience in using the most advanced tools and techniques to grapple with the
crucial global challenges they are being trained to investigate. This project
addresses this challenging problem by creating a clear curriculum model for
educators - an Hour of Cyberinfrastructure (Hour of CI) - that integrates
cyberinfrastructure skill building into domain-specific curriculum, with a clear
learning goal for students: try cyberinfrastructure for one hour. Geospatially-
based lessons in this project draw on real-world problems from social sciences,
environmental sciences, and geosciences to make them accessible and meaningful
to students in many scientific disciplines. Hour of CI lessons are available via
an easy-to-use science gateway for broad-scale educational use. The project
broadens access and enable community adoption of cyberinfrastructure for the
nation's future scientific research workforce thus serving the national
interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science; to
advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; and secure the national
defense.

The Hour of CI project is a nationwide campaign introducing hundreds of diverse
undergraduate and graduate students to cyberinfrastructure. Modeled on the "Hour
of Code, the Hour of CI project is building a sustainable learning community and
scalable training environment to train almost two hundred educators and over
five hundred graduate and undergraduate students at institutions ranging from R1
universities to two-year teaching colleges in the short-term and potentially
thousands more in the long-term. The project is developing 17 interactive,
online lessons for students and creating supplementary curriculum materials for
instructors. Hour of CI lessons are being developed using a learning outcome
centered Backward Design Process in which students are exposed to
cyberinfrastructure, establish conceptual foundations, and build a core set of
skills to help them achieve Cyber Literacy for Geographic Information Science,
which requires learners to be knowledgeable in eight core areas:
cyberinfrastructure, parallel computing, big data, computational thinking,
interdisciplinary communication, spatial thinking, geospatial data, and spatial
modeling and analytics. The project lowers the barrier to entry for educators
and students by building on a science gateway called the GISandbox to provide a
cyberinfrastructure-enabled training environment accessible through a web
browser for all Hour of CI lessons. The sustainable learning community built
during the course of this project will continue to expand adoption of the Hour
of CI beyond the project period.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.