* 1829150
* I-Corps Sites:  Type I - Saint Louis University I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kenneth Olliff, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,000.00

This project establishes an I-Corps Site at Saint Louis University (SLU).
Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition to accomplishing the goals of I-Corps, SLU specifically engages groups
that are underrepresented in STEM and entrepreneurial activities through
expanding collaborations with historically black Harris-Stowe State University,
which adjoins the SLU campus. Leveraging existing shared-degree pathways, these
collaborations offer significant opportunities for broader impact through the
development and export of best practices. The location of the SLU I-Corps Site
at the Center of Research Technology and Entrepreneurial Exchange (Cortex)
solidifies connections to a variety of regional innovation and commercialization
facilities, resources and networks. The SLU I-Corps site motivates faculty and
student researchers to think beyond the laboratory or classroom, capitalizing on
the university's strengths in entrepreneurship education. SLU trains
participants to test the market for their innovative ideas, training and
mentoring teams to encourage startup businesses. I-Corps also positions SLU as a
commercialization partner for industry, entrepreneurs, and agencies in the St.
Louis and broader Midwest regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.