* 1829122
* Exploring boundary conditions on the theory of agreement through the comparative study of African languages
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kenneth Safir, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2023
* USD 399,664.00

The Afranaph Project focuses on the study of anaphora, the linguistic devices
that are used to refer back to previously mentioned entities, the antecedents.
Anaphoric dependents like pronouns and reflexives depend for their reference on
antecedents in the same sentence or in discourse. The present research project
seeks to understand how patterns of agreement between antecedents and dependents
are expressed and organized in African languages and what principles underlie
those patterns. The distribution of specialized dependent forms and the manner
in which they agree with their antecedents vary considerably across languages,
but seem to be variants of certain general patterns of locality and sensitivity
to syntactic structure that provides clues about the nature of human cognition.
The Afranaph Project supports the documentation of minority languages, some of
them endangered, thereby contributing to the development of language
professionals with stakes in the future of those languages. Afranaph enhances
the training of junior scholars and the creation of new international
partnerships. It brings together a diverse research community and has seeded
collaborations in linguistic research as well as projects (like the
Kinande/English Dictionary) designed for use by non-scholarly
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How antecedents and dependents agree involves
central topics in linguistic theory. Antecedency relations exist in every
language and almost all languages show some agreement between antecedents and
dependents (e.g., for person, number or gender). Antecedency relations and
patterns of agreement are clues to how syntactic structure shapes human
cognition. The research expertise developed in anaphora studies will be applied
to many new research domains, including the meaning, morphology and syntax of
tense and aspect, sentential embedding, noun classes, and agreement. This cross-
linguistic investigation adds to the aggregate of information available for each
language in the project. The new research is facilitated by the resources of the
Afranaph Project, which has developed a research model and infrastructure that
permits the discovery, documentation, analysis and explanation of new empirical
patterns of interest to linguistic theory and typology. Afranaph employs the
expertise of native speakers of African languages who are trained as linguists
in order to generate data sets relevant to research questions in theoretical
linguistics. Data is elicited with detailed, specially-designed questionnaires,
analyzed in collaboration with consultants and then made freely available to any
interested party in our online database and website. Newly elicited data on
antecedent agreement will be pooled with data previously collected, enriching
our database resource for future research on additional topics. A by-product of
the funding is support for Afranaph Project
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.