* 1829458
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Isolating neural mechanisms of perceptual awareness from post-perceptual processes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Pitts, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 235,318.00

Understanding the neural mechanisms that give rise to perceptual awareness is a
long-standing and fundamental endeavor in human cognitive neuroscience. For
decades, cognitive neuroscientists have tried distinguishing between neural
activity patterns associated with conscious and unconscious processing.
Answering this question can shed light on whether the fundamental conscious
experience is linked to activity in lower-level sensory systems, higher-level
brain systems in frontal cortex that developed later (in both phylogeny and
ontogeny), or interactions between the two. This investigation is also relevant
for understanding various disorders of consciousness such as persistent
vegetative state or minimally conscious state, in which individuals are non-
responsive, and where such findings could be a first step towards construction
of computer algorithms that could indicate the presence of conscious states.
Finally, with the adoption of machine learning and neural networks,
understanding the neural processes that lead to conscious experience in the
human brain could be useful in developing new network architectures designed to
more closely mimic human intelligence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
proposed research is to identify neural correlates of perceptual awareness using
a variety of methods such as electroencephalography and functional magnetic
resonance imaging. To examine this issue, the researchers will compare conscious
versus unconscious processing in the brains of awake human observers.
Specifically, they will investigate the differences in neural activity when
observers consciously perceive visual items compared to when those same items go
unnoticed. A critical problem in comparing conscious versus unconscious
processing is that it is difficult to separate the neural events associated with
conscious perception from the neural events associated with task performance
such as memory, decision-making, or verbal and manual responses. Therefore, the
researchers will use newly developed "no-report paradigms" that include
conditions in which stimuli are sometimes seen and sometimes unseen, but
observers are not required to report their perceptual experience. By comparing
differential neural activity for seen versus unseen stimuli when observers
report their experience versus when they do not, the researchers will have a
unique opportunity to test several leading theories of consciousness and to
identify minimally sufficient neural correlates of perceptual
awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.