* 1829071
* NRT-HDR: Modeling and Understanding Human Behavior: Harnessing Data from Genes to Social Networks
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Andrea Bertozzi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,000,000.00

A confluence of technologies is transforming the biological, environmental, and
social sciences into data-intensive sciences. Indeed, with the data now produced
every day, there exists an unprecedented opportunity to revolutionize the
journey of scientific discovery. By harnessing these data, one can advance the
understanding of human conditions, behaviors, and their underlying mechanisms
and social outcomes, enabling a spectrum of new and transformative research and
practice. Fundamental new approaches across computing, mathematics, engineering,
and sciences are critically needed, and future scientists must be accordingly
trained in these emergent cutting-edge methods. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of California, Los Angeles
will address this demand by training graduate students at the intersections of
data science, mathematics, cryptography, artificial intelligence, genomics,
behavior science, and social science. The traineeship program anticipates
training one hundred twenty (120) PhD students, including fifty (50) funded
trainees, from the social, biological, mathematical and computational sciences
and engineering, through a unique and comprehensive training opportunity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This cross-disciplinary traineeship program has four
research areas: genomics and genetics; brain imaging and image analysis; mobile
sensing and individual behaviors; and social networks. These areas are
interconnected through three core themes: mathematical modeling and network
analysis, scalable machine learning and big data analytics, and biomedical
applications and social outcomes. At the nexus of these research areas and core
themes, this traineeship program provides novel interdisciplinary graduate
education to advance both graduate student training and scientific research. Key
features of the traineeship include novel curricula; cross-disciplinary
laboratory rotations between engineering, life science, and social science; new
foundational classes at the intersections of data science, mathematics,
artificial intelligence, behavior science, and social science; summer
internships at research institutes, big data firms, and hospitals and
translational clinical settings; career, ethics, and technical communication
skills development; and outreach to minority, women, and high school students
with a distinct focus on groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM PhD
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.