* 1829473
* Neural Mechanisms in Learned Multitasking Improvements
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Adam Gazzaley, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 402,349.00

The overall aim of this project is to understand how the brain enables learned
improvements in multitasking ability. Multitasking is a complex cognitive
process that is prevalent in everyday life, from texting while walking to
driving while reading a street sign. It is well established that during
multitasking, both tasks are associated with performance declines, as compared
to when the tasks are independently performed. Fortunately, through practice and
learning, multitasking costs may be reduced. Yet, how the brain enables us to
enhance multitasking performance remains elusive. This project investigates
these questions by studying whether training can improve multitasking
performance, as well as the changes in brain responses that accompany such
improvement. It will also use interventions that impact brain activity and that
may themselves produce multitasking improvement. The importance of the current
project is in advancing the limited scientific knowledge in this domain, and in
enabling multiple activities and outcomes that will be relevant to society more
broadly. Apart from the scientific work, this project will offer several
volunteer opportunities for high school and college students. For all these
positions, women, persons with disabilities and minorities in STEM education
will be highly encouraged to apply. Second, the knowledge generated by this
research will be disseminated to the public through open-source publications,
public lectures, and media outlets. These findings will enhance our
understanding of multitasking ability, and developing therapeutics to target
populations who suffer from this cognitive decline or learning disorders. The
overall aim of this project is to address the hypothesis that regions within
prefrontal cortex rely on theta band (4-7 Hz) oscillations to enhance and
optimize multitasking ability. To achieve this, transcranial alternating current
stimulation (tACS) will be applied in the theta band above prefrontal cortex
while participants are engaged in multitasking: visual discrimination with a
concurrent visuomotor tracking task. Transcranial stimulation will be applied on
three consecutive days while participants are engaged in multitasking.
Participants will be assessed one day and one month after tACS to assess whether
theta stimulation above the prefrontal cortex facilitates learned improvements
in multitasking. Additionally, electroencephalography (EEG) data will be used to
assess changes in oscillatory activity that supports learned multitasking
improvements. It is hypothesized that tACS stimulations that impact theta
oscillations will be particularly effective in improving multitasking
performance, potentially impacting frontal theta EEG oscillatory power. To
evaluate whether these learned multitasking improvements arise from alterations
within the prefrontal cortex, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) data will be
collected from each participant and used to form individualized models of the
tACS-induced electric fields in the brain. It is hypothesized that due to
anatomical differences that impede tACS current flow to the brain, participants
with greater modeled electric fields in the medial prefrontal cortex will
exhibit the greatest increases in prefrontal theta oscillations and the largest
improvements in multitasking ability. The proposed research will provide a
direct assessment of mechanisms by which brain networks give rise to learned
improvements in multitasking ability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.