* 1829089
* I-Corps Sites:  Type I - Accelerate WPI, Worcester Polytechnic's I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Mark Rice, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 255,000.00

This project establishes an I-Corps Site at Worcester Polytechnic Institute
(WPI) through its Innovation and Entrepreneurship Center at the Foisie
Innovation Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are
NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The I-Corps Site at WPI trains students and
faculty in the value proposition and customer segments analysis of the Business
Model Canvas as originated by Osterwalder. The I-Corps Site impacts campus-wide
stakeholders, adding value to WPI's project-based education. The I-Corps Site at
WPI provides the necessary infrastructure, resources, and training to enable
groups (teams) to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming
I-Corps Teams applicants. Under the leadership of WPI's President, Innovation
and Entrepreneurship has been identified as one of the critical six pillars of
WPI's vision and strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.