* 1829258
* Collaborative Research:  Using Gravity Waves to Probe the Solar Atmosphere
* GEO,OPP
* 11/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Stuart Jefferies, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Papitashvili
* 09/30/2020
* USD 693,673.00

This research is targeted at making a fundamental breakthrough in understanding
of the dynamics of the solar atmosphere by conducting the first detailed
observational characterization of the Sun's internal gravity waves. These waves
are likely playing a significant role in the dynamics of the Sun?s atmosphere
(that affects Earth's "space weather"), but little is known about them because
of difficulties observing their oblique paths and small vertical wavelengths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will radically change this situation by
determining the role internal gravity waves play in the energy balance of the
solar atmosphere - both the "traditional" gravity waves with frequencies below
the Lamb frequency and the recently discovered "anomalous" gravity waves with
frequencies above the Lamb frequency. This will be accomplished by combining the
data from two high sensitivity and stability Doppler magnetographs deployed to
the Antarctic South Pole Station along with the data collected by the
Helioseismic Magnetic Imager instrument on-board the NASA's Solar Dynamics
Observatory (SDO) in space. The project will be imaging "line-of-sight" solar
plasma velocity fields with high spatial resolution at three separate heights in
the solar atmosphere. These images will provide the basis for the first detailed
characterization of the properties of internal gravity waves as a first step
towards developing suitable diagnostic tools for probing the solar atmosphere
from the ground. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid science, collaborative effort, and
the Doppler magnetographs' deployment to Antarctica provide an ideal opportunity
to achieve excellent education and outreach goals. By providing undergraduates
and college students with Antarctic research experience, the proposal
demonstrates how a future generation of researchers can make meaningful
contributions to the cutting-edge science.