* 1829864
* Interdisciplinary Research and Training at the Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Program
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Claudia Cenedese, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,627,523.00

The Geophysical Fluid Dynamics (GFD) Summer Program began in 1959 at the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution with the aim of introducing a then relatively new
topic in mathematical physics, geophysical fluid dynamics, to graduate students
in physical sciences. It has been held each summer since and promotes an
exchange of ideas among the many distinct fields that share a common interest in
the dynamics of rotating, stratified fluids with similar properties and dynamics
as the oceans. It is a ten-week program of interdisciplinary research and
training entering its 6th decade of activity. By its very nature, the GFD
program promotes the dissemination and exchange of scientific results among
researchers from different backgrounds and at different career stages. New
techniques from different disciplines are readily transferred across
disciplinary borders, and a culture of unity and synergy between research and
training is passed on to the fellows. The program often is the crucial mechanism
by which the fellows meet prospective employers at the postdoctoral level and
beyond, thus broadening their scientific network. The GFD program has global
appeal and in the past, has attracted extremely talented young scientists to the
US for postdoctoral research and academic positions through exposure to the US
research community at a key formative moment in their careers. The topics
selected for the proposed five-year cycle have strong broader impacts both in
the disciplinary fields and to society at large. In a nutshell, the GFD Program
acts as a conduit through which recent mathematical advances can improve the
description of the global climate system, an issue of vital and important
societal concern. Finally, the annual GFD Public Lecture targeted toward a
general audience introduces the local community to the science of
GFD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GFD program provides a uniquely stimulating and
supportive environment for cross-pollination of ideas and approaches among a
wide range of subjects including applied mathematics, oceanography, fluid
dynamics, geophysics, geology, meteorology, astrophysics, planetary science,
engineering, and physics. Research and graduate training go hand in hand: a
small group of outstanding graduate students (typically ten) known as "fellows"
are charged with conducting advanced projects for the bulk of the summer and
presenting their results in both oral and written reports during the final week.
The fellows' research projects are individually or jointly supervised by members
of the GFD staff -- a group of summer-long participants who are academics from
the diverse fields represented at GFD -- and thereby often catalyze new long-
lasting and productive collaborations among multiple advisors from varying
fields and the fellows, and indeed among the fellows themselves. Furthermore,
the fellows' research horizons are naturally broadened by working in such a
concentrated fashion, both in terms of exposure to different research fields
from those on which their theses are based, and in terms of the exposure to
different techniques (mathematical, numerical or experimental) from those they
have previously employed. The experience of working across traditional academic
boundaries is a central, and highly valuable part of the training in the GFD
program, and prepares the fellows well for future academic careers in emergent
research fields. Each year, the program has a focus on a "theme" relevant to
geophysical fluid dynamics, often selected to address an emergent key research
challenge with immediate societal relevance and multidisciplinary character. The
summer opens with two weeks of intensive principal lectures on the theme,
typically given by two or more acknowledged experts. Thereafter, daily seminars
are given by invited visitors and the staff. For 2019-2023 the proposed themes
are: Stratified Turbulence and Ocean Mixing Processes, Data-driven Modeling in
GFD, Exoplanetary GFD, Multiscale Modeling: Links to the Ocean Submesoscale, and
Variational Methods in GFD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.