* 1829520
* Integrating Geophysical and Geochemical Data to Understand the Hydration and Thermal State of the Colorado Plateau Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Thomas Hoisch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 12/31/2023
* USD 304,824.00

The Colorado Plateau, located in the states of Utah, Arizona, New Mexico, and
Colorado, is home to some of the most spectacular scenery and geologic exposures
within the US. However, the region is enigmatic geologically for its high
elevation, the occurrence of modern volcanism along its margins, and rocks that
have not experienced the folding and faulting normally associated with mountain
building. It is also unusual because mountain building and volcanism typically
occur at the edges of tectonic plates, whereas the Colorado Plateau is located
far from the margins of the North American plate. Previous work has suggested
that the mantle beneath the margins of the Colorado Plateau is undergoing small-
scale convection, which brings hot material at depth closer to the surface. This
hot mantle material then heats the lower crust, which is believed to contain an
unusual amount of water-rich minerals due to the absorption of water that was
released from a subducting oceanic plate passing beneath the area earlier in its
history. Water lowers the melting temperature of rocks, and heating may
contribute to uplift and melting within the region. This project will use
geophysical and geochemical data along with thermodynamic and temperature
modeling to better understand the subsurface structure, the amount of water, and
the temperatures beneath the margins of the Colorado Plateau. The goal of this
work is to improve our understanding of the tectonic evolution of the Colorado
Plateau and better understand the causes of volcanism along its margins in
places such as the western Grand Canyon and the San Francisco Volcanic field.
This project will train students in modern geochemical and geophysical
techniques and will support a workshop to bring together researchers who address
these and similar problems. Ultimately, this work will provide insight into the
global tectonic processes that build and support high elevations and produce
volcanic activity far from plate margins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
tectonics of western North America have long been influenced by plate boundary
processes occurring along the continent's western margin. These processes have a
complex history in which variations in plate convergence direction, slab dip,
and the transition from a convergent to a transform margin have significantly
altered the state of the lithosphere and asthenosphere and led to multiple
episodes of deformation across the region. The Colorado Plateau is located
within this intraplate deformation zone and is notable for its resistance to
deformation and high surface elevations with no obvious driving mechanism for
uplift. Despite its long-term stability, as evidenced by exposures of flat-lying
Paleozoic rocks, the Colorado Plateau has recently been identified as a region
influenced by small-scale mantle convection along its margins and it is argued
that the plateau is succumbing to volcanism and extension encroaching into its
interior. For these reasons, the Colorado Plateau provides an ideal location to
study how stable continental lithosphere evolves with time and how "cratonic"
lithosphere may destabilize. To develop a better understanding of these
processes, we will conduct an integrative study focused on the Colorado
Plateau's upper mantle that will compile existing seismic and geochemical data,
analyze a small targeted set of geochemical samples to address knowledge gaps,
inverse model seismic and geochemical data to constrain melt conditions, and
utilize thermodynamic modeling to determine stable mineral assemblages, melt
percentages, density, and potential hydration states. The synthesized results
will be used to test the hypotheses that lithospheric hydration is an important
control on the uplift of the Colorado Plateau and that small-scale convection is
driving both melting and volcanism, and contributing to uplift and deformation
on the edges of the plateau. The specific questions to be addressed with our
geophysical, geochemical, and modelling work are: What is the modern density
structure of the Colorado Plateau lithosphere, how did Farallon flat-slab
subduction hydrate the overriding lithosphere, how does continental lithospheric
density evolve through time, and have lithospheric downwellings occurred beneath
the Colorado Plateau? The findings from this work will have global implications
for the tectonic evolution of the region and for the density evolution of
continental lithosphere in both active deformational belts and stable
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.