* 1829826
* Network Comparison, a Cornerstone of the Foundations of Network Science
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2017,02/28/2022
* Laurent Hebert-Dufresne, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 02/28/2022
* USD 128,672.00

"Big data" increasingly means big networks, because such data either directly
concerns relational structures as in human and animal mobility patterns, gene
interaction networks, or is influenced by an underlying relational structure as
in epidemiological studies, urban studies, and cultural diffusion. Most
applications of networks rely crucially on comparing networks, for example to
detect changes in one network across time, to categorize or classify multiple
networks of similar types, or to build analogies across fields by comparing
networks of different origins. The question of how to compare two networks in a
principled way, without relying on the ad hoc choice of statistics used by many
current comparison methods, is key to the foundations of network science. This
project will bring to bear new ideas from mathematics, computer science, and
statistical physics on the problem of principled, structural comparison of
networks. Through pre-existing collaborations, the PIs will leverage these new
comparison methods to address questions in several different areas, for example,
about: how food webs change across gradients like latitude, altitude, and
temperature,morphological growth patterns of bacterial colonies, the evolution
of human culture and communities, and links between socio-economic indicators
and epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project will develop new
rigorous and principled methods of comparing the structure of complex networks.
The methods to be pursued aim to get away from single-scale summary statistics;
to break new ground, we must think in terms of structural distance rather than
statistical inference. In combination with tools from machine learning, such
structural comparison methods are an important step towards defining the "space
of real-world networks", which could serve as a more rigorous basis for a theory
of complex networks. These methods have four advantageous features: (1) they
systematically consider multiple scales of network organization, (2) they do not
depend on an identification of the nodes of the two networks beforehand, (3)
they can compare networks of different sizes, and (4) they are not dependent on
any particular generative model of network growth. Very few, if any, of the
existing network comparison methods have all of these features, and those that
do exist have not been extensively developed. These features enable many new
applications in a range of areas, including ecology, microbiology, cultural
evolution, and epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.