* 1829796
* Decadal trends in oceanic anthropogenic CO2 from the CLIVAR and GO-SHIP d13C datasets and in an ocean biogeochemistry model
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2022
* USD 557,995.00

The ocean has absorbed about a third of the fossil fuel carbon dioxide (CO2)
that humans have emitted, slowing the accumulation of CO2 and its associated
trapping of thermal energy in the atmosphere. The research aims to improve our
understanding of how this ocean uptake of CO2 will change when ocean circulation
responds to continuing changes in climate. Researchers will use observations of
the isotopic ratio of carbon (13C/12C) of seawater and atmospheric samples, as a
high signal/noise method to determine air-sea transfer rates and storage in the
ocean interior of fossil-fuel CO2. Also, a state-of the art ocean C-cycling
model will be used to validate the model's air-sea exchange rates and upper
ocean storage of fossil-fuel CO2. The additional information provided by 13CO2
will establish important benchmarks on ocean-atmosphere and biosphere-atmosphere
C exchanges in models used for forecasting future changes in climate. Results
would be incorporated into an outreach program through the University of
Washington's Program on Climate Change to educate the public on the impact of
human activity and climate on the ocean, atmosphere, and earth. One postdoc
would be supported and trained as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand the processes that
control the evolution of the anthropogenic carbon dioxide (CO2) signal in the
ocean, we will utilize two characteristics of dissolved inorganic 13Carbon
(DIC13) that distinguish it from DIC. First, the 10x longer air-sea
equilibration time for DIC13 yields a well-constrained air-sea 13CO2 flux in all
basins that is resolvable on decadal time scales. Second, the anthropogenic
DIC13 accumulation in the ocean is quantifiable to better signal to noise than
anthropogenic DIC itself. The availability of ocean del13C and DIC data from
WOCE, CLIVAR and GO-SHIP provide the opportunity to quantify, based on
observations alone, the evolution and transports of the anthropogenic DIC and
DIC13 signal on regional and global scales in the ocean. Implementation of the
anthropogenic DIC and DIC13 perturbations into an ocean model, driven by
interannually varying winds, will yield simulations of the DIC and DIC13
evolution that we will compare to observations, helping to identify likely
processes causing interdecadal shifts in the rate of this evolution. The
combination of observations and model analysis tracking the decadal DIC13 and
DIC perturbations are designed to improve our insight into the ocean's important
role in modulating climate by taking up and storing anthropogenic
CO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.