* 1829777
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Using Time-series Field Observations to Constrain an Ocean Iron Model
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Kristen Buck, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 01/31/2023
* USD 338,566.00

Iron is an essential nutrient for the growth of phytoplankton in the oceans. As
such, iron plays key roles in regulating marine primary production and the
cycling of carbon. It is thus important that models of ocean biology and
chemistry consider iron, in order to explore past, present and future variations
in marine productivity and the role of the ocean in the global carbon cycle. In
this joint project involving researchers in the U.S. and the U.K., supported by
both NSF and the Natural Environment Research Council (U.K.), field data from
the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study (BATS) region will be combined with an
established, state-of-the-art ocean biogeochemical model. By leveraging the
known seasonal-scale physical, chemical and biological changes in the BATS
region, the oceanographic context provided by the BATS core data, and an
existing model of the regional physical circulation, the proposed study will
yield process-related information that is of general applicability to the open
ocean. In particular, the proposed research will focus on understanding the
atmospheric input, biological uptake, regeneration and scavenging removal of
dissolved iron in the oceanic water column, which have emerged as major
uncertainties in the ocean iron cycle. The project will include significant
educational and training contributions at the K-12, undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels, as well as public outreach efforts that aim to explain the
research and its importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability of
ocean models to simulate iron remains crude, owing to an insufficient
understanding of the mechanisms that drive variability in dissolved iron,
particularly the involvement of iron-binding ligands, colloids and particles in
the surface input, biological uptake, regeneration and scavenging of dissolved
iron in the upper ocean. Basin-scale data produced by the GEOTRACES program
provide an important resource for testing and improving models and, by
extension, our mechanistic understanding of the ocean iron cycle. However such
data provide only quasi-synoptic 'snapshots', which limits their utility in
isolating and identifying the processes that control dissolved iron in the upper
ocean. The proposed research aims to provide mechanistic insight into these
governing processes by combining time-series data from the BATS region with
numerical modeling experiments. Specifically, seasonally resolved data on the
vertical (upper 2,000 meters) and lateral (tens of kilometers) distributions of
particulate, dissolved, colloidal, soluble and ligand-bound iron species will be
obtained from the chemical analysis of water column samples collected during
five cruises, spanning a full annual cycle, shared with the monthly BATS program
cruises. These data, along with ancillary data from the BATS program, will be
used to test and inform numerical modeling experiments, and thus derive an
improved understanding of the mechanisms that control the distribution and
dynamics of dissolved iron in the oceanic water
column.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.