* 1829740
* CyberTraining: CIU: The LSST Data Science Fellowship Program
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Adam Miller, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 499,251.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) Training-based Workforce Development for
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure award supplements graduate education in astronomy
by providing in-depth training in the skills necessary to make scientific
discoveries using big data. Ongoing and future surveys, such as the NSF's
flagship optical telescope project, the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST),
are producing data at an unprecedented rate. The sheer size of these data sets
requires new working practices: sophisticated computational software and data
mining procedures are necessary to fully exploit the rich information present in
the data. However, these skills are not typically a core component of the
astronomy and astrophysics graduate curriculum. The LSST Data Science Fellowship
Program (DSFP) supplements traditional educational programs by training students
in a variety of data science methods to work with and ultimately analyze big
data. DSFP students are selected from a wide variety of universities using an
innovative admissions procedure that increases the participation of students
from underrepresented groups. Furthermore, DSFP students are trained in science
communication and receive a certification in teaching data science so they can
tutor peers and lead training workshops in the material learned as part of the
program. The project serves the national interest, as stated by the National
Science Foundation's mission: to promote the progress of science, by training
the next generation of astronomers to have the computing skills necessary to
derive scientific insights from the largest telescopic surveys that have ever
been conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DSFP students attend six week-long sessions
over the course of two years as part of their program training. Each session is
hosted by a different institution and designed to focus on a single topic
including: the basics of managing and building code, statistics, machine
learning, scalable programming, data management, image processing,
visualization, and science communication. This curriculum empowers trainees to
ask broader questions of their data, prepares them for the technical challenges
associated with LSST, and exposes them to the tools and methods necessary to
advance fundamental science research. Student participants spread the adoption
of data science tools, methods, and resources via the aforementioned teaching
workshops, fostering new pathways to discovery in the broader research
community. Students must work in collaborative groups, which in conjunction with
their science communication training, enhances their leadership and mentoring
skills. To reach a broad audience, all materials developed as part of the
program are made available to the public, and a guide to convert the material
into a semester-long course at the undergraduate or graduate level is provided.
This program prepares students for success in a wide range of careers, providing
education in data science methodologies, domain-
specific&lt;br/&gt;considerations, and professional skill development in
research, teaching, and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.