* 1829976
* Using genomics to link traits to ecosystem function in the eelgrass Zostera marina
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Richard Grosberg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 816,486.00

Seagrass ecosystems provide important services to coastal regions, including
primary production, carbon storage, nutrient cycling, habitat for fisheries
species, and erosion control. At the same time, eelgrass is threatened by direct
destruction, pollution, and other human impacts on the environment. We know that
genetic diversity in eelgrass enhances seagrass bed growth and persistence, but
application of this knowledge to restoration and conservation is limited. This
work will guide restoration programs by considering what specific aspects of
diversity are important to conservation and restoration of seagrass ecosystems,
helping to guide the selection of source material to improve restoration success
(which is often low). The project integrates the effects of multiple components
of diversity and clarifies the extent to which genetic and ecological uniqueness
can predict ecosystem functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:
Genetic diversity as measured by the number of genetically distinct individuals
(genets) in an assemblage influences critical ecosystem functions in a wide
range of ecosystems. Functional diversity, the presence of key traits, or
population flexibility to respond to environmental change are all potential
mechanisms underlying these patterns, but distinguishing among them requires a
clear link between genetic diversity and the phenotypes present in an
assemblage. The investigators, and others, have previously demonstrated that
genet diversity in eelgrass (Zostera marina) increases stand productivity,
animal community diversity, and resilience to environmental change. These genet
diversity effects are associated with increases in genetically determined trait
diversity. Predicting trait diversity without having to measure traits of every
genet remains a major barrier to wider application of functional diversity
approaches in restoration and management. In this project, the investigators
assess the association between Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) across the
genome and performance-related traits that we will measure at the individual,
population, and seascape-scale. They also assess environmental correlates of
trait differentiation from field sampling. Finally, the research team will
compare the predictive power of genomic SNP diversity versus other metrics of
intraspecific diversity for the functioning (productivity, invertebrate
abundance) of field planted eelgrass assemblages. If genomic variation can
reliably be used to predict functional traits, then the value of genomic
sequencing efforts for informing management will be greatly enhanced. Broader
Impacts: Seagrass restoration and mitigation is currently of major interest in
California and elsewhere and the project results will inform current initiatives
regarding eelgrass management in California through the state's Ocean Protection
Council. In addition to recruiting individual students from diverse backgrounds
to work on the project, the project broadens participation of students in STEM
fields through its partnership with three existing outreach/training programs at
UC Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.