* 1829333
* Next Generation Raman: Developing A Monolithic Spatial Heterodyne Spectrometer For Multi-Scale Chemical Mapping In Marine Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Timothy Shaw, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2022
* USD 590,897.00

The goal of this project is to develop a radically new type of instrument, a
monolithic Raman spectrometer, designed to generate chemical images of solids
liquids and/or gases in ocean environments at all depths. The instrument uses a
technique called Raman Spectroscopy, where light scattered off of a sample at
composition specific wavelengths (colors) is collected in a 2-dimensional (2D)
image (picture) to produce a chemical map of the sampling area. In this project
the key technological advancement is the new type of Raman instrument, called a
Monolithic Spatial Heterodyne Raman Spectrometer (MSHRS). Although great
progress has been made in the development of instrument platforms and sampling
systems necessary to support Raman spectroscopy for oceanographic applications,
advances in Raman spectrometer technology have not kept pace for use in these
environments. The value of Raman measurements, balanced by the effort and cost
of deploying current instruments, justifies the development of a new type of
Raman spectrometer that is suitable for extreme environments like the deep
ocean. The MSHRS being developed in this project overcomes some major
limitations with existing systems for operation in the oceans such as instrument
size and weight, power requirement, ruggedness (no moving parts), and
sensitivity. The MSHRS technology being developed will allow deployment of
instrument platforms and sampling systems necessary to support Raman
spectroscopy for a broad range of oceanographic applications. This will support
Raman measurements on minerals, opaque solids, and in water for important
chemical species such as methane, carbon dioxide (CO2), sulfate, and sulfides in
environments to depths up to 3.6 km, where the pressure is 360 times higher than
at the surface. The MSHRS will generate chemical maps to show the 1D and 2D
spatial distribution of these and other chemicals, even in complex mixtures
typical of natural environments. The value of Raman measurements, balanced by
the effort and cost of deploying current instruments, justifies the development
of this new type of Raman spectrometer. The proposed MSHRS alone will be a major
advance over "off the shelf" spectrometers currently used in marine Raman
applications, reducing the size while increasing robustness and sensitivity over
conventional designs. And, when combined with small diode lasers and the latest
imaging detectors, the instrument can be truly miniaturized with no loss of
performance. The MSHRS is potentially small enough to be deployed on autonomous
swimming and drifting platforms (called gliders, Argo floats) or manipulator
arms on remotely operated vehicles (ROVs). This work will support the
development of a new Raman capability that will facilitate a wide range of new
applications as well as basic chemical measurements in marine systems and will
fuel transformative oceanographic research. While the focus of the proposed work
is the study of process dynamics for oceanographic applications; the technology
has much wider applicability. In addition to support of basic and applied
research, industrial applications using the new capability for on-line analysis
and process evaluation are likely. The investigators have a long history of
mentoring students from underrepresented groups and the two students supported
by this project are current female graduate students. These students will also
benefit by collaborating with scientists at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory and will gain a National Lab perspective on homeland security and
defense applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Spatial Heterodyne Raman
Spectrometer (SHRS), recently described by Angels group (the project principal
investigator, PI), is a radically different design, offering tremendous
advantages over conventional dispersive Raman systems, including 10 to 100 times
larger acceptance angle and subsequently a much larger field of view, 100 to
10,000 higher light throughput for extended sources, very high spectral
resolution and a wide spectral range. The SHRS design also allows for the
spectrometer to be extremely small because the spectral resolution is not a
strong function of device size. In the proposed work we will take the SHRS to
the next level by developing a Monolithic SHRS (MSHRS) where the spectrometer
optical components are a single piece of fused silica. This will provide a
robust Raman spectrometer, immune to shock and vibrations, with increased
sensitivity at a size and weight orders of magnitude smaller than current
oceanographic Raman instruments. The MSHRS will be evaluated in terms of
resolution, spectral range, throughput and robustness to vibration. Raman system
figures of merit (e.g., resolution, sensitivity, light throughput, etc.) will be
determined using solid, liquid, solutions and gases. In model applications we
will evaluate the MSHRS for monitoring reaction dynamics in model oxic/anoxic
mixing systems characteristic of a range of oceanographic environments. As a
measure of the stability and precision of the MSHRS we will also evaluate its
use for measuring selected isotope ratios for species relevant to the
fundamental ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.