* 1829412
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Japan-U.S. Collaboration on the Seismic Resilience of Wood-frame Building Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Chris Pantelides, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 04/30/2020
* USD 12,999.00

Light-frame wood single- and multi- family dwellings represent the majority of
the residential building stock in the United States and form an important
underpinning infrastructure for national welfare. Although significant progress
has been made during the past decade to better understand the seismic response
of wood-frame building systems and identify sustainable seismic retrofit
methods, most studies have focused only on the structural system and
nonstructural component response. Building interactions with lifeline components
(e.g., utility piping systems) and soil-structure interaction during seismic
events have not been widely investigated either analytically or experimentally.
This Grant for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) will support a team of
researchers from U.S. universities to collaborate with researchers from Japanese
universities on experimental seismic studies of wood-frame building systems that
will be conducted at the world's largest shake table (E-Defense) in Miki, Japan
in early 2019. The goal of this RAPID project is to collect time-sensitive data
and plan payload tests for the experimental studies at the E-Defense shake table
on two full-scale, three-story wood-frame buildings as a sub-project of the
"Tokyo Metropolitan Resilience Project" supported in Japan by the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the National Research
Institute for Earth Science and Disaster Resilience (NIED). The outcomes of this
research will include a database, recorded using the advanced technologies of
the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
Natural Hazards Reconnaissance Facility equipment (https://rapid.designsafe-
ci.org/), on the seismic performance of typical wood-frame building systems, the
efficiency of sustainable seismic retrofit methods, and the complex soil-
structural-nonstructural-lifeline interactions. The data from these experimental
tests can be used to advance computational models for the prediction of building
performance, repair times, and post-event functionality rates. The results of
this research will also enable decision-makers to better understand the nature
of interdependency between the multiple attributes of a residential unit and the
efficiency of the various seismic retrofit techniques and will assist in
planning and investments to reduce seismic vulnerability. The collected data
will be archived and made publicly available in the NSF-supported NHERI Data
Depot (https://www.designsafe-ci.org/). This project will train a graduate
student and promote international collaboration between Japanese and U.S.
colleagues working together on enhancing the resilience of wood-frame building
systems in urban environments through the established partnership of the NSF-
supported NHERI with Japan's NIED. The findings of this project will be
disseminated through a public webinar as well as podcasts on the NHERI web site
(https://www.designsafe-ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this RAPID project, the
collaborative Japanese and U.S. research team will investigate the seismic
resilience of wood-frame building systems tested at the E-Defense shake table as
well as testing various seismic retrofit/repair solutions for enhancing urban
community resilience. The design of wood-frame residential construction in Japan
is considerably comparable to U.S. residential design. The objectives of this
project are twofold: (1) collect damage and repair/restoration data during the
E-Defense tests for different levels of seismic intensity until complete
structural collapse, accounting for the interaction of structural and
nonstructural components, soil-structure interaction, and lifeline utility
performance (both for conventional designs as well as for solutions with seismic
retrofits), and (2) identify opportunities for payload projects such as
retrofits, various utility systems, and nonstructural components. The collected
data will be used to establish a holistic performance of housing recovery based
on the assessment of the complex interaction among seismic hazard
characteristics, human decision-making processes, building and retrofit
attributes, and economic factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.