* 1829771
* CyberTraining:CIC: DeapSECURE: A Data-Enabled Advanced Training Program for Cyber Security Research and Education
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Masha Sosonkina, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

As the volume and sophistication of cyber-attacks grow, cybersecurity
researchers, engineers and practitioners heavily rely on advanced
cyberinfrastructure (CI) techniques such as big data, machine learning, and
parallel programming, as well as advanced CI platforms, e.g., cloud and high-
performance computing to assess cyber risks, identify and mitigate threats, and
achieve defense in depth. However, advanced CI techniques have not been widely
introduced in undergraduate and graduate cybersecurity curricula. This lack
creates a hurdle for many senior undergraduates and early-stage graduate
cybersecurity students who are keen to conduct cutting-edge cybersecurity
research and/or participate in advanced industrial cybersecurity projects. This
project introduces a unique Data-Enabled Advanced Training Program for Cyber
Security Research and Education (DeapSECURE), aimed to prepare undergraduate and
graduate students with advanced CI techniques and teach them to use CI
resources, tools, and services to succeed in cutting-edge cybersecurity research
and industrial cybersecurity projects. The project responds to the urgent need
for well-prepared cybersecurity workforce in the Hampton Roads metropolitan
region, the Commonwealth of Virginia, and the Nation. It, thus, serves the
national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of
science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure
the national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops six new CI
training modules which emphasize the practical use of the advanced CI
techniques, especially the tools that implement them, in the context of
cybersecurity research. Each training module includes three sections: (1) an
overview presented by an invited cybersecurity faculty about his/her research,
concluding with a research problem that heavily depends on CI techniques; (2) an
introduction of corresponding CI skills, tools and platforms; (3) a hands-on lab
session where students will apply the CI techniques to solve the research
problem formerly introduced by the cybersecurity faculty. The modules will be
delivered via two distinct means: monthly workshops and summer institutes. Six
monthly workshops are conducted during academic year, primarily targeting
students enrolled at Old Dominion University (ODU). The summer institutes
present these six modules to students from local community colleges, Research
Experiences for Undergraduates program at ODU, and other Virginia universities;
they also include special activities such as field trips, open house for K-12
students, Cyber Night events, cybersecurity career panels, and student
competitions. Complementing the workshops and summer institutes, an online
continuous learning community is created, which includes a virtual computer lab
and a student forum, as a place for students to continue their learning
engagement after the face-to-face sessions. Archived workshop materials, as well
as additional learning materials are also posted on this online platform as open
educational resources, to be made available to the cybersecurity research and
education communities. The open-source style development of the learning modules
facilitates a wide-range of adoption, adaptations, and contributions in an
efficient manner. The project leverages existing and new partnerships to ensure
broad participation, and accordingly broaden the adoption of advanced CI
techniques in the cybersecurity community. The project employs a rigorous
assessment and evaluation plan rooted in diverse metrics of success to improve
the curricula and demonstrate its effectiveness. The metrics, which are based on
the students' outcomes and exit surveys, are assessed by an independent
evaluator. The adoption of the learning modules outside of the training program
is also considered as a metric of success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.