* 1829199
* I-Corps Sites: Type I - University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jose Lugo, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 305,909.00

This project, from the University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez (UPRM), establishes
and I-Corps Site at this institution. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-
funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Puerto Rico faces an critical economic
situation. The UPRM I-Corps Site, in playing a role in the possible solution
spaces, contributes to developing a strong innovation and entrepreneurial
ecosystem that can spur the translation of research into commercialization. UPRM
is uniquely situated to provide an interdisciplinary educational experience that
will allow their community to identify and exploit market opportunities. UPRM's
campus has a Business School that actively collaborates with the Schools of
Engineering. The Business and Economic Development Center (BEDC) is at the
center of this collaboration and hosts the NSF I-Corps Site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to accelerate the
commercialization of new technologies developed by researchers and students
located in Puerto Rico. To achieve this goal this Site provides customer
discovery (CD) training, mentoring, and modest CD travel funds to
entrepreneurial teams (focused on STEM) from UPRM and the extended community.
The CD training consists of a two week workshop based on the national I-Corps
program and tailored to the UPRM Site needs. Mentorship is provided by UPRM and
external innovation ecosystem partners, and extends for a three to six month
period, with a focus on working toward either application to the I-Corps
National Program, competing for SBIR grants, or direct commercialization of the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.