* 1829268
* Collaborative Research: Modeling the Invention, Dissemination, and Translation of Scientific Concepts
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Xiang Ren, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 239,988.00

Scientific advance rests on discovery, dissemination, and translation. And yet,
most discoveries fail to get noticed and have practical relevance. Nearly every
university, discipline, foundation, government and company would like to know
not just how to facilitate the creation of new scientific ideas, but how to get
those ideas to spread and relate to practical issues in the world. To address
such challenges, this research follows leading philosophers of science who argue
that scientific concepts are the basic unit of knowledge, and it is there people
observe scientific revolutions and advance. This research identifies scientific
concepts using natural language processing techniques. With concepts in hand, it
intends to model their interrelation in documents as forming an accumulated
knowledge network to which every new publication's conceptual relations can be
compared. Through comparison one will identify conceptual discoveries as the
arrival of new concepts and conceptual relations. Results from this project will
inform a variety of stakeholders concerned with intellectual innovation. The
findings will have practical relevance by identifying where and when scholars
make creative intellectual contributions, contributions that garner wider
attention and reception in fields and domains far afield from academe. It will
also identify levers for facilitating more rapid forms of discovery,
dissemination and translation. Findings from this research will thus have direct
relevance to decisions by academics, government agencies, and non-governmental
organizations trying to accelerate scientific advance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research conducts three interrelated
projects that identify the social conditions giving rise to concept discovery,
dissemination, and translation. The first study asks what are the conditions
that give rise to scientific discoveries like new concepts and new conceptual
relations? Here the project identifies ecological conditions, resources, and
demographic compositions that enable forms of conceptual creativity. The second
study follows concepts over time and seeks to understand how they garner
attention. Notably, only some conceptual discoveries actually spread and get
repeatedly used. What are the initial conditions surrounding a concept's
creation that predicts its entire career? Here, the project intends to study new
concepts and new concept linkages, and it will look at their staging (start) and
implementation (preceding moment) practices so as to determine what drives the
heightened usage of some concepts over others. The third study will follow
concepts as they spread beyond their discipline and to domains outside of
academia. There the project analyzes how concepts translate across fields, or
how they move from basic research applications to applied ones such as those
found in patents. It also asks how scientific concepts get archived as accepted
knowledge in encyclopedia such as Wikipedia. What leads an idea to go from
theory, to applied use, to public acceptance? Again, are there ecological
conditions and socio-cultural resources that enable an idea to move across
social domains? This research will generate and share unique linked data, and it
will create new empirical models and extensions of theory that will shift the
way scholars conceive of scientific advance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.