* 1829090
* Conference: FASEB Summer Research Conference on Dynamic DNA Structures in Biology, July 2018, St. Bonaventure University, Olean, NY
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Catherine Freudenreich, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 04/30/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the FASEB Conference on Dynamic DNA Structures in Biology to be
held July 8-13, 2018 at St. Bonaventure University, Olean, NY. This is an
evolving field that continues to bring together researchers with complementary
interests in nucleic acid chemistry, biochemistry, genetics, and genome
architecture and function. The meeting will include keynote lectures by two
leaders in the field. Formal sessions will include a combination of plenary
lectures, talks and poster sessions to encourage sharing of latest research
results. Informal opportunities will be provided for junior researchers to learn
from established investigators at a 'meet the speakers' lunch and a career
discussion with senior researchers from both academia and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA molecules are highly dynamic and can adopt a variety
of conformations that play important roles in the function and regulation of
genes and genomes. Recent advances in the field--including gene editing and the
role played by chromatin and the DNA damage response in transcription-associated
genome instability--will be highlighted in this meeting. Other topics for
discussion will be chromosome breaks and genomic rearrangements; structure-
induced genome instability; replication through roadblocks; transcription-
induced mutations; expandable DNA repeats and human disease; DNA repair and
rearrangement, and G-quadruplexes. The meeting will bring provide an excellent
forum for junior investigators, including those from underrepresented groups, to
hear about latest research in the U.S. and abroad, to meet and talk with leaders
in the field, and to have an opportunity to present and receive feedback on
their own research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.