* 1829123
* I-Corps: Microfluidic platform for cell characterization and modification
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Alexander Alexeev, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will make
cutting edge cell therapies more affordable and accessible for a larger patient
population. Cell therapies are among the most promising treatments for life-
threatening diseases, such as cancer and severe immunodeficiency. While these
cell therapies have been recently FDA approved, they remain extremely expensive,
with single treatment costing hundreds of thousands of dollars. Manufacturing
cell therapies requires expensive reagents and facilities and highly skilled
labor, which drives up healthcare costs and makes cell therapies unattainable
for many patients in greatest need. This I-Corps project aims to revolutionize
the field of cell therapy manufacturing with an innovatively low-cost cell
processing technology. This approach can efficiently modify normal cells into
potent cell therapies and isolate desired cell populations for quality control.
It benefits from low cost operation and eliminates the need in expensive skilled
personal. This technology has a great potential to usher in a new era of
affordable cell therapies and cost-effective healthcare.

This I-Corps project utilizes a microfluidic platform that can sort and engineer
cells with little to no impact on cell viability and function. Instead of
relying on expensive and dangerous methods such as viruses or electric shock,
the approach relies on natural cell response to rapid compressions to cause the
processed cells to uptake molecules that can turn cells into life-saving cell
therapies. This uptake can also be used to deliver labels to the cell interior
to indicate desirable or undesirable cell traits for an easy and rapid readout
for quality control. The entire technology is housed on a microfluidic chip that
can process over 100,000 cells per second. The technology for cell sorting makes
use of inherent cell mechanical properties and does not require any additional
chemical or biological cell modification. This microfluidic platform can perform
tasks that are normally extremely complicated, such as cell engineering, cell
labeling, and cell sorting, providing efficient and cost-effective solutions for
both making cell therapies and processing them into safe, high-quality
treatments.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.