* 1829350
* Collaborative Research: CompCog: Broad-coverage probabilistic models of communication in context
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Roger Levy, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 115,338.00

People often mean more than they say. To take an example, imagine Adam says "I
could use a cup of coffee" and Bob responds by saying "There's a place called
Joe's around the corner." We understand this as a coherent exchange even though
Adam's utterance wasn't phrased overtly as a question and Bob didn't explicitly
say that Joe's sells coffee. Extracting this rich additional meaning requires us
to consider sentences in light of both the context they are used in and the
cooperative motivations of Adam and Bob in using language (what are called
"pragmatic inferences"). This project is devoted to constructing formal models
of these pragmatic inferences. Modeling pragmatic inference is a major
scientific challenge in the study of language and the human mind and a key to
the future development of autonomous intelligent systems that can communicate
with humans using natural language. Machines that can do robust language
understanding in context will pave the way for societally beneficial
technological applications such as adaptive intelligent tutoring and assistive
technologies.

The technical core of the project involves developing and extending models of
pragmatic reasoning, drawing on ideas and insights from decision theory,
probabilistic models of cognition, bounded rationality, and linguistics. In
particular, the work extends the recently developed family of "rational speech
act" (RSA) models, which provides a set of formal tools that can be used to
address basic challenges in psycholinguistics concerning how major principles of
pragmatic inference fall out of simple assumptions about cooperativity and
shared context among conversation participants. This enterprise has the
potential to fill a major open theoretical gap in our scientific understanding
of human language and social cognition. Project work includes developing
computational Bayesian models of semantic composition and pragmatic inference
and testing those models using controlled psycholinguistic experiments. The work
will also yield new models and publicly available datasets and will contribute
to interdisciplinary connections by creating and reinforcing links between
linguistics, psychology, and computer science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.