* 1829885
* Time Series Particle Flux Measurements in the Sargasso Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Maureen Conte, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,507,839.00

This award continues, for another three years, the Ocean Flux Program (OFP) that
has been in continuous operation near Bermuda since 1978. The OFP time-series of
particle fluxes in the deep Sargasso Sea has produced a unique record of the
"biological pump," a term used to describe the sinking of biological material
from the surface to the deep ocean. The OFP provided the first direct evidence
for seasonal changes in the deep ocean and tight links between deep ocean and
upper ocean processes. The OFP provides clear evidence for the intensity of
biological activity throughout the ocean's interior and the roles of key
processes in biogeochemical and elemental cycling. The time-series is becoming
long enough to study flux variability in terms of ocean basin-scale forcing,
such as the North Atlantic Oscillation. The OFP sample archives are an
unparalleled resource for study of temporal trends and the biogeochemical
consequences of changing ocean chemistry. Education provided by the OFP broadens
the experiences and science directions of many students (high school to PhD
levels) and early investigators at critical career
junctures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OFP time-series is the longest of its kind
and unique in its focus on the deep ocean. As the record lengthens,
investigators are better able to put into perspective the observed flux patterns
in terms of the interplay between climate and ocean functioning. Colocation of
complementary time-series -- Hydrostation S, the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series
(BATS), the Bermuda Testbed Mooring (BTM, 1994-2007), the Tudor Hill atmospheric
tower and other sampling conducted near the Bermuda Time-Series Site -- and
continuing advances in instrumentation on the OFP mooring present unparalleled
opportunities to study coupling among ocean physics, biology and chemistry and
material fluxes, and flux linkages with atmospheric and climatic forcing. As
ever more sophisticated analytical tools are used to probe the recovered flux
materials, new data continue to reveal novel information about ocean
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.