* 1829957
* Collaborative Research: Investigations of Wind-Driven Exchange and Long-Wave Modulation of Surface Fluxes Under Strong Wind Conditions Using OOI Data
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* James Edson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 283,852.00

The Ocean Observatory Initiative (OOI) has been developed by NSF to provide
continuous measurements at a wide variety of locations for unprecedented access
to the world's oceans and marine atmospheric environment. A major theme of the
OOI is Ocean-Atmosphere Exchange, which was identified during OOI planning as
"critical to improving the predictive capabilities of storm forecasting and
climate-change models." This project will allow access to new quality-controlled
and continuous high-wind measurement of fluxes, waves and ocean currents at the
OOI DC flux moorings under moderate to high wind conditions - data that should
open new windows for evaluation of these forecast models as well as support for
ongoing and future process studies at the OOI Pioneer, Endurance and Global
sites. This project will take advantage of these observations to improve our
detailed understanding of the interaction between the atmosphere, the surface
wave field, and the underlying ocean, as well as to test, improve and validate
parameterizations which estimate the critically important wind stress as a
function of other, more easily observed or modeled parameters. Expected broader
impacts from this research include STEM training of high school students, an
enhancement to the OOI research infrastructure, and increased partnerships
between academia, industry and federal agencies. These will be achieved through
participation in a WHOI program aimed at developing a senior-level capstone
course in Oceanography for high school students, dedicated OOI flux data
development activities to support expanded science investigation using these
platforms, and provision to the broader research community of widely sought
after high-wind condition field measurement datasets including wind stress and
buoyancy flux. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate the
turbulent exchange of momentum that drives waves and&lt;br/&gt;currents at
moderate to extreme wind speeds. The primary objectives of this project are (1)
validate&lt;br/&gt;and/or improve bulk air-sea flux algorithms that parameterize
the momentum flux at moderate to high wind speeds to reduce the uncertainty
resulting from the scarcity of measurements in the 15-25 m/s range; (2) conduct
process studies to investigate wind-wave feedback mechanisms that address the
impact of wave-age, wave-steepness and directional differences (e.g., between
the wind, wave and stress fields) using OOI directional wave spectral data and
high-rate co-spectral flux estimates; and (3) use the sum of these
investigations to test existing parameterizations of surface fluxes being
employed in LES and numerical wind and wave modeling activities at several
forecast centers. This study is expected to advance the evaluation and
improvement of drag coefficient parameterizations and explore new ones based on
physical arguments and insights gained from the continuous OOI measurements. The
improvement of these parameterizations is a crucial component in the development
of coupled ocean-wave-atmosphere models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.