* 1829232
* I-Corps:  Live printing osteoconductive scaffolds
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,07/31/2018
* Venu Varanasi, The Texas A&M University System HSC
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 07/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the ability
to have a standardized quality of craniofacial surgery by providing accuracy and
flexibility, improved patient outcome &amp; satisfaction, reduced number of
surgeries and intraoperative time resulting in reduced cost of care and patient
morbidity. Regeneration of the natural bone is an additive advantage over
currently used fixative implants. These implants are also a source of secondary
infections and fracture, such risks are mitigated with the formation of natural
tissues, eliminating the need for surgical recall. The U.S. reports ~7.5 million
Emergency Department visits related to craniomaxillofacial (CMF) injuries, at a
cost of $55.2 billion annually. The technology proposes a fundamental shift in
CMF bone reconstruction, allowing regeneration of craniofacial bone using guided
3D printed osteoconductive scaffolds. This translates to reflecting a soft
tissue flap over a defect to allow a laser or image guided analyzer to study the
defect volume and contours, after which a robotic extruder deposits the scaffold
into the desired area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project addresses
reconstruction of craniomaxillofacial (CMF) bone defects caused by trauma,
developmental anomalies or benign/malignant tumors. Our technology is
transforming CMF reconstruction by 3D printing osteoconductive/inductive
scaffolds directly into defects. Preliminary studies on critical-sized calvarial
defects in a rat model demonstrated the regeneration of bone while preserving
dural tissue. A methacrylated Gelatin-Laponite nanosilicate bio-ink was utilized
to print a mesh-like scaffold for a critical-sized defect in rat calvaria. The
in-situ printing in the defects helped maintain the micro-pattern stability of
the scaffold and the nano-silicate particle-enhanced bone regeneration. These
results indicated the possibility of overcoming the current shortcomings in
osseous tissue regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.