* 1829622
* CyberTraining: CIU: SJSU Data Science for All Seminar Series
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Scott Jensen, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 410,060.00

The Nation's research enterprise faces a shortage of data scientists. Expanding
the pipeline of data science students, particularly from underrepresented
populations, requires educational institutions to increase awareness of data
science and inspire a passion for data in students as they begin their academic
careers. Currently, few community colleges or undergraduate programs provide
training in cyberinfrastructure tools or data science techniques to a broad
student population. This project takes a novel approach to augmenting the
Nation's data science workforce by training community college and undergraduate
students to provide data analytics support to data scientists through a series
of "Data Science for All" extracurricular seminars. The seminars require no
prior data science knowledge, emphasize transferable skills, and present a
feasible path into data science-related research and other careers for students
from a broad array of disciplines and from underrepresented groups without
extending their time to graduation. By increasing the Nation's data science
capabilities and the diversity of its data science research workforce, the
project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote
progress of science and advance the prosperity and welfare of the Nation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to increase undergraduate
student awareness of data-driven science and to grow and diversify the
population of students trained to perform data wrangling - the data acquisition,
transformation, cleaning, and profiling required to prepare data for analysis.
According to industry experts, data wrangling is the "heavy lifting" of data
science, constituting up to 80% of a data scientist's daily work. Shifting this
time-consuming effort to trained data analysts free data scientists to focus
more of their time on research. The project achieves its goals through the
development and delivery of widely consumable, extracurricular seminars
providing interactive training on data science concepts and industry-leading
data wrangling tools to undergraduate and community college students. Initial
seminar topics, selected in collaboration with the project's advisory board,
include Python, Jupyter notebooks, Apache Spark, Tableau, and demystifying
artificial intelligence (AI). The seminars' focus on data wrangling also
introduces students to data preparation documentation - capturing the data
provenance needed for reproducible science. This project's contribution to the
Nation's data science workforce is broadened through the free and open
distribution of its seminar materials and supplemental resources and its online
instructor support community. To encourage adoption at Bay Area community
colleges and universities, instructor training is provided through co-
instruction and a teaching-the-teacher model. The project contributes to
pedagogical research by identifying instructional approaches most effective in
teaching data science to a diverse population of undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.