* 1829157
* Community College Anatomy and Physiology Education Research (CAPER)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Murray Jensen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Human Anatomy and Physiology (A&amp;P) is a required course for nearly half a
million undergraduate students, many of whom enroll in community colleges (CCs).
Averaging 29 years of age, these students hope to transform their lives by
entering allied health care careers such as nursing or dental assisting. Yet,
accompanying this culture of hope are stark social and economic realities. Many
students are military veterans and receive financial support from the GI Bill,
many work as well as attend school, and many are raising families. These burdens
result in heightened levels of student anxiety. While CCs are known for their
focus on teaching, CC instructors are burdened with heavy workloads and few
opportunities for professional development. The result is predictable: an
environment where there is high instructor burnout and high student failure
rates. The Community College Anatomy and Physiology Education Research (CAPER)
project addresses this issue by taking a novel approach to instructor
professional development. Specifically, CC instructors will become co-
investigators in research studies investigating changes in student performance
and anxiety following implementation of evidence-based instructional practices
(EBIPs). Introducing practices such as guided inquiry and cooperative group
learning into science classrooms has been shown to promote student learning and
to foster a more equitable learning environment for students of color and women.
By participating in this project, CC instructors will contribute new data to the
field as well as change their own practices. These instructors will then act as
leaders in A&amp;P education within their schools and their professional
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAPER project takes an evidence-based
approach to fostering transformation. Community College A&amp;P instructors will
combine a professional development course with the design and implementation of
a small-scale educational research project investigating the impact of a
student-centered teaching strategy. They will also participate in a larger scale
study examining the affective impact of different pedagogies. The individual
research projects will use validated instruments to detect changes in student
success measures resulting from EBIP implementation. The results will refine our
understanding of EBIP effectiveness in the diverse student populations found at
community colleges. In addition to their individual projects, instructors will
collaborate in a multi-institutional effort examining the hypothesis that EBIPs
could alleviate the negative impacts of anxiety on student performance and
retention by improving learning and building community. The instructors'
contributions to this project will be foundational to the increasingly relevant
topic of student stress. Finally, the research team will monitor instructor
perceptions and practices using a combination of validated survey instruments,
interviews, and classroom observation protocols. Using a pre-/post- research
design will reveal if the CAPER project was able to promote transition to more
student-centered instructional practices. A dissemination strategy of conference
presentations, blogs, and articles will ensure that the information reaches the
end users, the first step in promoting change. In particular, the instructors
will be well-situated to influence the practices of other CC instructors, both
within their institutions and within professional organizations such as the
Human Anatomy and Physiology Society, the Community College Biology Education
Research network, and the Physiology Educators Communities of
Practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.