* 1829744
* Collaborative Research: CYBER Training: CIU: Data Streams, Model Workflows, and Educational Pipelines for Hydrologic Sciences
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Anthony Castronova, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 53,540.00

Studies of water and environmental systems are becoming increasingly complex and
require integration of knowledge across multiple domains. At the same time,
technological advances have enabled the collection of massive quantities of data
for studying earth system changes. Fully leveraging these datasets and software
tools requires fundamentally new approaches in the way researchers store, access
and process data. The project serves the national interest by motivating a
culture shift within the hydrologic and more broadly earth science communities
toward open and reproducible software practices that will enhance
interdisciplinary collaboration and increase capacity for addressing complex
science challenges around the availability, risks and use of water. Project's
CyberTraining approach provides virtual learning experiences throughout an
academic year, with online learning modules oriented around a one-week in-person
workshop (WaterHackWeek) that will focus on hands-on real-world research
projects. These research projects are designed to serve the national interest by
preparing for natural hazards such as floods, hurricanes and climate change, and
to advance the nation's health by making tools and data accessible to health
researchers, local governments, and citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New
cyberinfrastructure that emphasizes data sharing and open, reproducible software
practices is currently in development, but requires a mode of knowledge
transfer, or CyberTraining, that extends beyond currently available university
curriculum. Project's aim is to ensure successful use of community
cyberinfrastructure to 1) publish large datasets, 2) run numerical models, 3)
organize collaborative research projects, and 4) meet journal requirements to
follow open data standards. The activities take advantage of HydroShare, a
National Science Foundation funded cyberinfrastructure platform, operated by the
Consortium of Universities Allied for Hydrologic Sciences (CUAHSI), for sharing
hydrologic data and models. The short-term goals are to develop new
CyberTraining modules; the long-term goals are to have an annually recurring
WaterHackWeek, to distribute curriculum CUAHSI to more than 130 member
universities, and advance cyberinfrastructure education for the broader
geoscience community. The use of the hackweek educational model extends the use
of cyberinfrastructure to promote the progress of science by including a
specific emphasis on graduate student training as instructors, training
coordinators, and building research networks with data providers who are
stakeholders outside of academia. For example, case studies include data and
resource management by Native American tribal governments, Hurricane Maria data
archive for research in Puerto Rico, improving flood forecasting, and tool-
building using complex numerical models such as the National Water Model. This
project allows to test the educational model in the water research community, in
addition to connecting team's research and curriculum to annually recurring
hackweeks in neuro, astro, ocean, and geo sciences. The team of researchers is
actively engaged in experimenting with this new model, and in testing its
efficacy through robust evaluation metrics. The proposed activities encourage
collaboration and support for use of cyberinfrastructure at all stages of the
educational pipeline and provides participants with opportunities for
networking, career development, community building and design of open-source
software tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.