* 1829641
* Collaborative Research: Inferring Cellular Lysis and Regeneration of Organic Matter by Marine Viruses
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Steven Wilhelm, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2023
* USD 657,818.00

Viral infections of marine microbes can transform the fate of microbial
populations that fuel global ocean biogeochemical cycles. For example, viral
infections of microbes lead to the release of carbon and nutrients back into the
environment. This regeneration of carbon and nutrients stimulates the activity
of other microbes and diverts carbon and nutrients from larger organisms in
marine food webs. Because virus-microbe infections are relatively specific, it
is critical to identify those pairs of viruses and microbes that may
disproportionally contribute to the turnover of carbon and nutrients in the
ocean. This project will develop quantitative approaches and tools to quantify
which viruses infect which microbes and to use these data to quantify how viral
infections of microbes collectively shape nutrient and carbon cycles in the
North Atlantic Ocean. The project will analyze virus-microbe interactions in
mesocosms at the Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences in mid-coast Maine and
during open ocean expeditions to the Bermuda Atlantic Time-Series Study (BATS)
site. An interdisciplinary team will leverage recent advances in molecular
biology, computational biology, and mathematical modeling to identify virus-host
partners and their impact on the movement of elements through marine systems.
This project will support three graduate students, six undergraduate students
and one postdoctoral researcher in an interdisciplinary context. Research
advances will be translated into reproducible software methods to be
disseminated via the community cyberinfrastructure platform iVirus, with
additional training materials presented as part of a viral methods and
informatics workshop held at The Ohio State University. The translation of
discoveries to the public will be furthered by the involvement of journalism
undergraduate students at the University of Tennessee-Knoxville.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon advances in the molecular toolkit
of viromics to develop an integrated approach to characterize lineage-specific
rates of infection, lysis, and nutrient release induced by marine viruses in
open ocean ecosystems. It will combine theory, in vitro experiments, and in situ
sampling to (i) extend a robust inference method for estimating virus-microbe
cross-infection networks from time-series data; (ii) establish and characterize
in-vitro protocols for inferring cross-infectivity in complex communities using
culture-independent methods; (iii) estimate lineage-specific rates of lysis and
regeneration of nutrients in marine systems, including applications to coastal
and open ocean ecosystems. Project aims focus on quantifying the extent to which
virus-induced lysis and regeneration of carbon and nutrients is heterogeneously
distributed across microbial populations. To do so, the project will incorporate
time series measurements of abundance information (via metagenomes) and activity
information (via metatranscriptomes). In so doing, it will advance efforts to
understand community-scale interactions rather than those amongst a single
virus-host pair. Theoretical methods and in vitro protocols will directly infer
lineage-specific infection, lysis, and nutrient release rates in coastal- and
open-ocean ecosystems in the North Atlantic Ocean. Results will be used to
identify key links that disproportionately influence bulk nutrient release. A
novel PCR-based approach will augment and validate the core inference approach.
Overall, the project aims to enhance our understanding of how viruses contribute
to marine ecosystem function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.