* 1829822
* Multicomponent Diffusion in Natural Silicate Melts
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Youxue Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2022
* USD 432,149.00

Diffusion is a ubiquitous and fundamental process arising from the random motion
of atoms, ions and molecules in a phase. If there is inhomogeneity, the random
motion of diffusion results in net mass transfer from high concentration to low
concentration to eliminate the inhomogeneity. Although it is a microscopic
process, diffusion plays a crucial role in numerous macroscopic phenomena
ranging from nutrient transfer in the human body, dispersion of pollutants, to a
variety of igneous processes, such as explosive volcanic eruptions and igneous
rock formation. Explosive volcanic eruptions begin with bubble growth, whose
rate is controlled by the diffusion of gas molecules from the melt into the
bubbles. Igneous rock formation is the collective effect of crystal growth in
magma, in which diffusion plays an important role. The more generalized concept
of diffusion has also been applied to understand the mean elevation of
continents. The goal of this research is to understand diffusion in natural
silicate melts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A natural silicate melt typically
contains many major oxide components. Diffusion in a multicomponent (meaning
three or more components) system is complicated because different oxide
components may move in a coordinated fashion. Hence, the diffusion of one
component is affected not only by itself, but also by other components.
Therefore, even though the ultimate effect of diffusion is to homogenize, the
complicated diffusion may lead some oxides in silicate melts to diffuse from low
to high concentration, termed uphill diffusion. In the literature, diffusion in
natural silicate melts was treated only partially: If a component shows "normal"
diffusion behavior, meaning the flux is from high to low concentration, it is
quantified to obtain the effective binary diffusivity. Otherwise, researchers
simply note the uphill diffusion behavior, and then shy away from it without
quantification. Such uphill diffusion is frequently encountered in experiments
as well as in natural systems. With a prior NSF grant, Youxue Zhang's research
group at the University of Michigan investigated multicomponent diffusion and
made remarkable progress in the last three years. The new grant will enable
continued research and development. Diffusion in melts with natural basalt and
dacite compositions will be studied. There are 8 major oxide components and the
diffusion is described by a 7 by 7 diffusion matrix (49 unknowns). Glasses with
appropriate compositions will be synthesized to form diffusion couples. High-
temperature and high-pressure diffusion couple experiments will be carried out.
The compositional profiles in the quenched glass will be measured using an
electron microprobe. The data will be fit using the Levenberg-Marquardt
algorithm to extract the diffusion matrix. One working hypothesis is that the
diffusion eigenvectors for natural silicate melts are independent of temperature
and melt composition, which will be evaluated. The obtained diffusion matrix
will be applied to calculate diffusion profiles in mineral dissolution
experiments, and to predict diffusion in natural magmas during a variety of
processes, including crystal growth and dissolution, magma mixing, and post-
entrapment interaction between a melt inclusion and the host mineral. The
results will be published and disseminated in scientific meetings and in
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.