* 1829184
* Characterization, Dynamics, and Biological Impact of Indoor Airborne Dust Exposure
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Maruthi Sridhar Balaji Bhaskar, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Sonal Dekhane
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,786.00

Characterization, Dynamics, and Biological Impact of Indoor Airborne Dust
Exposure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Historically Black Colleges and Universities -
Research Infrastructure for Science and Engineering (HBCU-RISE) program supports
the development of research capability at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities that offer doctoral degrees in science and engineering disciplines.
Supported projects have a unifying research focus in one of the research areas
supported by the National Science Foundation, a direct connection to the long-
term plans of the host department, institutional strategic plan and mission, and
plans for expanding institutional research capacity, as well as increasing the
production of doctoral students, especially those underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With National
Science Foundation support, Texas Southern University will conduct a research
project entitled "Characterization, Dynamics, and Biological Impact of Indoor
Airborne Dust Exposure". This research focuses on two strategic directions: (1)
collection, monitoring and chemical/biological characterization of indoor dust
in correlation with local conditions, and (2) responses of model prokaryotic and
eukaryotic systems to stress induced by indoor dust. This will form the basis
for developing a statistical model able to identify patterns and predict trends
in indoor air quality for locations typical to the Gulf Coast region. This study
will also assist in determining whether exposure to chemical components of dust
alters the expression of pro-inflammatory pathways in lung epithelial
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research outcomes will have a direct impact on local
communities where the proposed environmental sampling and monitoring tasks will
take place. The research outcomes will also advance current understanding of the
contribution of outdoor air pollution to indoor air quality and biological
responses. Spatial and temporal analysis of air quality data in a geographical
region is essential for environmental and human health risk assessment. This
project also aims to strengthen the doctoral Environmental Toxicology program at
Texas Southern University. The program will benefit from (1) direct financial
support to four doctoral students per year, (2) mentoring for graduate students
to support their course preparation, effective teaching and learning, grant
writing, and research, (3) summer internships for undergraduate students to
advance research-based learning experiences and motivate them to pursue advanced
degrees in STEM fields, and (4) enhancement of the Environmental Toxicology
program curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.