* 1829167
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Yan Tong, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 6
graduate students from U.S. educational institutions, along with unpaid senior
members of the research community as mentors, to be held in conjunction with the
thirteenth IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture
Recognition (FG 2018), which will take place May 15-19, 2018, in Xi'an, China.
The IEEE FG conference is the premier international forum for research in image-
and video-based face, gesture, and body movement recognition. Their broad scope
includes new algorithms for computer vision, pattern recognition, and computer
graphics, as well as machine learning techniques relevant to face, gesture and
body motion for a variety of applications. The conferences present research that
advances the state of the art in these and related areas, leading to new
capabilities in interactive systems, biometrics, surveillance, healthcare, and
entertainment, and they play an important role in shaping related scientific,
academic, and educational programs. More information is available online at
http://www.fg2018.org/. The Doctoral Consortium will provide an opportunity for
Ph.D. students whose dissertations are on topics related to automatic face and
gesture recognition to present their proposed research, and receive constructive
feedback from an invited committee of faculty and industry researchers, as well
as from other students working in these areas. The event will give students
valuable exposure to outside perspectives of their work, and provide a
comfortable forum in which to discuss and fine-tune their career objectives with
members of the international research community, and identify areas that need
further development. The workshop will also enable these young researchers to
develop a network of contacts at a critical stage of their careers, and will
foster a supportive community of scholars and spirit of collaborative research.
The organizers will make a particular effort to recruit and include students
from underrepresented groups (women and underrepresented minorities) and
students from smaller schools or schools with less established computer vision
research. They will also try to recruit a demographically diverse (in terms of
region, type of employment and stage in career) group of mentors to advise these
students.

The Doctoral Consortium will be a half-day event during the conference. This
year, there will be four distinct aspects to the event. First, each participant
will be paired up with an invited faculty or industrial researcher who works in
the related area and will act as their mentor both in the Doctoral Consortium
and throughout the FG conference. Second, there will be a career panel during a
working lunch where participants will have an opportunity to discuss their
research and career objectives with other participants and mentors in an
informal setting. Third, there will be a dedicated oral session for the students
to present their research to the invited committee. Fourth, there will be a
poster session for the students to present their work to all conference
attendees. These four activities, taken together, will afford an excellent and
structured way for students to communicate with other students as well as with
established researchers of their related research community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.