* 1829509
* Collaborative Research: Decomposing the effects of diversity on the abundance of marine parasites
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Chelsea Wood, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2024
* USD 636,888.00

As Earth's ecosystems experience rapid biodiversity change, disease ecologists
have turned to an urgent question: how might reductions in biodiversity affect
the transmission of parasites? In other words, does biodiversity loss increase
the abundance of parasites by eroding natural checks and balances on
transmission? Alternatively, does it decrease parasite abundance by removing the
free-living biodiversity on which parasites depend? This study will constitute
the first comprehensive test of these questions in any ecosystem by evaluating
the relationship between fish biodiversity and parasite abundance across 18
replicate coral reef ecosystems. Not only will the project explore whether
reductions in fish biodiversity are associated with increases or decreases in
parasite burdens, it will also assess whether parasite and host traits or
geographical distance influence the direction and strength of this relationship.
The theories to be tested are among the most important and controversial in the
rapidly growing field of disease ecology and this work represents a novel,
creative approach to a long standing, but unresolved research question. The
project will yield transformative insights into the nature of parasite
transmission in a changing world. Furthermore, it will intimately intermingle
education with research by launching the Research Internship in Molecular
Ecology at California State Monterey Bay, which will place a group of
underrepresented undergraduates in a central research role, and by developing
and disseminating quality educational tools for teaching about parasite
biodiversity through collaboration with the Network of Conservation Educators
and Practitioners at the American Museum of Natural History. Parasites are often
hidden and can be easy to overlook, but they are ecologically important and
affect every population of marine animals. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The field of
disease ecology is plagued by uncertainty and disagreement over whether
biodiversity loss exacerbates parasite transmission, because it lacks the
comprehensive, multi-host, multi-parasite, broad-spatial-scale dataset needed to
formulate a convincing empirical test.&lt;br/&gt;To answer this recalcitrant
question, the PIs will generate a dataset of unprecedented replication and
taxonomic and spatial resolution, by exploiting the advantages of a marine model
system. The project is centered on a natural experiment in which the abundance
of parasites will be quantified across a highly resolved gradient of host
biodiversity, for more than 77 parasite species and 18 replicate coral reef
ecosystems. The resulting dataset will critically test hypotheses for the
biodiversity?parasite abundance relationship, revealing how the direction,
shape, and scale-dependence of this relationship vary across a diverse array of
parasite taxa, and resolving questions of burning interest in the disease
ecology literature ? and of vital importance to marine conservation. This
project will address the following questions: (Q1) For each parasite species
detected, what is the direction and shape of the relationship between
biodiversity and parasite abundance? (Q2) What factors (e.g., parasite traits
like transmission strategy and host specificity, host traits like body size)
determine the direction and shape of the relationship between biodiversity and
parasite abundance? (Q3) How does spatial scale interact with parasite dispersal
capacity to moderate the effects of biodiversity on parasite abundance? To
address these questions, the project will integrate an existing dataset on fish
biodiversity and abundance of coral reef fish parasites from six equatorial
Pacific islands (the Northern Line Islands) with new sampling from 12 additional
islands (the Southern Line Islands and French Polynesia). The resulting dataset
will reflect the burden of &gt;77 metazoan parasite taxa for seven species of
coral reef fishes across18 islands. This work will provide the world's first
data on the direction, magnitude, and shape of the biodiversity?disease
relationship across a diversity of parasite taxa, host taxa, and spatial scales,
and will comprehensively identify conditions under which biodiversity is likely
to be important in determining the abundance of parasites ? a fundamental
contribution to ecology and to biological oceanography. The project will also
intimately integrate education with research by placing a group of
underrepresented minority undergraduates in a central research role: performing
the molecular analyses required to estimate parasite dispersal distance. A
summer Research Internship in Molecular Ecology will be established at
California State University Monterey Bay, a Hispanic-Serving Institution. The
project will also underwrite the development of a peer-reviewed learning module
on parasite biodiversity, to be developed and disseminated in collaboration with
the American Museum of Natural History, and will support the training of two
graduate students, one postdoctoral scholar, and several
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.