* 1829371
* The EarthScope/GMT Analysis and Visualization Toolbox
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Leonardo Uieda, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 174,975.00

Research under the EarthScope umbrella involves both data processing and display
of results. The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) is a set of scientific analysis and
plotting modules that are widely used in the Earth Sciences, particularly
because they allow for specialized processing and imaging suitable for the
geosciences. GMT is a long-lived (~30 years) and robust NSF-funded software
toolset that originated in the ocean sciences but has spread to all aspects of
the geosciences and beyond. This project will add numerous enhancements to GMT,
including a much simplified usage syntax called modern mode. In addition, new
modules for simplifying the creation of animations, 3-D stacking and
interpolation of grids, conversion of imagery for placement in Google Earth, and
greatly improved interactive documentation will be built during the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Generic Mapping Tools (GMT) scripting has
remained remarkably similar over its 30 years of existence. Because thousands of
GMT classic scripts have been written, making major changes has been
problematic, even if such changes would simplify its usage. The proposed modern
mode will solve this dilemma as it introduces two new commands (begin and end)
that starts and end a modern mode session. Hence it is not possible to
accidentally enter modern mode without the use of those commands, thus allowing
all existing GMT scripts to run unchanged. Once in modern mode, the required
syntax will be simplified to avoid repetitive options and the user will no
longer be responsible for assembling a composite PostScript file. The default
output format will be PDF but more than one format may be selected, including
standard raster image formats. Improved interactive documentation will be added
to showcase modern mode (while maintaining the documentation for classic mode).
To strengthen EarthScope science there will be new modules for 3-D grid stacking
and interpolation, KML image quadtree building for Google Earth, and a new
animation module that vastly simplifies the task of building scientific
animations. It is anticipated that UNAVCO will assist with annual workshops
aimed at EarthScope scientists using GMT in shell, MATLAB, or Python
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.