* 1829093
* Collaborative Research:  Deglacial and Holocene Environmental Change in California's Headwaters:  Insights from High-Resolution Sedimentary Records from Mono Lake
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael McGlue, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2023
* USD 207,195.00

As droughts, floods, and wildfires increase in frequency, intensity, and
devastation, new emphasis must be placed on understanding the climate system of
the American West. This project will study sediments from the Mono Basin, the
most important water source for California. Located in the eastern Sierra
Nevada, Mono Lake is highly sensitive to changes in the amount of precipitation
falling in the region. The project will develop well-dated lake data to compare
with climate models for the last ~16,000 years to study the mechanisms that
control environmental change. In addition, the project will produce
methodological improvements in sediment-dating techniques, produce virtual tours
for the Flyover Country mobile phone app and develop educational materials for
national park and community groups. The project also will use project datasets
in hands-on STEM training for undergraduate and graduate students and high
school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Well-dated lake sediment cores provide
one of the few terrestrial archives available to extend the record of climate
change in the American West into the early Holocene and terminal Pleistocene.
Interpretation of geochemical, sedimentological, and paleobiological proxy
records from Mono Lake cores will provide continuous records of lake level and
productivity that are tied to absolute lake levels available from paleo-
shorelines. A sub-centennial-precision age model for the records will allow
accurate and precise correlation of terrestrial climate conditions in the West
to global records for the first time. This will shed light on the mechanisms
controlling Western climate between the waning of the great continental ice
sheets and the droughts and pluvials of the last 2000 years, which have been
examined in detail in tree-ring records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.