* 1829136
* Alongshore Variable Dune Erosion During Extreme Storms
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 766,023.00

Despite the importance of dunes, there are few concurrent field observations of
surf and swash zone waves and currents, and beach and dune morphology during
extreme storms. Thus, model simulations usually are calibrated and evaluated by
comparison with observed pre- to post-storm changes in topography. The wave and
current processes that drive these topographic changes, and the time and space
scales of changes during periods of extreme storm activities, are not well
understood. The project examines hydrodynamic processes during extreme storms
that result in alongshore variable dune erosion over 100-m scales owing to wave
collision. The outcomes of the project will improve coastal management, help
protect coastal communities, and sustain coastal resources. The project will
provide field training to undergraduates, recent graduates, and young
professionals embarking on coastal careers by offering 2- to 3-week-long
fieldwork-focused internships. This internship program will provide critical
experience to participants enhancing the potential job placement in the field of
coastal engineering. In addition, a graduate research student will be trained in
the use of numerical models for the simulation of nearshore processes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unique observations of surf and swash zone waves, and
surf, beach, and dune morphology before, during, and after 3 large storms,
combined with numerical model simulations, are used to determine the causes of
alongshore variability of dune erosion, over 100-m scales. The hypotheses
examined are: (i) alongshore variable dune erosion and recession rates depend on
the initial surf zone bathymetry and associated hydrodynamics, and (2) positive
feedbacks between wave runup, reflection, and offshore transport at the dune toe
lead to erosional hotspots during storms. The importance during storms of surf-
zone bathymetry and hydrodynamics to dune evolution, and the feedbacks between
surf- and swash-zone processes and erosional hotspots are examined. The PIs will
investigate how waves propagate across the surf zone and beach during extreme
storms, and how parameterizations of wave processes used in numerical models may
be different during more moderate conditions. Numerical simulations of dune
evolution are sensitive to user-selected parameters, as well as to the offshore
and surf-zone bathymetry, which often are not well known. Laboratory
observations indicate that given best-fit sediment transport coefficients,
models may simulate dune changes reasonably well, despite overestimating water
levels and underestimating runup fluctuations. The research undertaken as part
of this project will determine if the simulated hydrodynamics are accurate
throughout extreme storms, and if the time history of simulated sand-level
change is correct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.