* 1829254
* I-Corps Sites: Type I - Texas Tech University I-Corps Site for Innovation and Entrepreneurship
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Tim Dallas, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2023
* USD 304,994.00

The Texas Tech University (TTU), through a National Science Foundation I-Corps
Site (Site) award, promotes the growth of innovative ideas into commercially
viable products in the South Plains of Texas and Eastern New
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TTU Site promotes, encourages, mentors, and
catalyzes the translation of research with commercial potential. Focus areas
include healthcare, natural resources such as food, fiber, and energy, including
cybersecurity, which are all major components of the local economy. The TTU Site
accelerates successful licensing and business formation of productized
technologies. The TTU Site grows the existing ecosystem by also offering
entrepreneurial curricula to students, faculty and the community while deepening
the awareness of commercialization practices through the Business Model Canvas
and Lean Startup methodologies. Finally, the TTU Site strengthens innovation
locally, regionally, and in collaboration with the national NSF I-Corps network
to grow the quality and quantity of teams in the pursuit of commercialization,
validation, and startup creation. The TTU Mentors program supplies the teams
with qualified and motivated mentors to assist in a broad range of business
activities, including: marketing, intellectual property law, sales, product
development, accounting, finance, and human resources. The TTU Site benefits the
local and state economies through the economic development gains achieved by
students, faculty and the community as they start new businesses. In addition,
TTU serves a large and growing Hispanic population (approx. 27% of the student
body), as well as many veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.