* 1829147
* The Chemistry of Aqueous Carbonic Fluids in Subduction
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* J. Michael Brown, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 393,000.00

At high pressures and temperatures in parts of the Earth's interior, water and
carbon dioxide are both fluids. These fluids can dissolve into each other,
either fully or partially. They can also undergo chemical reactions, both with
each other and with other substances (minerals) in their surroundings. The
extent to which they dissolve, and the nature and extent of reactions they
undergo, effect phenomena as diverse as the crystallization of different
minerals and the formation of magma that leads to volcanic eruptions. This
project seeks to determine how much water can be dissolved into carbon dioxide,
and how much carbon dioxide into water, at various pressures and temperatures,
and the chemical changes that occur when they do. Beyond the geological
perspective, both water and carbon dioxide are common, industrial solvents and
thus an understanding of their interactions is generally desirable; it may, for
instance, lead to the design of binary, chemically tun-able "green" solvents for
use at the pressures and temperatures in which they are mutually soluble. In
addition, water and carbon dioxide are primary constituents of modern high
explosives, and their modelling requires a knowledge of these combined fluids at
suitably high pressures and temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nature of
high-pressure, high-temperature mixtures of water and carbon dioxide will be
investigated, across conditions ranging up to 100,000 atmospheres and 1000C. The
degree of miscibility of the two components will be acquired over the stated
range, leading to the simple and basic knowledge of where (in pressure,
temperature and composition) a single, homogeneous fluid can exist and where,
conversely, it must segregate into two, co-existing fluids. A more fundamental
perspective on these findings will be sought through investigation of the
chemical species which actually exist in solution. In particular, the degree to
which carbon dioxide will react with water and dissociate first to bicarbonate
ion, and thence to carbonate will be quantified. The work will also encompass
the addition of various solutes (e.g., sodium chloride) to the water/carbon
dioxide mix and a determination of how large proportions of carbon dioxide
affect the solubility of minerals such as calcium carbonate and quartz. Water
and carbon dioxide will be loaded into a high-pressure diamond-anvil cell, which
will then be placed in an oven. Temperature will be raised until the contents of
the cell have formed a homogeneous solution, following which temperature will be
lowered and limits of solubility determined visually as the temperature at which
a second (different and co-existing) fluid appears. Solubility of minerals
loaded with the fluids will similarly be determined visually. The species
present, and their concentrations, will be determined by use of Raman
spectroscopy, an optical technique well-suited to the diamond-anvil
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.