* 1829176
* RESEARCH-PGR: The Cytonuclear Dimension of Allopolyploidy
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Daniel Sloan, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,829,880.00

One of the key realizations of the genomics era is that all plants, including
our major crop plants, have histories of genome duplication in which the DNA
content inside cells is doubled (polyploidy). Although much has been learned
about the consequences of genome doubling in recent years, many fundamental
questions remain regarding how genome duplication contributes to plant biology
and crop productivity. An important dimension of genome duplication is how the
now-doubled nuclear genome interacts with other genomic compartments found
within the plant cell, such as the mitochondria and plastids. The planned
research will investigate this underexplored aspect of genome duplications, with
implications for how cellular energetics, which play a key role in growth,
reproduction, and yield, are altered in the wake of genome doubling events. The
research will use a diverse panel of important crop systems and state-of-the-art
genomics techniques. Project resources, data, and personnel will be used to
expand outreach and education programs, including an international workshop
series on genomics and a long-term effort to provide high school teachers with
an immersive experience in hands-on research and curricular development. The
project will create training opportunities for participants across the full
range of educational and career stages in both research and service-learning. In
sum, this research aims to provide fundamental insights into genome interactions
and crop biology and broaden participation in plant biological
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Allopolyploidy events entail the simultaneous
merger of genomes from two divergent lineages combined with the doubling of
nuclear genome content. Because cytoplasmic genomes are typically inherited from
only a single (maternal) parent, allopolyploidization is expected to have
complex effects on the relative copy number (i.e., stoichiometry) of nuclear and
cytoplasmic genomes, and also create novel, "untested" pairings of nuclear and
cytoplasmic genotypes. The planned research will reveal the spectrum of genomic
responses that alleviate the disruptive effects of allopolyploidy on cytonuclear
interactions and facilitate the successful establishment of hybrid/polyploid
lineages. Bioinformatic analyses will test for predicted compensatory responses
in organelle-targeted nuclear genes that resolve maladapted interactions between
the paternally derived nuclear subgenome and maternally derived cytoplasmic
genomes, including: (1) maternally biased gene conversion; (2) altered selection
pressures on sequence evolution in the paternal subgenome; (3) paternally biased
pseudogenization and gene loss; and (4) preferential down-regulation of paternal
homoeologs. By taking advantage of &gt;600 re-sequenced genomes from cotton
allopolyploids, the proposed research will be extended to the population-genomic
level to detect these effects "in action". Finally, the relative copy number of
nuclear vs. cytoplasmic genomes and the relative expression levels in the
nucleus, mitochondria, and plastids will be precisely quantified to
differentiate among multiple hypothesized responses to stoichiometric imbalance.
Together, these analyses will provide a powerful test of whether and how
cytonuclear interactions contribute to the formation and evolution of polyploid
crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.