* 1829911
* Collaborative Research: Influence of wind and bottom generated turbulence on air-sea gas exchange in shallow water environments
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* David Ho, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 282,845.00

Air-sea transfers of energy and gases are critically important for predictions
of short term weather, as well as long term climate trends. Over the past
decades, considerable effort has been devoted to parameterizing these fluxes in
terms of widely measured variables such as wind speed. However, these
parameterizations are inadequate in shallow coastal regions where fetch, waves,
and bottom-generated turbulence influence the physical mechanisms responsible
for the air-sea fluxes, which have implications for our ability to understand
important environmental processes such as coral reef metabolism or carbon
cycling. Furthermore, shallow coastal water ecosystems are susceptible to
anthropogenic pollution, leading to hypoxia or anoxia. In order to understand
the future states of these ecosystems that are exposed to continued
anthropogenic perturbations, biogeochemical budgets and fluxes have to be
established, including exchanges across the air-water interface, i.e., they
require quantitative knowledge of factors controlling gas exchange. This project
will measure the air-sea gas fluxes and multiple physical variables contributing
to their variability in a shallow coral reef. It is anticipated that the results
from this study will yield improved understanding of the influence of physical
processes such as wind, currents, waves on producing surface-, and bottom-driven
turbulence, and how they control air-sea gas exchange in shallow coastal waters.
They should also allow these processes to be parameterized in terms of easily
measured environmental variables such as wind speeds, current velocities, and
water depth. On a more local level, the PIs will continue their efforts toward
disseminating scientific understanding in the field of physical and chemical
oceanography by participating in undergraduate research opportunities, local
science events targeted at K-12 students, and graduate student advising. This
project will provide multidisciplinary training to two graduate students, and an
undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of experiments will be
performed over two consecutive years on the barrier reef of Kane'ohe Bay, Hawaii
to determine factors that control gas exchange in shallow ocean environments.
During the experiment, gas transfer velocities will be measured with tracers
(N2O, SF6, Rhodamine WT) and eddy covariance of CO2, along with concurrent
measurements of processes such as wind, current, waves and turbulence. With the
data collected in Kane'ohe Bay, the PIs will: (i) Assess when or whether it is
valid to apply open ocean wind speed/gas exchange parameterizations toshallow
water environments (ii) Improve our understanding of how physical processes such
as wind, currents, waves interact with the shallow bottom to produce surface-,
and bottom-driven turbulence (iii) Examine how surface and bottom generated
turbulence control air-sea gas exchange in shallow coastal waters (iv)
Parameterize gas exchange in shallow water environments in terms of easily
measured environmental variables such as wind speeds, current velocities, and
water depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.