* 1829357
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Recovering the Polyvalent Genealogies of Machine Learning, 1948 - 2017
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Matthew Jones, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 07/31/2022
* USD 26,163.00

Machine learning techniques currently make "high-stakes" judgments in areas as
diverse as criminal justice, credit risk, social welfare, hiring, and
congressional redistricting. Such techniques make these decisions using patterns
learned from historical social data. Emphasis on prediction rather than the
circumstances of dataset creation have led to machine learning systems that
preferentially target vulnerable populations for disparately adverse social
judgments while making it more difficult for those subject to these decisions to
protest unfair treatment. This study explores the limitations of such machine
learning systems by tracing how technical and non-technical people, including
funding agencies, have historically understood what machine learning systems
could and should achieve. Particular care is given to the forms of "learning"
valued by researchers during different moments in the 20th century, and to the
emergence of theoretical concepts that were constrained and even defined by the
capabilities of the available material devices. This work makes visible the
efforts of women and men previously omitted in histories of artificial
intelligence and machine learning, and develops a quantitative method to
document how the innovations of a discipline are contingent upon
interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary research networks. Finally, this project
traces how the allocation of resources to particular research communities
spurred scientific innovation in adjacent and seemingly unrelated academic
research fields in the physical and social sciences. In this sense, the
discipline of machine learning provides a useful case study for modeling the
propagation of ideas across different subfields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
qualitative and quantitative historical research is employed. First, nine
university and government archives are perused to reconstruct the institutional
organizations, interpersonal research networks, and material computing devices
available to machine learning and artificial intelligence researchers. Second,
an investigation is conducted using a novel combination of topic modeling and
word embeddings on a corpus of millions of full-text Association of Computing
Machinery articles from 1950 to 2017 to trace how discursive influence
propagates across disparate sub-disciplines. Four research products are
generated: (1) a technical machine learning publication detailing the novel
method used to analyze the article corpus, (2) a history of science article
tracing the early history of machine learning, (3) a general audience "think
piece" discussing the policy and ethical implications of contemporary machine
learning research, (4) and the public release of the project code and the
subsequent statistics generated from the article corpus. Digital copies of
salient archive records discovered during this research study will be made
freely available via Columbia University's Digital Repository, insofar as this
is possible given the copyright and access restrictions of holding institutions.
Archive materials collected and computational study of the article corpus will
be used in the co-PI's doctoral dissertation exploring how machine learning has
been used to classify individuals, imagine communities, and legislate forms of
social and political evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.