* 1829831
* Ecology and biogeochemical impacts of DNA and RNA viruses throughout the global oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Matthew Sullivan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,052,917.00

In the oceans, microbial life sits at the base of the food chain, but microbes
also control the flow of nutrients and energy. While our knowledge of microbial
impacts on the oceans is rapidly advancing, we remain far behind in studying the
impact of viruses. Decades of experiments and global surveys that have focused
on common ocean viruses (double-stranded DNA viruses) suggest that they kill
many cells, change the genes that cells encode in their genomes, and reprogram
how cells function during infection. This project seeks to create a metabolic
map of the global oceans and quantify which of these microbial processes common
viruses manipulate. Further, this project will expand to other types of viruses
(RNA viruses) that are less well studied, as well as advance our knowledge of
both DNA and RNA viruses with respect to global patterns and distributions to
assess viral activity. Such analyses are critical to better understand how
viruses of all types alter microbial processes and thereby drive nutrient
cycling in the oceans. Beyond the science, this project will train two postdocs,
a graduate student and five undergraduate students, as well as conduct outreach
through Columbus-area seminars and lecture series and provide a training
workshop for researchers in each years 1 and 3. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial
metabolisms alter nutrients and energy flow in ways that impact global ocean
biogeochemistry, but associated viruses modulate these metabolic impacts through
mortality, horizontal gene transfer and metabolic reprogramming. The latter
impact is particularly understudied due to being a largely manual process,
though early data hints that it likely impacts photosynthesis, central carbon
metabolism, and nitrogen and sulfur cycling. Further, though eukaryotes are
likely most commonly infected by RNA viruses and RNA viruses are thought to
represent about half of viral particles in seawater, very little information on
RNA virus diversity or ecology exists. Finally, particles are not the ?active?
form of viruses, which begs for the development of new approaches to assess
activity using the newly-available reference genomes against expression (e.g.,
metatranscriptomic) datasets. This project seeks to leverage extensive
organismal, physical, and chemical datasets from the global Tara Oceans
expedition to (i) advance from surveying dsDNA viral biodiversity towards
inferring their metabolic impacts and active infection ecology, and (ii) build a
parallel RNA virus biodiversity inventory from which to establish foundational
ecological understanding of drivers and community structure. Scientifically,
these efforts will evaluate more than a dozen hypotheses and establish countless
more hypotheses about viral roles in marine microbial ecology and
biogeochemistry. The project will train two postdocs, a graduate student and
five undergraduate students, some through engagement with international Tara
Oceans Consortium meetings, as well as provide public outreach through classroom
and seminar visits at a Columbus area school (~240 students), a local chapter of
the MIT Alumni club, an OSU Center for RNA Biology ?Science Sundays? lecture
series, and seminars and interactive activities with Canada?s indigenous people.
A viromics training workshop will be held in each years 1 and 3 to maximize
research community involvement and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.