* 1829563
* Support for the U. S. GEOTRACES Project Office
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,233,169.00

This award would support the work of the U.S. GEOTRACES Project Office to
coordinate and support the activities of investigators at U.S. institutions who
are fulfilling the GEOTRACES mission, specifically: "To identify processes and
quantify fluxes that control the distributions of key trace elements and
isotopes (TEIs) in the ocean, and to establish the sensitivity of these
distributions to changing environmental conditions." Trace elements such as
iron, cobalt and zinc occur in the ocean at ultra-low concentrations. Their low
abundance is thought to influence the health and fertility of marine ecosystems.
Consequently, gaining an accurate knowledge of the processes that regulate the
distribution of these elements in the ocean forms a key contribution to
sustainable management of marine resources. To fulfill the GEOTRACES mission,
and achieve benefits derived from doing so, GEOTRACES is making observations
spanning a global array of ocean sections in close connection with numerical
modeling, and supported by a solid foundation of ongoing intercalibration of
analytical methods and a program-wide data management system. The U.S. GEOTRACES
Project Office takes leadership in ensuring successful completion of US
GEOTRACES contributions in support of the mission and in leading the
international GEOTRACES data management and synthesis initiatives. The award
supports project office personnel, working groups contributing to GEOTRACES
synthesis, events that facilitate the use of GEOTRACES products by the broader
community, and workshops for expedition planning and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;US GEOTRACES is in the middle of a
decade-scale plan to complete a prioritized sequence of ocean sections.
Synthesis activities will interpret distributions of TEIs measured along these
sections to identify the principal sources of TEIs in the ocean and, in many
cases, to quantify the rates of processes that regulate TEI supply and removal.
Synthesis activities, furthermore, assess the role of TEIs in biogeochemical
cycles of carbon and major nutrients, including bioavailability of
micronutrients together with their biological uptake and regeneration throughout
the water column. Products of these activities will feed into modeling of the
ocean biogeochemical cycles that assesses the sensitivity of TEI distributions
to changing environmental conditions. Building and improving the GEOTRACES data
management system will be an ongoing process throughout the proposed funding
period. As co-chair of the standing committee responsible for the structure of
the GEOTRACES data product, Anderson will work closely with the Data Management
Committee throughout the process. The primary goal for the immediate future is
to replace the current system, which involves manual transfer of Excel workbooks
and Google docs between the three committees that handle data, the GEOTRACES
Data Assembly Center, and the individual who assembles the data products, with
an automated system shared by all involved that eliminates manual transfer of
individual data sets. It is anticipated that developing the new data system will
take two years, so the process will begin in the spring of 2018 to ensure that
the system is available in time to prepare the next intermediate data product,
scheduled for release in 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.