* 1829809
* Collaborative Research: Water mass variability and connectivity in a strengthening Southern Hemisphere Super-Gyre
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Tangdong Qu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 597,900.00

The recently identified Southern Hemisphere Super-Gyre (SHSG) is a nested system
of the southern subtropical gyres. It sweeps out of the Tasman Sea, transports
waters westward, and feeds the upper limb of the Atlantic thermohaline
circulation. The Sub-Antarctic Mode Water(SAMW) and Antarctic Intermediate Water
(AAIW) are prominently involved in the SHSG inter-ocean connection. Through this
connection, the SAMW/AAIW can be distributed among the three ocean basins.
Recent analysis has revealed a two-decade-long SHSG spin-up, and an increase in
the inter-ocean Tasman and Agulhas Leakages. The project will study the time-
varying nature of SAMW/AAIW and their inter-ocean link to a strengthening SHSG.
The SAMW/AAIW are large volume water masses that take up substantial quantities
of atmospheric gases, which are important for life and climate - such as oxygen
and CO2. They are two significant water masses that are involved in the inter-
ocean connection of the SHSG. Strengthening of SHSG has been correlated to
atmospheric modes, e.g., Southern Annular Mode (SAM). However, recovery of the
ozone layer is predicted to weaken the SAM. Thus, whether the SHSG and the
Tasman and Agulhas Leakages continue strengthening or not is an open question.
Also unknown is how variability in these circulations link to variability in
SAMW/AAIW and their inter-ocean connectivity. Data and models will be used to
assess connectivity of the southern gyres and their correlations with
atmospheric modes (SAM, El Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), and Indian Ocean
Dipole (IOD)). In addition, estimates from the observations will be useful as
tests for model outputs. The research will promote education by the training of
a postdoctoral fellow at UCLA in the analysis of observational data and model
outputs. It will enhance infrastructure for research and education by
establishing collaborations between different disciplines (physical and chemical
oceanography) and different institutions (UCLA and University of
Miami).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work would be the first systematic
study of the SAMW/AAIW and their variability in a presently strengthening SHSG.
Variability in the SAM, together with over a decade of Argo data and recent
model advances make study of the SAMW/AAIW and their link to the SHSG inter-
ocean connection possible and timely. The overall objectives are: (1) To
estimate the annually averaged SAMW/AAIW properties and subduction rates in the
three southern subtropical oceans, (2) To evaluate how much of the SAMW/AAIW is
transported from one southern subtropical gyre into another, and how their
pathways and volume transports vary with time and correlate with the SHSG spin-
up, and (3)To explore the causes of water mass variability in the southern
subtropical oceans with particular attention to variability associated with
buoyancy fluxes, the SHSG spin-up and atmospheric modes. To achieve these
objectives, available satellite and Argo data will be analyzed, and the results
will be used to inform output from ocean general circulation models and
simulated passive/adjoint tracers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.