* 1829434
* Familiarity and Meaning in Visual Working Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Timothy Brady, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 09/30/2022
* USD 540,876.00

Visual working memory allows people to briefly hold visual information in
awareness. Researchers investigating this memory system have found that people
are capable of holding in mind very few objects at a time, and that this number
is related to many different factors. The current research focuses on how
factors such as background knowledge, familiarity and meaning affect visual
working memory, as measured by the number of objects that are held. This work is
expected to improve our understanding of visual skills such as those involved in
driving and other complex tasks that require remembering and monitoring multiple
objects. It is also expected that the work will inform the design of artificial
displays and user interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research aims to
broadly understand how the working memory system is affected by background
knowledge, familiarity and meaningfulness. In order to isolate the visual
working memory system -- and separate it from other memory systems, like long-
term memory -- a large amount of research focuses on working memory for simple
shapes or colors. Such research allows us to isolate the contributions of visual
working memory, but is not indicative of how we use our memory in the real
world. This project will focus on understanding both the cognitive and neural
mechanisms of visual working memory for meaningful objects more like those we
encounter in our everyday life. In particular, we will use both behavioral
manipulations designed to isolate working memory and a neural marker of brain
activity measured with electroencephalography to track how much is held in
visual working memory to measure memory capacity for meaningful objects. We will
also employ a cognitive training paradigm designed to improve visual working
memory capacity by creating new meaningful connections between objects. Overall,
the goal of the research is to better understand how to measure and improve
visual working memory for realistic and meaningful
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.