* 1829373
* Tropical Gravity Waves and Latent Heating: Making the Invisible Visible
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* M Joan Alexander, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 547,093.00

The research will involve a synergistic use of gravity wave, precipitation, and
cloud observations together with local-area models for new constraints on
convective updraft-scale latent heating and wave drag on circulation. Gravity
waves surrounding convective clouds are complex, three-dimensional, time-varying
phenomena. Through application of two specially designed regional model tools
together with available observations, the research can make the invisible
features of both the latent heating and the waves visible. The project focuses
on applying this new knowledge to the problem of subgrid-scale gravity wave drag
for global climate prediction and weather forecasting. Gravity wave resolving
models that have been observationally validated indicate that the scales and
propagation of gravity waves emitted from convective clouds carry the signature
of the four-dimensional properties of the localized, rapid variations in latent
heating inside the clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will examine the
following two hypotheses: (1) Observations of gravity waves and precipitation
constrain the local, instantaneous properties of latent heating inside
convective clouds; and (2) Knowledge of the latent heating can be used to
construct the missing features of the wave field needed to accurately assess
their remote effects on circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tropical
gravity wave drag is the leading force driving the quasibiennial oscillation
(QBO) in lower stratospheric winds, which itself is a leading factor in Northern
Hemisphere wintertime seasonal and interannual climate predictability and
tropical intraseasonal and interannual precipitation predictability. The
knowledge of gravity waves gained from this project will provide a clear picture
of the gravity wave momentum flux variability and relation to convective clouds,
which will permit more accurate predictions and future climate
projections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will have substantial scientific
and societal impacts. These include: (a) forecasting clear air turbulence felt
by aircraft; (b) early warning of hurricane intensification over remote ocean
areas; (c) improving tropical weather forecast skill; (d) nonmigrating tidal
influences on middle atmosphere winds; and (e) forecasting ionospheric
disturbances and communication channel disruptions. The project will provide
training to an early career scientist. The project would also support a female
PI, a member of an under-represented group in STEM
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.