* 1829707
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: CIC: Framework for Integrated Research Software Training in High Energy Physics (FIRST-HEP)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Sudhir Malik, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 124,342.00

High-energy physics (HEP) aims to understand the fundamental building blocks of
nature and their interactions by using large facilities such as the Large Hadron
Collider (LHC) at the European Laboratory for Particle Physics (CERN) in
Switzerland and the Long-Baseline Neutrino Facility (LBNF) and Deep Underground
Neutrino Experiment (DUNE) planned for the 2020s at Fermilab, in Illinois, as
well as many smaller experiments. These experiments generate ever increasing
amounts of data and rely on a sophisticated software ecosystem consisting of
tens of millions of lines of code that is critical to mine this data and produce
physics results. People are the key to developing, maintaining, and evolving
this software ecosystem for HEP experiments over many decades. Building the
necessary software requires a workforce with a mix of HEP domain knowledge and
advanced software skills. The Framework for Integrated Research Software
Training in High Energy Physics (FIRST-HEP) project provides a training path
from a researcher's first steps through active contribution to software training
and workforce development. The project serves the national interest as stated by
NSF's mission to promote the progress of science by preparing a workforce
trained in cyberinfrastructure and impacts STEM disciplines in terms of much
needed and sought after software training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FIRST-HEP
project directly organizes training activities and works with partners to
leverage and bring synergy to disparate existing efforts in order to maximize
their collective impact. It brings together an extended set of partners from the
community to build not only missing basic training elements like introductory
programming skills in Python, git and Unix but also use of HEP data formats like
ROOT and advanced topics including parallel programming, performance tuning,
machine learning and data science for Ph.D. students. It works to build a
community of instructors and experiments around the software training material
and transforms the approach for research software training in HEP. It builds the
workforce required for the cyberinfrastructure challenges of running and planned
HEP facilities and experiments in the coming years.The FIRST-HEP education and
training activities include specific goals to educate minorities in HEP, K- 12
educators and the broader STEM workforce. The K-12 teachers learn very basic
skills of Unix including file management, programming languages, such as C+ and
shell scripting. FIRST-HEP harnesses the potential of the underrepresented
groups and works to ensure that the pool meets or exceeds the diversity in the
larger HEP graduate student population when selecting both training participants
and instructors for the HEP fundamental training sessions and the advanced
computing schools. FIRST-HEP includes a dedicated outreach activity on
cybertraining to the local Puerto Rico public. FIRST-HEP leverages engagement
with the Software Carpentries to host training of K-12 teachers at UPRM in basic
Software Carpentry skills and who in turn train their students. This encourages
the teachers and school authorities to consider incorporating the basic
carpentries into the high school curriculum. The training and cyber skills
gained during the FIRST-HEP fundamental training courses directly contribute to
the broader STEM workforce and trains students to pursue data science careers
and other research areas besides HEP, such as Astronomy, where similar software
skills are required.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.