* 1829174
* Student Support for the Organization for Human Brain Mapping
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Lucina Uddin, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Kurt Thoroughman
* 02/28/2019
* USD 30,000.00

The Organization for Human Brain Mapping (OHBM) is the primary international
organization dedicated to non-invasive neuroimaging research and the functional
organization of the human brain. The Annual Meeting of OHBM is regarded as the
premier venue for the integration of innovative brain imaging methods and
cognitive neuroscience. It was started more than 20 years ago to provide a forum
for the brain-mapping scientific community to disseminate findings and enable
interactions among scientists investigating the functional organization of the
brain with emerging imaging methods. Since 1994, the OHBM has sponsored twenty-
three highly successful meetings, where attendees are exposed to cutting-edge
neuroimaging data acquisition methods, emerging approaches to large-scale
neuroimaging data analysis, the visualization of results, and their applications
in health and disease. This award will fund travel awards for deserving students
and trainees to attend the 2018 Annual Meeting to be held in Singapore. Travel
awards will be given to 30 students with high-ranking abstracts. Of these at
least 15 travel awards will be awarded to the students with the top-ranked
abstracts among 3 targeted groups (women, minorities, disabled).

The Annual Meeting provides a means for students of neuroimaging to attend
educational courses, hear lectures from leading brain researchers, form new
collaborations, and to present their original research. OHBM On Demand provides
public access to educational resources year-round by publishing online past OHBM
courses and talks. These openly available videos and slides include keynote
lectures and educational courses on topics covering state-of-the-art
methodologies and clinical applications of neuroimaging. Historically, female
representation in the mathematical and computational sciences has been low. In
contrast, in both neuroscience and psychology it has been relatively high.
Hence, the conference's position in the cross-section of statistics, computer-
science, psychology, and neuroscience promises to provide computational training
to a diverse audience and help bridge the gender gaps in the STEM fields. In
addition, improved understanding of the organization of the human brain is
directly relevant to treating neurological and psychiatric disease, and the use
of non-invasive imaging methods is increasingly important to translational
investigation and training in clinical neuroscience. As neuroimaging is used in
a wide-range of scientific disciplines, we would expect benefits for society in
areas ranging from economic and social policies to medical, educational and
psychological interventions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.