* 1829969
* Submesoscale sea ice-ocean interactions in marginal ice zones
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andrew Thompson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 537,702.00

Identifying critical processes governing marginal ice zone (MIZ) dynamics
remains one of the key challenges in our ability to comprehend and accurately
model the rapidly changing polar oceans. MIZs are regions of strong mixed layer
gradients in ocean temperatures and salinities, indicating that enhanced ocean
variability at relatively small spatial scales ought to be present there.
However, quantitative estimates of the role of small scale flows in MIZ dynamics
are currently missing, and climate models do not parameterize these non-linear
processes. This research will test the hypothesis that energetic vertical
velocities at relatively small scales can efficiently bring the oceanic heat in
contact with the sea ice and affect its melt rates. The research is of critical
importance to society for understanding how sea ice and ocean circulation evolve
under modified surface forcing conditions in a changing climate. The research
activity will develop a diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce by
establishing interdisciplinary collaborations among several U.S. academic
institutions and broadening participation of underrepresented groups. The
project will primarily fund a post-doctoral scientist who will be trained with
broad exposure to the fields of physical oceanography and remote sensing. The
investigators will contribute to enhancing society's scientific and
technological understanding by engaging in undergraduate and graduate teaching
activities, mentoring summer undergraduate students and participating in high-
school outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a
submesoscale-permitting global ocean model together with a set of idealized
numerical experiments to diagnose the characteristics of submesoscale flows in
various MIZs, classify their generation mechanisms, and assess their cumulative
impact on sea ice melt rates. Critical forcing will be identified by conducting
hydrodynamic stability analysis and by evaluating MIZ processes driving the
potential vorticity towards negative values characteristic of sub-mesoscale
flows. An energy budget analysis will be explored to understand submesoscale
sources and sinks, and reveal the role of sea ice-ocean drag in damping upper-
ocean variability. A theoretical framework explaining sea ice velocity and
concentration patterns will be developed and used together with satellite data
to observationally constrain submesoscale vertical velocities in the ocean. The
project implements a synergetic triad of high resolution numerical simulations,
theory development, and observational data analysis, representing a timely and
unique opportunity to transform our understanding of sea ice-ocean interactions
in MIZs. The research will result in a global estimate of submesoscale sea ice-
ocean heat fluxes and, supported by satellite observations of sea ice patterns
in MIZs, provide a theoretical framework to identify oceanic and atmospheric
conditions under which submesoscale heat fluxes prevail. The remote sensing
component will unify observations from multiple satellites and create a novel
set of two-dimensional observations of ocean vorticity at submesoscales that
could be used to directly test and advance upper-ocean turbulence theories. Upon
completion, this research project will advance our knowledge of submesoscale sea
ice ocean interactions and reveal missing ocean-ice heat pathways; results will
also improve future predictions of sea ice extent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.