* 1829695
* Mineral-Promoted RNA Polymerization: Investigating Structural Properties of Catalytic Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Nita Sahai, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 08/31/2023
* USD 516,342.00

The goal of the proposed work is to identify minerals which could have played a
role in the origin of life (OoL) on early Earth by promoting the formation of
longer molecules (polymers) of ribonucleic acid (RNA) from simple starting
precursor molecules (monomers). Before life and enzymes, it is proposed that
minerals may have acted as catalysts to play the role of enzymes in promoting
polymerization. RNA is one of the most important molecules in biology because of
its ability to play many roles. In the OoL, the formation of polymers is
important because oligomers have the ability to take on different structures and
functionalities. Thus, polymerization of monomers is a key bridging step in the
progress from simple organic precursors towards the earliest life-like cells.
The proposed work would contribute to NSF's goal of promoting the progress of
fundamental science in one of the most profound questions asked by humankind,
which is, how did life begin? The proposed work also includes numerous outreach
activities, including the development of a weekly program on National Public
Radio as well as a public science lecture series, which would bring science to
the general public, and outreach activities to encourage women and diversity.
The grant funds would support a post-doctoral researcher. Thus, the proposed
work also supports NSF's goal of supporting education and diversity, and
training the future scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Minerals, because
of their reactivity and ubiquity, likely contributed to the origin of life in
the transformation from prebiotic geochemistry to biochemistry. RNA is an
information- carrier and some RNAs can also act as enzymes, so RNA is believed
to have been a precursor to DNA and enzymes in the origins of life. One of the
major challenges in the field is the non-enzymatic (prebiotic) synthesis of RNA
oligomers, and minerals have long been proposed as prebiotic catalysts. The role
of montmorillonite in promoting polymerization of activated ribonucleotides in
the presence of magnesium or high concentrations of alkali cations has been
known for thirty years, and several studies have investigated RNA monomer
adsorption on minerals, but other catalytic minerals are not known. Thus, there
is a lack of knowledge about any potential relationships between mineral
structure and polymerization catalytic efficiency. We propose to address this
gap in our knowledge. We propose three hypotheses for the relationship between
the mineral structure, its adsorption capacity and its catalytic efficiency: (1)
adsorbed ribonucleotide conformation is more important than adsorption capacity
of the mineral for catalysis; (2) the divalent or alkali cations should form
outer-sphere ternary complexes between the nucleotide and any negatively charged
mineral surface, so that they can be easily displaced and the nucleotide
phosphate is still available for phosphorylation; and (3) the mineral should
provide a nanoconfined environment where the condensation reaction can occur
despite bulk aqueous environment. Specific minerals, such as birnessite,
hydrotalcite and zeolites are predicted to have catalytic structures. The broad
goals of the present study are to shed light on any potential relationships
between mineral structure, surface chemistry, adsorption capacity, adsorbed
conformation and polymerization efficiency, thus, discovering new catalytic
minerals. The specific aims are (1) to determine the adsorption characteristics
of adenosine monophosphate nucleotides in the absence and presence of dissolved
cations;(2) to determine the nucleotide polymerization-promoting ability of
various minerals; (3) to determine the detailed molecular-level conformation of
adsorbed mononucleotides on minerals that promote polymerization; and (4) to
synthesize these results to develop a model for explaining the catalytic ability
of montmorillonite and to test the predicted catalytic activity of specific
minerals. We will determine adsorption using UV-Vis spectrophotometry, and
polymerization of mononucleotides on the known catalytic mineral and on the
newly predicted minerals by High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) and
MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometry. Conformation of adsorbed monomer will be determined
by Magic Angle Spinning NMR spectroscopy and by Fourier Transform Infra-Red
Spectroscopy. The proposed work provides structure-based predictions for
catalytic activity, thus helping to identify new catalytic minerals beyond
montmorillonite. Knowledge of a wider variety of catalytic minerals under
specific environmental conditions will help predict the plausibility of
prebiotic polymerization reactions of biomolecules for life's emergence on other
solid worlds, e.g., Mars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.