* 1829376
* EAGER:  Neogene fruits and seeds from the Gray Fossil Site, Tennessee: Using multiple imaging techniques to clarify an obscure interval in the history of Appalachian vegetation
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Elizabeth Hermsen, Paleontological Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 189,617.00

This project will analyze the fossilized fruits and seeds from the Gray Fossil
Site located in eastern Tennessee. Ongoing excavation of the site, an ancient
sinkhole deposit discovered in 2000, has yielded numerous, well-preserved
fossils of terrestrial plants and animals that lived approximately seven to
four-and-a-half million years ago. The vegetation of this time period in the
Appalachian region is significant because it predates the widespread ecological
disturbance caused by Pleistocene-age environmental changes, yet its
biodiversity is not well understood. Consequently, the Gray Fossil Site presents
a unique opportunity to clarify how ecosystems of the Appalachian region have
changed over recent geological history. Researchers will identify species of
fossil fruits and seeds from the site and will describe those new to science.
They will then compare the diversity of fossil plant species found at the site
to that of other ancient and modern plants world-wide. The comparison may
provide transformative insights regarding the pace of biological
diversification, extinction, and geographic range shifts of plant species at a
local to global scale. Researchers will train undergraduate students and engage
the public at the Gray Fossil Site and Museum by producing a digital visitor's
guide to the fossil flora. Research results will be disseminated widely and will
include contributions to the NSF-funded, open access Digital Atlas of Ancient
Life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create the first comprehensive
carpoflora for the Gray Fossil Site. Researchers will analyze previously
excavated fruit and seed fossils using a combination of light microscopy,
scanning electron microscopy and micro-computed tomography. These methods supply
complementary data that characterize both surface morphological and internal
anatomical details without the need for destructive dissection. Project
personnel will determine the systematic affinities of the fossils using
structural characteristics and phylogenetic analyses, where feasible. They will
then assess the biogeographic relationships of the carpoflora based on the
taxonomy of the fossils. These data will test the hypothesis that the carpoflora
will share greatest similarities to the ancient and modern floras of Eurasia and
North America. Outcomes of this project will include an improved understanding
of Miocene and Pliocene ecosystems of North America, the historical biogeography
of the Appalachian flora, and the state of internal anatomical preservation of
the Gray Fossil Site carpoflora. The project will improve the curation of US
fossil collections and strengthen research collaborations among US
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.