* 1829004
* NRT:  A Graduate Traineeship in Cyber Physical Systems
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* John Lach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,581,476.00

Enhancing resource availability, health, security, and a sense of well-being can
be enhanced by our ability to sense, analyze, and act on our world with
efficient, safe, and secure engineered systems. To realize such systems requires
a deep understanding of the interfaces between the cyber and physical worlds,
leading to the establishment of the field of Cyber Physical Systems (CPS). While
CPS as a discipline and application-enabler has evolved tremendously over the
past decade, current graduate training does not sufficiently prepare students
for fundamental discovery and innovation in CPS nor for effective translation of
research to application development. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Virginia (UVA) will address this
need by training graduate students to pursue fundamental CPS discovery and
innovation and to collaborate with application domain experts to realize a
smarter planet, specifically in the areas of smart health, smart cities, and
autonomous systems. The traineeship anticipates training one hundred fifty-eight
(158) master's and doctoral students, including thirty-three (33) funded PhD
trainees, from civil and environmental engineering, computer science, electrical
and computer engineering, mechanical and aerospace engineering, and systems and
information engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current CPS graduate training is
lacking in three critical ways that will be addressed in this project. First,
current courses do not instill the integrative knowledge needed for new
scientific discovery and translational applications in the field of CPS. Second,
most students do not have a sufficiently robust experience of convergence
activities as part of their training. This lack exists not only in traditional
engineering and computing education but also extends into analyses of target
application domains and associated grand challenges. Third, explicit
professional development is absent in most graduate training. Such exposure is
critical in CPS given the field's potent role in our ever-evolving smart world,
and CPS practitioners must attend to social issues regarding ethics, safety,
privacy, communication, and policy. This traineeship will address these issues
and drive CPS graduate education nationwide by developing a novel, comprehensive
graduate training program that involves orientation, normalization modules,
elective courses, experiential convergence research activities, professional
development workshops, and a hands-on, testbed-driven educational curriculum.
Students will acquire both the technical depth and the integrative
transdisciplinary understanding of CPS and its associated application domains to
be successful in CPS-related careers. During their time in the program, trainees
will engage in transdisciplinary CPS research on projects related to challenges
in smart health, smart cities, and autonomous systems. These research efforts
have the potential for significant scientific and application impact, such that
a smarter world can be achieved and associated societal grand challenges can be
addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.