* 1829817
* A multi-parameter physical-chemical sensor suite on SeaCycler for determining the carbonate system, net community production, and air-sea fluxes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Uwe Send, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2022
* USD 965,755.00

The net annual flux of CO2 into the ocean helps mitigate climate change, and the
transfer of oxygen and organic carbon into the deep sea fuels its vast
ecosystem. Linked to that, and equally important, is the net community
production (NCP) since it represents the source input at the bottom of the
ecosystem food chain, governs the vertical carbon export into the deep ocean,
and also has a large controlling influence on the air-sea fluxes of CO2 and O2.
The transfers of carbon and oxygen in the water column, their exchange with the
atmosphere, and NCP are controlled by both physical and biological processes
which vary greatly on seasonal and shorter time-scales, and also interannually.
Rates and controlling processes at high latitudes have special significance but
are poorly studied and understood, in part due to logistical and technological
difficulties. In order to constrain or even fully determine the air-sea fluxes
and NCP with in-situ measurements, usually assumptions need to be made since
autonomous sensors currently cannot observe the full suite of quantities
required for closing the relevant budgets. However, recent and ongoing
developments now offer a mix of sensors, partially in prototype form, which
could be deployed on the moored profiling system "Seacycler" and which could
allow simultaneous determination of net community production (NCP), of the air-
sea flux of CO2, and the construction of budgets in important regions of the
global ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will acquire and fabricate an
innovative suite of commercially available and prototype sensors and equipment,
in order to integrate and exercise them on SeaCycler in a hierarchy of tests.
The goal is to collect sufficient data with these sensors on SeaCycler to
demonstrate a) their reliability, b) the functioning in profiling mode on
SeaCycler, c) their accuracy, d) the ability to determine total dissolved
inorganic carbon (DIC) and calcification (removing the normally made assumptions
about Redfield ratios), e) the utility of turbulence profiles in distinguishing
mixing vs mixed layers (important for budgets and the role of blooms), f) the
robustness of SeaCycler itself. These efforts will lay the foundation for year-
long open-ocean deployments of SeaCycler with a suite of accurate and tested
sensors to determine the magnitude and variability of the air-sea flux of CO2
and O2 in high-latitude regions such as the Labrador Sea and of the
storage/export of DIC and O2 in newly formed water masses. The new capabilities
would allow calculation of the magnitude of NCP entirely using biogeochemical
budgets, and to capture the physical/chemical controls of its sub-seasonal to
inter-annual variability. It is expected that the effects of calcification on
carbon budgets and air-sea fluxes can be quantifiable, by observing both CO2/pH
and DIC/AT changes with high temporal resolution. The work will bring to bear
several technologies developed under NSF OTIC grants, and leverage NSF OOI
technology. The new technology will allow experiments to develop algorithms to
reduce uncertainty in float and satellite observations. The observations enabled
would also be crucial for testing numerical models which simulate biogeochemical
processes, air-sea fluxes, and NCP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.