* 1829247
* I-Corps Sites: Type II - University of Louisville I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Van Clouse, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 223,856.00

This project, from the University of Louisville (UofL), creates a Type II NSF
Innovation-Corps (I-Corps) Site. There are two types of I-Corps Sites. Type I
Sites proposals are at institutions that have not had prior funding as an
I-Corps Site. Type II Sites are at institutions that have had prior funding as
an I-Corps Site. I-Corps Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors. The UofL Site continues the
integration of their commercialization infrastructure and capabilities through
the collaborative efforts between the Office of the Executive Vice President for
Research and Innovation (EVPRI), the College of Business' Forcht Center for
Entrepreneurship (Forcht Center) and the institution's STEM programs. The UofL
I-Corps Site Program was established in 2015 and has provided entrepreneurial
training, customer discovery and prototype development support to faculty,
staff, students and alumni across the UofL. These efforts are focused on the
commercialization of STEM discoveries resulting in increased regional economic
development and entrepreneurship-trained faculty, staff, students and alumni.
The UofL I-Corps Site program allows the University of Louisville innovation
enterprise to recruit and engage STEM researchers and students at all stages of
the entrepreneurial discovery process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
leverages institutional research strengths and resources to enable students,
faculty, staff and alumni to establish new ventures in emerging technologies and
drive those ventures to successful milestones and exits. The University of
Louisville is serving as a driver of the growth of high tech industries in
Kentucky, a state that consistently lags other states in this regard. Phase II
of the UofL's I-Corps Sites program implements a model of technology development
that centers on entrepreneurial training and customer discovery as the
foundation of product development. The program also focuses on collaborating
with existing resources at UofL to focus on recruiting a diverse group of
participants from under-represented groups in the STEM fields. The
entrepreneurial training of students, faculty, staff and alumni will allow the
state and region to recruit and retain the best and brightest researchers and
entrepreneurs, thereby contributing to creating a culture shift across the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.