* 1829465
* Integration of the Physical and Chemical Rock Properties, Structure, and Permeability of the San Andreas Fault, San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth Borehole, California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* James Evans, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 08/31/2022
* USD 234,055.00

Ten years ago, about 40 m of whole rock core was collected from a depth of
approximately 3 km across an actively creeping trace of the San Andreas Fault as
part of Earthscope's San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth Borehole. Every
centimeter of SAFOD core sampled is extremely valuable and represents a rare
view into an active plate boundary fault. The aim of the overall project is to
provide more realistic constraints for earthquakes that occur along the San
Andreas Fault and, more broadly, within active faults around the world through
the examination of whole rock core samples and a synthesis of a variety of
geological and geochemical data. Earthquakes occur as faults displace rocks in a
response to stress within the Earth's crust. Before, during, and after an
earthquake, the rocks record physical and chemical changes that are associated
with this cycle. Earthquakes and associated hazards pose a significant risk to
society that may result in loss of life, serious injuries, damage to
infrastructure, and major economic impacts. This work contributes to the
development of better constraints for earthquake ground-shaking and seismic
safety hazard models for active fault systems. Working with undergraduate and
graduate students, the project will create engaging and interactive learning
modules for undergraduate non-majors and community-at-large events that
contribute to the legacy of SAFOD and Earthscope data, and increase students'
and the general public's awareness about the field of Earthquake Geology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is focused on the structure and
composition of the San Andreas Fault at depth using the available range of
cuttings, sidewall cores, whole-rock core, and downhole geophysical logging data
from Earthscope's San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth Borehole. Specifically,
the proposed research aims to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Examine the mechanisms
of deformation and slip localization, the grain- to fault-scale nature of fluid-
rock interactions within the fault zone, and to determine the origin, nature,
and roles of carbonaceous matter in the fault zone, testing the hypothesis that
carbon-bearing fault rocks influence slip weakening and localization or serve as
indicators for earthquake induced fluid migration.&lt;br/&gt;2) Couple new
results on fault zone composition and structure with borehole-based data to
determine the elastic properties of the fault zone, to examine the nature and
significance of time-dependent chemical and physical fault zone processes, and
to relate the material properties to key elastic parameters that affect the
energy distributions in and near fault zones. &lt;br/&gt;3) Synthesize and re-
evaluate all published and accessible results by numerous research groups of the
geology, geochemistry, and rock properties of SAFOD with our new results, to
develop a predictive schematic model of fault zone structure and properties,
which we will then relate to its elastic moduli. &lt;br/&gt;4) Educate and
mentor students to become competitive STEM Workforce members and effective
science communicators through participation in research and in the development
of interactive educational activities that contribute to the legacy of SAFOD and
Earthscope data, and increasing students' and the general public's awareness of
earthquake geology and seismic hazards. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SAFOD core
provides an opportunity to rigorously examine in situ fault-rock samples in
order to decipher the processes that influence seismic slip and aseismic creep.
Systematic integration of microscopy and geochemistry enables us to understand
structural diagenesis in dynamic, complex, and heterogeneous fault zones.
Remnants of extensive alteration during fluid-rock interactions, and complex
microstructural changes during deformation are difficult to resolve without
diverse techniques at various scales. The proposed interdisciplinary approach
using high-resolution microscopy, geochemistry, and evaluation of rock
properties spans a wide range of scales and methods and will further contribute
to our ability to decipher the physio-chemical processes (e.g., pressure,
temperature, permeability, fluid composition and source) from processes
associated with fluid migration at the microscopic scale in faults (e.g.,
thermal pressurization). &lt;br/&gt;The project will expand knowledge of the
role of fluids during fault weakening, constrain the conditions associated with
fluid migration at the micro-scale during the earthquake cycle, and determine
the evolution of strength and slip behavior of major tectonic faults for seismic
hazard assessment. The new and synthesized data sets will become accessible to
the entire scientific community, as envisioned by the original Earthscope
initiative and work towards answering one of Earthscope's outstanding questions
identified in 2010: What is the slip distribution during earthquakes and what
can we learn from heterogeneities about fault geometry and fault
rheology?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.