* 1829066
* EAGER:  A Cloud-assisted Framework for Improving Pedestrian Safety in Urban Communities using Crowd-sourced Mobile and Wearable Device Data
* CSE,CNS
* 01/19/2018,06/30/2019
* Murtuza Jadliwala, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 06/30/2019
* USD 129,561.00

Pedestrian safety continues to be a significant concern in urban communities.
Several recent reports indicate that injuries and fatalities in pedestrian-
related accidents are steadily rising and that pedestrian distraction is one of
the leading causes in such accidents. Existing systems and techniques for
improving pedestrian safety, which primarily operate on users' smartphones and
mobile devices in a stand-alone fashion, have several design drawbacks and
performance and usability concerns that have precluded their successful adoption
and usage. The goal of this project is to improve pedestrian safety by designing
accurate, efficient and usable tools and techniques, which can be easily adopted
by urban users.

In order to accomplish this goal, this project plans to pursue a focused
research agenda involving novel technologies and several exploratory and
untested ideas. As part of the proposed pedestrian safety framework, accurate
and energy-efficient on-device distraction detection techniques will be
developed by employing multi-sensor and heterogeneous data available from
upcoming mobile and wearable devices. In this direction, supervised and semi-
supervised learning will be used to design efficient activity classification and
distraction prediction techniques which will be empirically evaluated using
proof-of-concept implementations. Unlike existing stand-alone approaches, the
proposed framework employs a connected-community approach to accurately capture
the impact of both a pedestrian's own actions, as well as the actions of others,
on his/her safety. This involves the design and implementation of a privacy-
preserving and cloud-assisted data-analytics engine to capture, analyze and
notify pedestrians of impending hazardous situations from the crowd-sourced
distraction data obtained from participating users. Finally, a comprehensive
performance and usability evaluation will be conducted by deploying a large-
scale testbed involving participants from Wichita State University's (WSU)
campus community. The project outcomes, including the planned testbed, will have
a significant impact on improving pedestrian safety within the WSU campus
community. If successful, similar trials at an urban or city-wide scale can also
be envisioned. In addition to improving pedestrian safety, this project will
educate users and participants on the impact of technology on pedestrian safety
and its role in improving the same. Project outcomes and results will be
disseminated by means of peer-reviewed publications, white papers and open-
source applications. Applications and anonymous data collected from the planned
testbed will be appropriately disseminated to facilitate additional research and
advances in the area of pedestrian safety technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.