* 1829120
* 2018 Gordon Research Conference on Granular Matter: The Interdisciplinary Nature of Particulate Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Xiang Cheng, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 12/31/2018
* USD 16,600.00

This grant provides funds in support of scientists and engineers, particularly
junior scientists and engineers from under-represented groups, to attend the
Ninth Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Granular Matter being held on July
22-27, 2018 at Stonehill College in Easton, Massachusetts. The funds will also
support the associated Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Granular Matter held two
days before the GRC meeting at the same location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Granular
materials, or particulate materials, are the 2nd most abundant condensed format
of materials on Earth after water and are everywhere in daily life and
industrial contexts. But compared with the study of water flows, where the
Navier-Stokes equations have been established and extensively studied more than
150 years, the understanding of granular materials is still primitive. A
quantitative description of granular flows in different states is lacking. The
predictive power highly needed in industry remains limited. Fundamentally, the
development of a theoretical understanding of far-from-equilibrium granular
materials in disordered states with nonlinear dissipative interactions will
certainly push the frontier of statistical mechanics, condensed matter theory,
fluid mechanics and dynamical systems theory. Due to the relevance of granular
matter to a wide range of natural and industrial systems, the study of granular
materials spreads across multiple scientific and engineering fields, each of
which has its own objectives and techniques. To coordinate these diverse
research efforts, it is important to maintain a regular platform for scientists
and engineers to discuss and exchange ideas across disciplines. The structure of
GRC accomplishes this by promoting presentations of new, unpublished work
followed by free, unhampered discussion among participants from disciplines that
normally do not intersect. The conference requests formal discussion periods
after every talk (guided by a discussion leader), free time in the afternoons
for small groups, follow-on discussions, poster sessions, and shared meals with
on-site housing. This combination maximizes the interactions between
participants of different fields during the meeting. The conference also
provides a friendly environment in which new collaborations can be forged to
identify fruitful new lines of research and to help tackle longstanding
problems. Over the last two decades, this biannual conference has become the
most important international conference on granular materials. NSF has been the
main supporter for the previous eight meetings. A continuous support from NSF is
critical to the success of the upcoming GRC on granular
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.