* 1829430
* RUI: Theoretical Studies of Qubit-Based Environmental Noise Characterization in Solid State Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Guy Ramon, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 143,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The manipulation of quantum mechanical states
opens new possibilities for devices that require quantum mechanics to understand
and predict their operation. Applications include quantum information
processing, communication, and sensing. Exploiting characteristics of nanoscale
solid-state systems that have a quantum mechanical origin is hampered by
decoherence, a process that spoils the properties of quantum mechanical states
through the uncontrolled interactions between the quantum system and its
environment. In recent years a new paradigm to address the issue of decoherence
has emerged. Researchers have turned the problem on its head. Rather than using
qubits - the fundamental unit of information in a quantum computer to do quantum
computation, researchers are using qubits as sensitive probes to extract
valuable information about fundamental noise mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports a theoretical research and undergraduate education program aimed at
improving current methods of characterizing noise by elucidating some of the
main open questions in noise theory in the context of quantum environments. The
outcomes of this research may have impact on quantum-mechanics-based
technologies including quantum computation, quantum communication, and quantum
metrology. Noise spectroscopy techniques developed in this research may
influence the design of the next generation of multiqubit devices, which are
expected to be exposed to more complicated noise environments.&lt;br/&gt;The
program supported through this award will be carried out at Santa Clara
University, a Primarily Undergraduate Institution, and will provide educational
opportunities for undergraduate students through independent research projects
throughout its duration. Students will participate in cutting-edge physics
research that will train them in advanced theoretical methods and high-end
numerical analysis. A variety of theoretical methods and work modalities will
ensure that students will pursue multiple and independent lines of investigation
so that self-contained research projects can be completed within a full-time
summer period. Participating students will be exposed to the leading
experimental and theoretical endeavors in the highly vibrant and
interdisciplinary research field of quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical research and undergraduate education focused on qubit-based
environmental noise characterization. The research is aimed to elucidate some of
the main open questions in noise detection techniques that utilize qubit
readouts under properly chosen dynamical decoupling (DD) pulse sequences to
effectively scan the noise power spectrum. Studies will aim at enhancing the
resolution and extending the applicability of these DD noise spectroscopy (DDNS)
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;DDNS protocols for polyspectra reconstruction will be
designed to detect signatures of non-Gaussian noise. The method will be applied
to study charge fluctuations in solid-state quantum systems, where it can be
used as a sensitive tool to map the locations and characteristics of local
fluctuators. In a different application, non-Gaussian noise spectroscopy will be
used to improve nuclear spin detection using nitrogen vacancy centers in
diamond. Multiqubit DDNS techniques will be developed to resolve multiple noise
sources and to detect quantum noise in strongly coupled environments. These
methods will be applied to study quantum models of interacting fluctuators,
revisiting the spin-fluctuator model. The problem of two transverse noises will
be analyzed under a general framework, accounting for both dephasing and
dissipation, appropriate for a general qubit working point. The theory will be
applied to the commonly encountered scenario of quantum dot singlet-triplet spin
qubits simultaneously afflicted by charge and nuclear noises. Finally, venturing
outside DDNS, other qubit-based methods for environmental noise characterization
will be explored, including spin-locking based spectroscopy of continuously
driven qubits and correlated projective measurements.&lt;br/&gt;The program
supported through this award will be carried out at Santa Clara University and
will provide educational opportunities for undergraduate students through
independent research projects throughout its duration. Students at this
primarily-undergraduate institution will become familiar with noise theory,
semiconductor physics and foundational quantum mechanics, and will be exposed to
a wide range of analytical and numerical methods. Because of the scientific and
technological importance of these topics, students will benefit from a research
experience that will prepare them for a wide variety of careers in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.