* 1829237
* WORKSHOP: Bridging the Gap: An NSF Workshop on Conversational Agents and Human-Robot Interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Brian Scassellati, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 04/30/2019
* USD 49,869.00

This award funds participation of researchers in a 2-day workshop to be held in
Washington, D.C. entitled "Bridging the Gap: An NSF Workshop on Conversational
Agents and Human-Robot Interaction". Recent technical advances have led to
increased development and adoption of robots and embodied conversational agents
in a variety of domains and contexts. As these agents and robots become
increasingly ubiquitous in everyday life, it will become essential for
researchers and designers of both robots and agents to understand the common
challenges and opportunities for collaboration between humans and nonhuman
agents. This award funds the attendance of researchers in the fields of embodied
conversational agents and human-robot interaction for a workshop to lay the
groundwork for a shared research agenda across both fields.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The workshop involves keynote speakers commenting on the state of
each field with panelists from the other, breakout sessions for discussion of
crosscutting themes of common interest, and the development of a shared research
agenda to identify current grand challenges and opportunities for productive
collaboration between the fields of embodied conversational agents and human-
robot interaction. The broad themes discussed include the challenges of
embodiment (physical or virtual), coordination in mixed human-agent teams,
social and affective dynamics of human-agent collaboration, control systems and
learning, and the ethical implications of human-agent
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.