* 1829515
* Collaborative Research: Droplet transport in the vicinity of breaking waves: Experiments and simulations
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,02/29/2024
* David Richter, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 318,010.00

The accurate prediction of spray and aerosol generation at the ocean surface is
essential for a wide variety of applications including weather and climate
predictions. This research aims at characterizing and quantifying droplet
transport in the turbulent airflow around breaking surface waves in the ocean. A
unique combined experimental and numerical approach is designed. At the air-sea
interaction laboratory at the University of Delaware, controlled, repeatable
breaking wave events will be re-produced, and measurements of droplet
concentration and velocity for different droplet sizes will be used to directly
estimate production fluxes. At the University of Notre Dame, measured waveforms
and droplet production rates are used as inputs into large eddy simulations
configured to recreate laboratory conditions. Droplet statistics are directly
compared between experiments and simulations, and the simulations will provide a
means for investigating momentum and thermodynamic exchange rates, as well as
upscaling to field conditions. Numerical weather and climate models require
accurate parameterizations of marine aerosol source fluxes, and only by
understanding droplet transport immediately after production can these be
faithfully improved. The results of this study will be used for training 2 PhD
students and for engaging undergraduate students in STEM disciplines. The
results will also be disseminated to a wide audience through the utilization of
the research material for educational outreach efforts, including
visualizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides an unprecedented view
of droplet dynamics in the turbulent wave boundary layer. Virtually all field
observations of spray production rates infer fluxes based on fixed-height
concentrations, and this process requires making assumptions regarding the
turbulent transport of droplets in the lowest regions of the marine boundary
layer. For small droplets, many of these assumptions hold, but for large
droplets - those with the largest potential for altering air-sea heat and
momentum fluxes - factors such as droplet inertia, flow separation behind
breaking waves, and preferred wave-relative ejection locations likely violate
assumptions. The research plan is aimed at several specific objectives: (i)
performing controlled laboratory experiments which inform numerical simulations,
and making one-to-one comparisons of statistics and bulk balances; (ii) directly
compute size-resolved vertical fluxes of droplets in both experiments and
simulations, in order to reveal the influence of inhomogeneous and intermittent
turbulence in the vicinity of surface waves; and (iii) determine the
production/deposition velocity of droplets and expand to realistic conditions
using the large eddy simulations. The key outcomes will include modified flux-
profile relationships of droplets of varying size, and better-informed estimates
of spray-induced fluxes of heat, momentum, and
moisture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.