* 1829075
* NRT-HDR: A team-based training paradigm integrating informatics and ecology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kiona Ogle, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,899,112.00

Earth's deserts, tropical forests, and other ecosystems, natural or managed,
provide valuable goods and services to society. These ecosystems, however, are
threatened by extreme weather events, changes in land use, habitat
fragmentation, and species loss. The expertise to understand the impacts of such
threats will require teams who collectively bring to bear modern methods in
ecology, data and information processing, computing, statistics, and
mathematical modeling. However, such team-based, scientific approaches are rare
in formal graduate education programs. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to Northern Arizona University will address these
challenges by developing a team-based graduate training program in ecological
and environmental informatics, with a focus on team-based research combined with
the development of strong expert and public communication skills and modern
collaborative skills broadly applicable beyond academia. The project anticipates
training forty-eight (48) PhD students, including twenty-four (24) funded
trainees, with an additional 100 graduate students (MS and PhD) benefiting from
various aspects of the NRT training program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT
training program is couched in the interdisciplinary research theme of
understanding and forecasting the properties and processes of terrestrial
ecosystems, especially the impact of and feedbacks to global change. The field
is being flooded with data (e.g., from various ecological and Earth observatory
networks) that are critical to understanding and forecasting terrestrial
ecosystem responses. However, most graduate students and scientists lack the
quantitative, computational, and collaborative skills to leverage such data to
address grand, challenging questions. This NRT program will train the next
generation of scientists to overcome these limitations, with a focus on training
in informatics tools and team-science skills that facilitate solutions to
complex problems, motivated by the question: How does anthropogenic global
change affect the health and productivity of terrestrial ecosystems? In this
innovative graduate training program, trainees will create their own scientist
profile in ecological and environmental informatics by building substantive
depth in a primary core competency and establishing breadth in other primary and
supporting areas. The primary areas include data analytics and computing,
analysis and synthesis, and terrestrial ecosystem science; the supporting areas
include relevant data collection tools and products as well as skillsets in
communication, collaboration, and team building. Key elements of this NRT
program are scalable and sustainable, including: (1) a curriculum that allows
students to personalize their training, (2) workshops, courses, and other
activities that focus on team skills and applying these skills to collaborative
research projects, (3) preparation for a range of careers via professional
development and applied internship opportunities, and (4) the graduate
ecological and environmental informatics certificate that is accessible to
students in a range of STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.