* 1829773
* Trajectories in functional diversity after disturbance at vents on the East Pacific Rise
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Lauren Mullineaux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2023
* USD 482,693.00

Hydrothermal vents support oases of life in the deep sea and are inhabited by
unusual organisms that use chemical energy instead of photosynthesis as the
basis of their food web. However, because the vents occur in geologically active
areas of the seafloor, entire communities can be eradicated by catastrophic
natural disturbances such as eruptions. The main objectives of this project are
to quantify how quickly these communities recover from catastrophic disturbance
and to determine what processes influence their resilience. The project focuses
on both the structure (species diversity) and function (trait diversity) of the
communities. The investigators will examine vents on an active segment of the
East Pacific Rise where eruptive disturbance occurs on decadal time scales.
These activities will create an unprecedented long-term (&gt;14-year)
quantitative time-series of colonist species composition and function. The
application of trait-based analysis to the question of biological succession at
vents has the potential to change the way we think about resilience in other
patchy, transient and regionally-connected ecosystems. By considering how traits
change over time, the researchers can untangle which species-level
characteristics most influence abundance and distribution. The project
objectives have broad significance with the growing potential for human-caused
disturbances at deep-sea vents through deep-sea mining. Additional impacts
include strengthening participation of under-represented minorities in marine
science and contributing to international database development for functional
traits of deep-sea vent species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The unique,
chemosynthesis-fueled fauna inhabiting deep-sea hydrothermal vents are subject
to tectonic and eruptive disturbance that can eradicate entire communities. The
main objectives of this project are to quantify how quickly these communities
recover from catastrophic disturbance and to determine what processes influence
their resilience. The focus is on vents on an active segment of the East Pacific
Rise where eruptive disturbance occurs on decadal time scales. Field data on
colonization and larval supply are used to characterize not only species
succession but also the trajectory of functional diversity after a recent (2006)
eruption. A new, promising approach to the colonization studies comes from
incorporating trait-based analysis of functional diversity. Functional trait
analysis is increasingly recognized in terrestrial and freshwater systems as a
tool to holistically answer ecological questions, but trait analysis has not
been often applied to marine systems. By considering how traits of incoming
colonists change over time, the investigators can untangle which species-level
factors most influence abundance and distribution. This project will create an
unprecedented long-term (&gt;14-year) quantitative time-series of colonist
species composition and function. It includes multiple vent sites to encompass
the full diversity of habitat conditions, and assesses both local processes and
regional connectivity through larval supply. Field observations at individual
sites contribute to broader questions when placed in the context of
metacommunity theory. In this theoretical framework, field data such as this can
be used to answer such questions as how the eradication of the vent community at
a particular site affects the persistence of the metacommunity overall, and
which vent sites contribute most to regional
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.