* 1829336
* Travel Support for student participation at the 2018 Electron Backscatter Diffraction Topical Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Elena Miranda, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/28/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support student participation at a conference focused on
Electron Backscatter Diffraction (EBSD) at the University of Michigan, under the
sponsorship of the Microanalysis Society. EBSD is a core microanalytical
technique used by both the materials and geological sciences communities. It
utilizes the diffraction of high-energy electrons to determine phase types and
orientations of crystals in natural and engineered materials. EBSD plays an
important role in material science and geology for the understanding everything
from crystallization processes to deformation mechanisms, seismic and viscous
anisotropy and material properties (such as strength, fracture toughness, and
thermal conductivity). EBSD is also becoming part of the data science realm,
with a significant computing component to not only process large amounts of data
but also model the acquisition of the data and interface with material behavior
models. The award will support participation of students from diverse
backgrounds, and will serve to broaden participation in the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The format for EBSD 2018 will follow
that of the overwhelmingly successful previous five EBSD meetings. The first day
will offer all-day classroom and hands-on tutorials for beginners or more
advanced tutorials for experienced users, with a focus on advanced data
processing methods and data science, e.g. cross correlation EBSD, coupling
crystal plasticity modeling, Matlab Texture Analysis and Dream3D platform.
Attendees will also have the opportunity to see live EBSD demonstrations by all
the major EBSD vendors on UoM instruments. The next two days of the workshop
will proceed with invited talks addressing EBSD applications in geological
deformation mechanisms, geochronology, and fossilization, metals manufacturing,
transportation industry, and energy research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.