* 1829100
* Laboratory Technician Support: Experimental Hydrogeophysics Technician
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Andrew Parsekian, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 716,046.00

This award establishes a technician in the Hydrogeophysics Laboratory at the
University of Wyoming. The purpose of this technician is to provide a novel link
between broad Earth science research and quantitative geophysical measurement to
understand Earth processes experimentally, and to assist in training students
and scientists. Revealing properties and processes about the near-subsurface
environment - deeper than can be accessed with manual probes, in multiple space
and/or time dimensions - is important to promoting the progress of environmental
geoscience. Hydrogeophysics encompasses the observation and measurement of
hydrologic processes and anomalies from the Earth's surface to the depth of the
deepest groundwater that is connected to modern hydrologic systems. Research
enabled by this diverse set of geophysical methods spans much of Earth science:
glaciology, sedimentology, hydrology, ecology, and others. This award enables a
range of scientists across the country to access resources of the
Hydrogeophysics Laboratory and related measurement expertise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core mission of this project is to provide an
experimental hydrogeophysical technician at the University of Wyoming who serves
the broad geoscience community in support of experimental hydrogeophysical
research. The objectives are to: 1) enable a broad range of scientists to
benefit from hydrogeophysical measurements, 2) provide instrument and
methodology training, 3) contribute to methodological advancements, and 4)
enhance outreach. The technician performs measurements and assists visitors in
using or designing experimental apparatus, and with sample preparation. The
technician focuses on ground penetrating radar, electrical resistivity, and
nuclear magnetic geophysical methods. In the lab, primary efforts are directed
towards supporting experimental research and material property calibrations.
Experimental hydrogeophysics work is also conducted outside the brick-and-mortar
lab, and therefore the technician also provides support to related field
experiments, particularly related to acquiring samples and ancillary
measurements needed to develop material property transform
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.