* 1829277
* Laboratory Technician Support: Shock Wave Experiments in Geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Paul Asimow, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 721,154.00

This award will provide five years of stable funding to support a senior
laboratory manager for the Caltech Lindhurst Laboratory of Experimental
Geophysics. The Lindhurst Lab is dedicated to research into the interiors of the
Earth and planets and the results of hypervelocity impacts on their surfaces,
using laboratory scale impact experiments. The lab operates several large guns
that can accelerate projectiles to speeds from hundreds to several thousand
meters per second (that is, up to 17,000 miles per hour). When these projectiles
hit their targets, observations of the resulting shock waves or of material
recovered after the shock are used to probe both the process of impact itself
and the properties of geological or technological materials under extreme
compression. In some cases, these methods and the actual materials under study
are relevant to both national and planetary defense applications. The senior
laboratory manager position will enable recruitment and long-term retention of
an expert staff member able to maintain continuous memory of laboratory methods,
ensure safety, train students and postdoctoral researchers, and plan upgrades
and maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the time span of this award, the
funded technician will dedicate efforts to a number of methods. First, an
upgrade of the laboratory vacuum system to prepare the gun target chambers for
shots in much less time. Second, transition from traditional machining to
additive machining (3-D printing) for as many expendable parts as possible.
Third, design, installation and commissioning of a new Photonic Doppler
Velocimeter recently funded by the Defense Department's Office of Naval
Research. Fourth, recalibration of our high-speed optical pyrometer for accurate
dynamic temperature measurements. Fifth, design and testing of improved recovery
experiments combining graded density impactors and impedance-matched sample
chambers to achieve new pressure-temperature paths and better preservation of
high-pressure phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.