* 1829393
* Identifying coral reef 'bright spots' from the global 2015-2017 thermal-stress event
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Deron Burkepile, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2022
* USD 653,590.00

Coral reefs are one of the world's most diverse ecosystems that provide goods
and services, such as fisheries and storm protection, for inhabitants of
tropical and subtropical regions. However, the current rapid rate of climate
change threatens the existence of coral reefs as they degrade because of
thermal-stress events. Consequently, the coverage and coral composition of many
coral reefs is changing. Most global models suggest that few if any reef corals
will survive beyond the 2.5 degree Celsius temperature rise predicted for the
tropical oceans within the next hundred years. Such predictions differ from
recent field studies on coral reefs that show pockets where corals do not bleach
and die. The disagreement between the global models and field assessments is a
consequence of ignoring climate-change refuges; it is critical to locate the
climate-change refuges and determine what circumstances are conducive for coral
survival. The investigators will examine the global response of coral reefs to
thermal stresses over the last two decades, and focus on the 2015-2017 El Nino
event, which caused considerable thermal stress and coral bleaching. The
investigators ask the question: Where are the coral reef 'bright spots' from the
thermal-stress events? 'Bright spots' are considered as places with less than
expected bleaching. The team will also assess why some localities are potential
'bright spots'. Identifying coral reef bright spots will help guide future
conservation decisions by enabling managers to target reefs with specific
characteristics, which could be protected from human encroachment and be
designated as potential refuges from coral bleaching as climate change
progresses. This project includes training of a post-doctoral fellow and a Ph.D
student, and host a coral-bleaching workshop. This study will be of relevance to
all persons that live and work near coral reefs. What happens to reef corals has
cascading consequences on other reef-associated organisms, and also influences
whether reefs can keep up with sea-level rise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current
rapid rate of climate change threatens the existence of coral reefs as they
degrade by thermal-stress events. A glimmer of optimism lies in the observation
that thermal stresses vary spatially and temporally across the oceans, with the
consequence that coral communities in different geographic regions, and under
different local conditions, are likely to inherently differ in their capacity to
tolerate thermal stress. One of the most transformative aspects of this work is
in analyzing the extent to which the bleaching patterns differed from model
predictions. This work will capitalize on the recent progress on Bright-Spots
Analysis to assess unexpected outcomes. The investigators will take two
approaches. First, the project will use a machine-learning algorithm, boosted
regression trees to examine the relationships between coral bleaching and the
environmental predictor variables of interest. Second, a series of generalized
mixed effects models, within a hierarchical Bayesian framework, will be used to
identify where geographically 'bright spots' from thermal stress are located and
why some coral reefs are more susceptible to thermal stresses than
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.