* 1829655
* Critical Factors Controlling Gas Separations by Polymeric Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Sanat Kumar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 240,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical, computational, and data-
intensive research, and education with an aim to use computation and data-
intensive approaches to help develop membranes made of polymer to be used to
separate gases. The PI will develop computational tools modelling materials made
of polymers which are composed of long-chain molecules. These tools will be used
in conjunction with other theoretical, data-centric, and computational methods
to advance understanding of polymeric materials and to develop robust design
methodologies for polymer membranes for current and emerging technological
applications. A highlight of the work focuses on using polymer membranes to
clean gas streams of unnecessary pollutants, for example removing corrosive
sulfur-based compounds from gas streams to mitigate pipeline corrosion when
fracked gases are pumped over long distances. These research activities are
coupled to extensive educational activities. Driven by the PI's recent success
in recruiting high school and undergraduate students for summer research, the PI
will continue his efforts to recruit women and minority students at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels. A focus will be to provide high school
students with opportunities to perform summer research in this project.
Encouraged by past successes, these high-school students will be actively
encouraged to pursue undergraduate education leading to possible careers in
STEM.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports theoretical, computational, and data-
intensive research, and education to advance understanding of polymeric
membranes. Polymeric membranes, which are efficient for gas separation
applications, have the added advantages of being lightweight and easily
processable. There have been many advances in polymer membrane materials, but
most of these have been empirically designed. To develop design strategies,
there is need for a quantitative understanding of the microscopic mechanisms
controlling molecular transport, solubility, and hence permeability and
selectivity of these materials. The PI will use computer simulations and data-
intensive approaches to target some of the most important unresolved questions
in this topic. This award supports research which will primarily use molecular
dynamics simulations and machine learning methodologies to address three
important questions: (i) Can data-intensive methods be applied to design
membrane materials of interest? More specifically, can data mining and machine
learning be used to predict permeability and selectivity, and thus the upper
bound correlation for membrane gas separation performance? (ii) It has been
found that the solute size dependence of permeability in the case of rubbery
polymers is "opposite" to that found in their glassy analogs. Is this a general
trend, and if so, how does the transition from glassy trends, dominated by
sieving, to rubbery behavior, which is probably driven by solubility effects,
occur? and (iii) What is the role of nanoparticles when they are physically
mixed with polymers in the context of gas separation? How is this phenomenon
affected if the nanoparticles are made selective? What is the role of
nanoparticles in aging of polymer glasses in this context?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.