* 1829856
* Topographic Dynamics of the Gulf Stream
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* William Dewar, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 584,478.00

This is a theoretical and numerical study of the subsurface Gulf Stream from the
Charleston Bump to the Cape Hatteras region. The Gulf Stream is a central
element of the North Atlantic circulation that has proven subtle to model in
ocean general circulation settings. This work will solidify current
understanding of Gulf Stream dynamics, particularly with regards to the robust
separation from the coast at Cape Hatteras which remains a stubborn problem for
numerical models. In addition, this study will isolate and define the locations
in the vicinity of Cape Hatteras where the Gulf Stream comes out of geostrophic
balance between the pressure gradients and forces due to the rotation of the
Earth. The loss of energy from balanced flows to smaller scales, dissipation,
and mixing, will also be quantified in these areas, an important step to closing
the oceanic energy cycle. The identification of these locations can inform site
selection for future observational studies of processes involved in loss of
balance and non-hydrostatic phenomena. In addition to the usual methods for
disseminating results by means of journal publications and presentations at
national and international meetings, a graduate student will be trained in
multi-scale computational oceanography and large and mesoscale ocean dynamics.
Their Ph.D. research will be drawn from one of the topics outlined in this
proposal. Also, a connection with the FSU Women in Mathematics, Science and
Engineering (WIMSE) program will be engaged to recruit an undergraduate to work
on the development of topographic datasets, and the development of analysis
software. This will result in publications joint with the undergraduate in major
oceanographic journals. A website will be created to host and maintain the
modeling results and software, thereby making them available to the broader
community for their use. The goal is to have all the numerical data available
for download within six months of completing the
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivations for the study come from recent
results emphasizing the dynamical importance of this region to the North
Atlantic general circulation and open questions about Gulf Stream energetics,
local topographic controls and mixing. The presented hypotheses are: (1) Gulf
Stream -topography interaction promotes subsurface ''loss of balance'' and
subsequently the generation of submesoscale phenomena, (2) the isobath
convergence occurring at Cape Hatteras is a major control on Gulf Stream
separation from the coast and (3) non-hydrostatic phenomena, including density
inversions, are routinely generated in this area. This project will examine
these hypotheses within the confines of a numerical and theoretical study of the
Gulf Stream. The primary tools to be employed are regional embedded and
downscaled numerical models, combined with analytical and process-oriented
analyses. The goals of the project are to locate and describe the phenomena
associated with regional loss of balance and submesoscale generation and provide
quantitative estimates of the regional energy drain from the Gulf Stream to
unbalanced, submesoscale motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.