* 1829981
* Collaborative Research: Do benthic feedbacks couple sulfur, nitrogen and carbon biogeochemistry during transient deoxygenation?
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Tina Treude, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 09/30/2024
* USD 533,519.00

Collaborative Research: Do benthic feedbacks couple sulfur, nitrogen and carbon
biogeochemistry during transient deoxygenation?&lt;br/&gt;Tina Treude and David
Valentine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on chemical processes that
occur in oxygen-limited waters along the world's continental margins. These
processes are influenced by the activities of microbes and control the fate of
key elements that are deposited to sediments in these areas including carbon,
nitrogen and sulfur. As a result, they are key to the health and function of the
ocean. The intellectual merit of this research is to study the coupled chemical
and microbial processes that occur in these environments by combining robotic
technology with experiments that will be conducted at the ocean floor and in the
shipboard laboratory. The broader impacts of this project will provide at-sea
training and educational opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students
and the results will be broadly distributed to stakeholders and interested
parties. Results from this research promise to identify and quantify rates for
key processes that couple carbon, nitrogen and sulfur in marine environments
adjacent to the continents. The project addresses an important aspect of
environmental change in the ocean (i.e., decreased oxygen due to warming and
nutrient enrichment) and its influence on chemical and biological cycles and
ocean ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamics of oxygen minimum zones
along continental margins, and their potential for future expansion, are
important because of their intersection with global biogeochemical cycles and
because of their far-reaching impacts on ocean ecosystems. However, the impacts
of transient deoxygenation on biogeochemical cycles of carbon, nitrogen and
sulfur at the sea floor are not well established and are the focus of this
study. This study will test the overarching hypothesis that deoxygenation
triggers a positive feedback loop between bacterial mats at the sea floor that
consume hydrogen sulfide, a sulfur species that can be toxic to higher
organisms, and an underlying community of bacteria that produce hydrogen
sulfide. By this hypothesis, the establishment of sea floor mats, which depend
on inorganic nitrogen sources to run their sulfur metabolism, accelerates
nitrogen cycling in the uppermost sediment horizon following deoxygenation. The
accelerated nitrogen cycling allows for upward expansion of the sulfide-
producing bacteria, which in-turn provide a shallow source of sulfide as
substrate to further support nitrogen cycling in the sea floor mat. The results
of this study will enable understanding of the relationship between oxygen
dynamics in the water column and the biogeochemical processes at the sea floor
that link the transformations of carbon, nitrogen and sulfur. The results of
this study promise to define the environmental conditions under which the sulfur
and nitrogen cycles are coupled and subject to strong positive feedbacks at the
seafloor, as well as the conditions under which they are decoupled. This study
provides training in research and innovative analytical and experimental
techniques to four graduate students and several undergraduates. Undergraduates
will be engaged in research at two institutions, one of which has recently been
designated as a Hispanic serving institution. Approximately 10 undergraduate
students (20 in total) will participate in each of the two proposed
oceanographic expeditions, through an established course entitled: Field Studies
in Marine Biogeochemistry. This course provides an opportunity for students to
develop an independent research project in advance of the expedition, to
participate on the expedition, and to conduct research projects while at
sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.