* 1829343
* An Integrated Framework for Analyzing Technology Subsidies
* SBE,SMA
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Eric Williams, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 12/31/2022
* USD 298,713.00

Subsidies are among the many tools available to policy makers as they consider
how best to support consumer adoption and producer innovation of new
technologies, but accounting for the major effects of subsidies can be
problematic for some technologies. For example, despite a long history of
subsidizing energy technologies such as renewable electricity sources, biofuels,
and efficient lighting and appliances, the analytical basis for evaluating the
effects of subsidies on these technologies is not yet firmly established. Prior
assessments of energy technology subsidies employed one of two analytical
perspectives; the analysis either: (i) compared subsidy costs to the monetized
environmental benefits resulting from increased consumer adoption of the
technology, but ignored the subsidy's impact on technology evolution; or (ii)
examined the subsidy's impact on the market competitiveness of technology
producers, including future technology innovations, but ignored the
environmental benefits. Both perspectives contribute valuable insights, but
neither perspective fully accounts for the range of subsidy costs and benefits,
and policy prescriptions based on either perspective in isolation are
necessarily limited. By combining the two analytical perspectives within a
single integrated framework, this project will allow us to estimate and compare
the long-run net effects of alternative forms of technology subsidies on
consumer adoption, producer innovation, and the resultant benefits. The research
will apply the framework to estimate the net effects of different subsidy
trajectories (types, levels, and timing of subsidies) for particular emerging
technologies -- including electric cars, solar photovoltaics, and wind power.
The results will advance understanding of environmental policy, technology
innovation policy, and quantitative policy analysis. The major product of this
research, the integrated analytical framework, can be used to inform policy
decisions about which technologies to subsidize, the level and timing of subsidy
support, and other policy-relevant questions. The framework is flexible: it is
immediately applicable to the analysis of subsidies for new technologies in
other industries, and could also be extended to study forms of intervention
other than subsidies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated framework comprises
three types of models. An adoption model, using actual price and technology
sales data, forecasts consumer adoption of the technology as a function of the
consumer's subsidy-adjusted investment in the technology. A technological
progress model, based on experience-curve methods and actual cost/experience
data for comparable technologies, forecasts technology cost reductions that
result from accumulated consumer adoption of the technology, and isolates the
cost reductions attributable to the subsidy. An emissions model, using data
developed by the environmental economics and life-cycle emissions research
communities, converts units of technology adoption into estimates of emissions
reduction, and converts estimated emissions reductions into estimates of
monetized social benefit. The integration of these models produces estimates of
the time-discounted net effects of a technology subsidy that account for the
subsidy cost in relation to: (i) the direct environmental benefits (monetized
emissions reductions) from consumer adoption of the technology, and (ii) the
indirect innovation-related benefits derived from technical improvements,
stimulated by the subsidy, that yield additional consumer adoption and benefits
in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.