* 1829879
* Development and validation of an imaging cell sorter for integrated single cell genome and morphology analyses
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Ramunas Stepanauskas, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,396,269.00

Marine ecosystems are dominated by microscopic, unicellular life. Due to the
prevalent resistance to cultivation under laboratory conditions and staggering
diversity of marine microorganisms, molecular research tools are becoming
increasingly important sources of information about their composition and
function, response to global environmental changes and anthropogenic
contaminants, as well as their potential as sources of natural products for
bioenergy, pharmaceutical and biotech applications. However, although powerful
in their sheer throughput and independence from cultivation biases, molecular
tools often suffer from weak connectivity between the genomic sequences that
they reveal and the biological features that these sequences represent, such as
cell morphology. The goal of this project is to develop and validate a next-
generation fluorescence-activated cell sorter that will help bridging this gap.
The instrument will enable the capture of images and DNA of the same, individual
cell. It will also introduce several additional improvements in the general flow
cytometry technology. The integration of single cell genomics with imaging will
enable deeper insights into the composition and roles of uncultured microbial
groups in nature and provide the critical, missing link between the
contemporary, molecular data sets and the long history of cell morphology-based
plankton studies. Currently, there is no suitable instrument on the market for
this task. The instrument will be validated and optimized under laboratory
conditions and onboard a research vessel. The new technology will be made
readily accessible to the research community through core facility services,
workshops, publications and potential commercialization.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flow cytometry and cell sorting play important roles in
the quantification, optical characterization, targeted cultivation, as well as
molecular and elemental analyses of marine plankton. The goal of this project is
to develop and validate a next-generation fluorescence-activated cell sorter
that incorporates the following, major technical improvements as compared to the
existing instruments: a) high-quality images of the sorted cells are captured
using novel optical geometry; b) cell fluorescence action spectra are analyzed;
c) signal-to-noise ratios are greatly improved for light scatter and
fluorescence signals. These technological advances will enable high-throughput,
integrated analyses of genomes, morphologies, sizes and pigments of individual
cells, colonies and aggregates of the various uncultured lineages of small
eukaryotes, bacteria and archaea that dominate marine ecosystems. The new
instrument will also be instrumental in sort-free cell analyses and in
delineation of the sort gate without the need for the laborious and imprecise
bulk sorting for microscopy. The performance of this instrument will be
validated and optimized under various operational modes in laboratory conditions
and onboard a research vessel. To ensure easy access to this new technology to
the broad research community, its use will be incorporated into standard
services of the Single Cell Genomics Center and the J.J. MacIsaac Facility for
Aquatic Cytometry at Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences. These core
facilities already helped supporting research at over a hundred organizations
around the globe. Options for instrument commercialization will also be
explored. One post-doctoral researcher and one undergraduate student will be
engaged in the development and validation of the instrument. To foster further
dissemination and discussion of the new technology, this project will provide
partial support for the fourth microbial single cell genomics workshop and
annual aquatic flow cytometry courses at Bigelow
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.