* 1829629
* Out-of-Field Science Teaching Conference: A Focus on Scope, Experience, and Response
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Julie Luft, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Beth Herbel Eisenmann
* 12/31/2019
* USD 99,830.00

This two-day conference addresses a thorny issue in K-12 education, out-of-field
science teaching, or the reality that science teachers regularly find themselves
responsible for teaching content or in contexts that are outside their area of
expertise. For example, teachers who have expertise working with students in the
upper elementary grades might find themselves responsible for teaching first
grade or kindergarten. Or, teachers with expertise in one area of science might
find themselves responsible for teaching content in a different area (e.g., a
teacher who is certified in biology might find herself responsible for teaching
chemistry). Certification policies, the Next Generation Science Standards, and
the creation of interdisciplinary STEM classes and schools will potentially
result in more teachers being assigned out-of-field science teaching
responsibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thirty participants--including
educational researchers, science teacher educators, policy makers and elementary
and secondary science teachers--will explore three questions: (1) What is the
magnitude and variation of out-of-field science teaching in elementary and
secondary science settings? (2) How do K-12 science teachers arrive at and
negotiate out-of-field science teaching assignments? (3) What are the
implications of out-of-field science teaching for those involved in science
teacher preparation and professional development? The conference is unique in
that it focuses on science teachers, addresses educational policy requirements;
and looks at the spectrum of OOF teaching in science across the elementary,
middle level, and high school grades. One potential outcome of the meeting is
the establishment of a research agenda regarding out-of-field science teaching.
Ultimately, the activities leading up to the conference, the conference, and the
post-conference will allow for an understanding of the scope of out-of-field
science teaching and science teachers' experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.