* 1829344
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Team Success and Failure
* SBE,SMA
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Dashun Wang, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 10/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

One of the most fundamental and universal shifts in modern science and
technology is the flourishing of teams in all areas of science, scholarship,
invention and entrepreneurship as solitary researchers vanish. Teams constitute
the social engines that drive new developments with an increasing dominance in
science and technology. Nevertheless, little is known about the process through
which teams succeed and fail as the vast majority of studies are based on
observation and analysis of successful teams alone. For example, most team
research is restricted to teams that successfully formed in the first place,
resulting in a joint publication or patent. In reality, most teams fail,
sometimes in a spectacular manner. This fact suggests that our current
understanding of teams suffers from systematic selection bias where failed teams
have largely been ignored because the data that trace them are much less
abundant. Prior investigations have documented the career advantages teams
confer on their members, but not how they influence scientific discovery and
technological invention. Here by analyzing teams that fail alongside their
successful counterparts across many domains and outcome metrics, this project
will uncover empirically-grounded insights regarding why, how, and when teams
fail. Without analyzing the many ways in which teams fail, researchers remain
unable to identify robust factors associated with success. This project examines
team success and failure across a broad array of science and technology-related
contexts, ranging from biological, social and natural science and scholarship to
technology, software, and entrepreneurship. Teams can be large or small, more or
less structurally integrated, and involve distinct combinations of member roles
or mixtures of prior experience. The project involves a two-stage research
program to understand how successful teams of different sizes and shapes "think
differently" and can be designed to accelerate scientific and technological
development. First, the project evaluates success and failure outcomes for than
100 million R&amp;D teams over 100 years in terms of team size, network
structure, role composition and experience. Second, insights developed from this
investigation will enable the launch of large-scale online team experiments to
isolate the causal mechanisms driving these effects. These experiments will
bring certainty about critical team mechanisms and facilitate recommendations
for policy that can be used to design teams optimized for specific purposes in
advancing science and technology. Overall, this research promises to
dramatically improve our ability to trace, assess, predict, nurture and design
high-impact and highly disruptive teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, our
project first involves (1) massive data cleaning and linkage between data on
teams from a variety of domains in science, invention, and entrepreneurship.
Then (2) team success and failure is measured at many stages, including the
failure to secure funding, publish papers and prosecute patents, inject the
frontier with novelty, attract scientific and technical attention, remain robust
to replication, and achieve persistent influence. Next, the research (3)
analyzes the impact of team size and complexity on success and failure by
examining the size, complexity, role structure and diversity of experiences
within teams. The project uses insights from this investigation to (4) deploy
online team experiments to causally identify the influence of team
characteristics on success and failure outcomes. Finally, (5) optimal teams are
recommended, as also optimal team alterations or adjustments based on desired
science and technology outcomes. Results from this work could influence global
science and technology policy by increasing appreciation for the benefits of
distinct types of teams -- small and large, simple and complex, diverse and
similar -- relative to the science and technology outcomes they support,
including disruption and collective advance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.