* 1829970
* Collaborative Research: FORABOT: An Autonomous and Accessible System for Sorting Foraminifera
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Thomas Marchitto, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 161,470.00

Foraminifera or "forams" are marine protozoa that live in microscopic shells,
most often made of the mineral calcite. Foraminifera shells provide the backbone
for much work in the field of paleoceanography, which is the study of past
climates using seafloor sediments. Students and lab employees are often required
to pick several thousands of specimens from ocean sediments for each study.
After a steep learning curve, picking therefore becomes a repetitive and low-
reward task, making it well-suited for automation using machine learning and
robotics. The project aims to develop an autonomous sorting system for
foraminifera, which is accessible (in terms of usability and cost) to the
scientific community. This system will be compatible with existing off-the-shelf
microscopes, it will make use of microfluidics (or alternatively
micromanipulation) in order to facilitate the transport of the samples from a
container to their sorted receptacles, and will utilize machine learning for
recognition. The tools and datasets developed by the researchers will be made
available to the entire scientific community, and the aim is to keep the
fabrication cost under three thousand dollars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
prior work from the researchers, in which they developed a visual identification
system for six species of forams using images under varying lighting directions,
this project will: (1) automate the imaging and sorting process by using
microfluidics (or alternatively another micromanipulation technique that will be
developed); (2) scale up the recognition to thirty five species of planktonic
foraminifera that are widely used by paleoceanographers by incorporating
multiple laboratories for imaging, and a cloud infrastructure for crowd-sourcing
of the data capture and labeling; (3) expand on the existing machine learning
techniques to enable robust joint morphological characterization and recognition
of forams; and (4) provide a detailed comparison between human and autonomous
performance. In order to train the required models, the researchers will
consider a number of techniques including transfer learning and data
augmentation. Deep features learned from other datasets of forams using
different imaging modalities will be exploited. The dataset obtained in this
project will be augmented by creating synthetic images of forams. In order to
ensure robustness, penalty terms that enforce topological persistence for
segmentation and robustness to image perturbations for recognition will be
employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.