* 1829553
* CyberTraining: CIP: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Mobile Security Education by Creating Eureka Experiences
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Liran Ma, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The rapid development and rollout of mobile infrastructure and applications not
only bring convenience to people's daily lives, but also give birth to threats
that can jeopardize each individual's privacy and national security. Therefore,
it is critical to train and educate the future workforce on the fundamental
aspects of mobile security relevant to advanced cyberinfrastructure, and to
improve their ability to identify, prevent, and respond to emerging threats.
This project designs and develops a wide variety of intriguing and challenging
hands-on laboratories that aim to create Eureka Experiences in reference to the
"aha!" moment of understanding a previously incomprehensible concept. Such an
illuminating learning experience is created by incorporating Inquiry-Based
Learning (IBL) activities to hands-on laboratories. Overall, this project meets
the pressing and essential needs in the Computer Science and Information
Technology curricula, has a strong impact on developing the future workforce'
core competencies and preparedness in mobile security related to advanced
cyberinfrastructure, and helps advance national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, three types of hands-on
laboratories are designed and developed: i) Exploratory; ii) Core; and, iii)
Advanced. The primary purpose of exploratory labs is to spark the interests of
high school and community college students from diverse backgrounds to pursue a
career in cybersecurity in mobile ecosystems related to advanced
cyberinfrastructure. Core labs help prepare both undergraduate and graduate
students in STEM for productive cybersecurity careers by enabling enduring
understanding of key security concepts and technologies through hands-on
practice in an interactive setting. Advanced labs assist future research
workforce development by not only introducing emerging security technologies and
threats, but also inspiring student research in related fields. In addition, a
universal lab platform that is affordable and flexible is designed and
developed. This project helps develop core competencies in a number of areas
relevant to advanced cyberinfrastructure including how to secure mobile devices
and wireless systems, protect large scale and streaming data from mobile and
other sources, ensure user privacy, and prevent intrusion. By engaging all
stakeholders during the development process, this project increases the
likelihood of wide adoption of the developed materials by academic and
professional communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.