* 1829812
* Collaborative research: The effects of predator traits on the structure of oceanic food webs
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Anela Choy, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 510,624.00

Food webs describe who eats whom, tracing the flow of energy from plants up to
large animals. While many connections in food webs on land are quite familiar,
there are large gaps in our understanding of ocean food webs. Closing these gaps
is critical to understanding how nutrients and energy move through ocean
ecosystems, how organisms interact in the ocean, and how best to manage ocean
resources. This project will study ocean food web structure with a focus on
siphonophores, an abundant group of predators in the open ocean that form
colonies that range in length from less than an inch to more than one hundred
feet. Siphonophores are known to be important predators within ocean food webs,
but they are difficult to study because they live across great ocean depths and
are gelatinous and fragile. The details of what they eat, as well as many other
features of their biology, remain poorly known. This project will combine direct
observations of feeding, genetic analysis of siphonophore gut contents, and
stable isotope analyses to identify what different species of siphonophores eat.
This will provide a new understanding of how the structure of food webs arise,
aiding in our ability to predict future changes to food webs as the global
climate shifts. Siphonophores feed in a unique manner--they have highly
specialized tentacles that are used solely for capturing prey--thus, the prey
captured is determined largely by the anatomy and function of these tentacles.
The project will describe these tentacles, reconstruct their evolutionary
history, and investigate how evolutionary shifts in tentacle structure have led
to changes in diet. This project will train one PhD student, one Master's
student, a postdoc, and undergraduate students, including individuals of
underrepresented groups. This project will support the production of
scientifically rigorous yet engaging videos, foster the expansion of a citizen-
science program, and create K-12 teaching modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance three scientific aims: First, it will identify the diet of
a diverse range of siphonophores using DNA metabarcoding of gut contents and
prey field, remotely operated vehicle (ROV) video of prey encounters, and stable
isotope analysis. These approaches are highly complementary and allow for
extensive cross validation. Second, the project will characterize the
selectivity of siphonophore diets by comparing them to the relative prey
abundances in the habitats of each of these species. Third, the project will
characterize the structure of the siphonophore prey capture apparatus across
species through detailed morphological analysis of their tentacles and
nematocysts. These data will be integrated in an ecological and evolutionary
framework to identify predator features associated with prey specialization. In
a larger context, addressing these questions will advance our understanding of
oceanic predation by revealing how evolutionary changes in predator selectivity
correspond to evolutionary changes in habitat and feeding apparatus and how
these changes shape current food web structure in the open ocean. The team will
test and refine an integrated approach to describing the structure and origin of
food web topology, and evaluate the potential for phylogenetic relationships to
explain prey selectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.