* 1829008
* NRT: Technology-Human Integrated Knowledge Education and Research (THINKER)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Amy Apon, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,993,421.00

The pervasiveness of new digital technologies in manufacturing is changing the
way that data are generated, interpreted and shared over networks of machines,
robotics and software systems. This "industrial internet of things" holds great
promise for improving the quality and productivity of manufacturing in the
United States. However, the ability of human workers to effectively interface
with such digital systems is limited, potentially leading to disruptions in
cognition that may negatively affect output and job satisfaction. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award prepares master's and
doctoral degree students at Clemson University to advance discoveries at the
nexus of humans, technology, work, and health, through the convergence of human
factors, robotics, cognitive sciences, artificial intelligence, systems
engineering, education, manufacturing and social behavioral sciences. This will
be achieved through the design and integration of human digital technologies
that enhance humans' physical and cognitive interaction and abilities in
manufacturing environments. The project anticipates training fifty (50) M.S. and
Ph.D. students, including twenty-two (22) funded trainees, from electrical
engineering, industrial engineering, computer science, manufacturing, systems
integration, psychology, and sociology. These students will interface with a
parallel program of undergraduate and technical college students in a controlled
manufacturing environment to test deployment and integration across multiple
academic levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project responds to the critical need
to help shape and better prepare the STEM graduate student of tomorrow through
an innovated curriculum that focuses on the new digital and smart manufacturing,
automation, and associated data systems. The training and research takes a
human-centered design approach in the emerging digital manufacturing enterprise
(i.e., Industrial Internet of Things), by quantifying physical and human
cognition and developing augmented technologies (e.g. augmented reality aids for
worker empowerment) to improve worker behaviors and attitudes in the
manufacturing enterprise. This project will focus on an automotive industry
exemplar (i.e., vehicle assembly operation), employing a factory setting which
includes parts manufacture, structural and subassembly operations, robotics,
kitting, logistics, and a full-scale vehicle assembly line, together with
parallel programs in undergraduate and technical college curricula. The multi-
level educational approach is expected to drive improved team communication,
generate knowledge on worker behaviors and attitudes, and prepare students for
leading implementation of the technologies under study in manufacturing and
other industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary research areas through comprehensive traineeship
models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with changing workforce
and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.