* 1829724
* CyberTraining: CIU: Preparing the Public Sector Research Workforce to Impact Communities through Data Science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lynette Hoelter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 498,778.00

The ability to share data among researchers, citizens, government agencies, and
educators creates potential for new research collaborations with significant
real-world impact. However, cities are often unprepared to use
cyberinfrastructure to support research that would impact their citizens and
communities, and researchers often do not have access to or awareness of the
kinds of data and questions that are relevant for communities. This project
develops innovative and scalable instructional materials, for both in-person and
online courses, to increase data science literacy to meet the public sector's
emerging needs for experts in computational and data science. The materials
emphasize the types of data necessary for communities to make informed decisions
(e.g., administrative data on land use, constituent service requests, and crime
statistics) and applies them to pressing issues presented by community partners,
providing a real-world context for learning. The project leverages the
University of Michigan School of Information's Citizen Interaction Design
program and the Summer Program in Quantitative Methods of Social Research at the
Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) to train
undergraduate students, graduate students, and public sector researchers in
collecting, extracting, cleaning, annotating, and analyzing data generated and
used by government organizations. The project serves the national interest, as
stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of science; to advance the
national health, prosperity and welfare; by enabling cities to conduct research
that improves their communities and making the instructional materials and data
used in the courses available for use by other interested educators,
communities, and citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
bottlenecks in scientific and engineering research workforce development by
developing and offering three instructional activities: (a) a project-based
course in which students work directly with Michigan communities to design
cyberinfrastructure tools, and (b) two massive, open online courses (MOOCs) in
which students learn the fundamentals of data science for work in the public
sector. These courses provide scalable training and education programs to
increase cyberinfrastructure-enabled research in the public sector that
leverages administrative data. Course development occurs in collaboration
between educators and community partners in cities throughout the Midwest, in
order to ensure diversity of topics and audiences, timeliness, relevance, and
direct application. This reliance on real data and immediate application to
community issues is a novel approach in data science instruction. Despite being
offered virtually, the MOOCs retain the pedagogical benefits of working on
meaningful projects with real stakeholders. All three courses will be offered
and evaluated at least once over the course of the project, and the course
materials will be made publicly available through the University of Michigan?s
School of Information, ICPSR, and other forums (e.g., the University's
institutional repository, Deep Blue) for maximum impact. The long-term goals are
to broaden engagement between researchers and communities to leverage advanced
cyberinfrastructure to support public sector STEM research and to contribute to
the infrastructure for online, dynamic, personalized lessons and certifications.
Through partnership with the Midwest Big Data Hub, the project ensures that
communities in the Midwest have access to resources for workforce development
and opportunities to refine educational materials to serve their specific needs
now and in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.