* 1829078
* IRES TRACK II: US-UK International Student Research in Robust Control of Quantum Networks
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Edmond Jonckheere, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2021
* USD 164,503.00

The overarching objective of this program is to provide high-level training in
the emerging area of Quantum Information Science and Technology (QUIST) to the
next generation of promising early stage researchers and to equip them with the
research and soft skills needed to start their careers in this growing area.
QUIST endeavors to exploit the weirdness of elementary particle physics with the
ultimate objectives of deploying a Quantum Internet, designing secure
communication systems that cannot be compromised by eavesdropping, and providing
national security agencies with quantum computers able to crack encryption with
unprecedented speed. At a more fundamental level, QUIST underpins innovative
developments across a significant range of disciplines including mathematics,
computer science, physics, control engineering, semiconductor device technology,
and medicine. This program will be run jointly with British scientists and
students from Cardiff University and Swansea University, in Wales, UK,
capitalizing on Wales' unique position in quantum devices based on compound
semiconductor technologies. A cohort of five US students are sent to the United
Kingdom, where they are offered a unique combination of hands-on research
training, courses and workshops on scientific and complementary transferable
skills, and they interact with a cohort of British students, strengthening the
unique US-UK bond in sensitive technology and national security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this program, the PI-team focuses on high fidelity
control of spintronic networks that transmit information by spin wave rather
than charged particle transport. Controller design will be based on optimization
of fidelity relative to static bias fields. One of the unique pitches of this
research is to bring the concept of robustness in the quantum control arena,
specifically, robustness against spin coupling uncertainty and bias field
focusing errors. This in itself is already a transformative research, as
robustness in quantum systems escapes the classical paradigms because of the
unique, and fundamentally quantum mechanical, global phase factor that has no
classical counterpart. This yields such amazing results that the best fidelity
controllers are also the most robust, in defiance of the classical limitations.
This would allow, among other things, control to shed light on such physics
research topics as Anderson localization, Multi Body Localization (MBL) and
Eigenstate Thermalization Hypothesis (ETH). The next innovative feature is the
introduction of decoherence, which was shown but not yet theoretically proved to
make robustness classical, consistently with the very speculative concept that
decoherence makes physics classical. The last and probably most innovative pitch
of the research will be to approach spintronics from the networking angle, first
for the objective of constructing quantum network-on-chip, but also for the
reason that many students opt for a networking educational track and that quite
a lot of young talent can be tapped from this pool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.