* 1829369
* I-Corps:  The Augmented Reality WEarable Device (ARWED) for Upper-Limb Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Nina Robson, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is based on the
characteristics of the Augmented Reality WEarable Device (ARWED) for training of
post-stroke patients, allowing, for example, the user to perceive an impaired
arm as healthy. Preliminary training protocols, incorporated within the ARWED,
make the system a reliable solution that is expected to be broadly utilized by
medical professionals working in rehabilitation, sports therapy ,and
convalescence. Although the ARWED has been developed mainly for the physical
training of post-stroke patients, the project's explorations are expected to
provide effective tools for the physical rehabilitation of patients with limb
limitations at any scale -- ranging from individuals suffering partial loss of
motor ability to those with severe limitations in mobility due to strokes, birth
defects or accidents. Since observational learning may offer greater benefits
regarding transfer to Activities of Daily Living (ADLs), in comparison to
robotic-based stroke training, the medical community would also benefit from the
development of the ARWED. Insights into how training using technology may
enhance the recovery of motor control in diverse populations while providing a
novel intervention that may prove more effective than what is currently
available. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project centers on exploiting the
link between action-observation and action execution in order to develop
training protocols, based on observational learning techniques, to facilitate
rehabilitation following a neurological disorder. Such a disorder may range from
such catastrophic events as stroke or a spinal cord injury. Currently, there are
limited systems that utilize virtual reality in the relearning of biological
movements. The development of the ARWED required solving several challenges in
computer vision, modeling, and robot motion. The current testing of the
effectiveness of the device requires combined expertise from the areas of
biomechanics, signal analysis, virtual reality, robotic fault recovery theory
and rehabilitation. Therefore, the theoretical contributions emerging from this
collaborative research is expected to advance knowledge and understanding not
only within the medical field, but also across the above-mentioned research
areas. The multidisciplinary nature of the research will lead to the education
of undergraduate and graduate students in the areas of Engineering, Medicine and
Kinesiology, among others. The outcomes of the project will facilitate a
dialogue between Physical/Occupational Therapy and Engineering students and
professionals that can aid in the human recovery following neurological
disorders efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.