* 1829188
* Strombolian and Hawaiian Volcanism:  Sub-second Parameterization of the Eruptive Dynamics of Explosions at Kilauea and Stromboli
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Rebecca Carey, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2023
* USD 471,897.00

Basaltic explosive eruptions are highly dynamic, and prone to transitions in
style and intensity that cannot yet be predicted. This diversity is exemplified
by two island volcanoes: Kilauea in Hawaii and Stromboli in Italy. Both are very
active volcanoes and both are associated with growing volcano tourism critical
to island economy. Their eruptions pose constant challenges for management
agencies, exemplified by the situation at Kilauea as this award is being made,
because the eruption sites are highly accessible and there is a need to balance
the strong popular interest in viewing the eruptive activity against public
safety. This balance requires critically on sophisticated knowledge of the
volcanoes current and immediately future behavior. There is both a public desire
for better knowledge of the volcano's behavior and a need for improved
forecasting of the likely course and footprint of all future eruptions. The
approach is expected to identify patterns and precursors indicative of changing
in style, supporting management of risk at the world's most popular 'tourist
volcanoes'. Observatory partners in this study have federally mandated roles to
advise response agencies in Hawaii and Italy and will transfer knowledge to the
bodies charged with risk management. This project will involve exchange of
material and ideas between institutions in the USA, the United Kingdom, and
Italy to the benefit of young researchers and students. The results will be
widely disseminated via meetings and workshops, courses offered by the FEMA-
funded National Disaster Preparedness Training Center at UH, the Internet and
scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a rich behavioral
spectrum at basaltic explosive volcanoes which spans from passive degassing
through isolated, impulsive bubble bursts and powerful single explosions, to
unsteady spattering of variable intensity, and to sustained but pulsatory
pyroclastic fountains. The goal of the study links these patterns and
transitions of explosive basaltic eruptions to the physical processes in the
vent and very shallow conduit that cause and shape them. It focuses on questions
like: 1) What drives rapid changes from spaced sequences of discrete explosions
to prolonged intervals of sustained fountaining? 2) What are the links between
eruption style/dynamics and exsolved gas flux and chemistry? 3) How do changing
vent characteristics influence style and intensity? Answers to these and other
key questions will be achieved by field measurements of high temporal and
spatial resolution using synchronized FTIR and gas cameras together with high-
speed cameras (visual and infrared wave bands). It focuses on already tightly
constrained key eruptions at these volcanoes, in particular activity at Kamoamoa
in 2011 and Halema'uma'u in 2008-2018 at Kilauea and especially the newly
started eruption along Kilauea's Lower East Rift Zone. These observations of
dynamics of eruptive process will be paired with geophysical data to quantify
and explain fine-scale temporal and spatial variations in explosive activity at
basaltic volcanoes. The project addresses the second theme of the 2017 National
Academy of Sciences report on the future of volcano science, namely, to collect
high-resolution measurements at more volcanoes and throughout their life cycle
to overcome observational bias. The study will fundamentally improve
understanding of the behaviors of Hawaiian and Strombolian volcanoes and help
assess hazards of future explosive events at basaltic
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.