* 1829722
* EAGER: MAKER: Enhanced learning through making by way of personalized content for animation and fabrication
* EHR,DRL
* 12/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Peter Wardrip, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 06/30/2021
* USD 240,568.00

This project seeks to impact the process of learning through Making by
investigating an approach that allows future Makers aged 5 to 10 years old to
provide input to educators who develop creative and unique physical or digital
products that appeal to other K-8 student populations. Through this research
there is potential to provide better educational toys and artifacts that appeal
to K through 8 students instead of the traditional educational products created
through mass production. The idea that Making can support individualized
educational products that are designed to the individual preferences of a child
is exciting and novel. This research investigates the impact of personalized
content originating from children as a means to promote play as a form of
learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research investigates innovative
interactive design tools as a way of learning-through-making. Also, this project
assesses the efficacy of a museum Maker space and an afterschool program for
working with educators and young learners. This project evaluates the impact of
using hand drawings as a starting point to a complexly designed systems.
Qualitative analysis using inputs from play-testing sessions held at the
Pittsburgh Children's Museum and afterschool programs will be used for
comparison of the student populations. Designs and innovations using interactive
software will enable novel Maker activities and empower broader audiences. The
additional experiences for young learners to become involved with mathematical
models and computational software tools that automate tedious and challenging
design tasks is exciting and novel. The project expertly integrates Maker
activities into an extensive engineering based learning environment in an
informal way to expose and encourage the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.