* 1829406
* Collaborative Research: Experimental constraints on the rates and mechanisms of iodine redox transformations in seawater
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Dalton Hardisty, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,152.00

The goal of this study is to constrain the chemical and biological reactions
controlling the iodine cycle in the marine environment. Seawater iodine plays a
key role in the cycling of carbon, dissolved oxygen, and ozone, and has been
hypothesized to also influence the elemental cycles of manganese and nitrogen.
The composition of iodine in sedimentary rocks has also been proposed as an
archive of ancient seawater oxygen availability. Unfortunately, few constraints
currently exist on iodine reaction rates and mechanisms in seawater, limiting
quantitative applications. To remedy this, scientists from Michigan State
University (MSU) and Woods Hole Institute of Oceanography (WHOI) will use a rare
iodine isotope, iodine-129, as a tracer of iodine chemical reactions in
controlled seawater incubations designed to determine specific reaction rates
and mechanisms from two end-member environments: well-oxygenated mid-Atlantic
seawater as part of the United Kingdom-based Atlantic Meridional Transect (AMT)
annual time series and low oxygen zones in the Pacific Ocean. The project will
contribute to building the future United States STEM (Science Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics)-trained workforce via the training of one graduate
student and at least one undergraduate student from the campus of MSU. This
includes hands-on field training and experience through two research cruises,
extensive analytical training at WHOI, as well as experience in Earth system
modeling simulations of iodine-oxygen interactions at the modern and ancient sea
surface. The experimental constraints are designed to inform broader modeling of
iodine-related chemical cycles for scientific communities including atmospheric
and marine chemists, environmental regulators, and geologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The redox potential of iodate-iodide is
uniquely poised for probable applications as both a redox tracer of Oxygen
Minimum Zone (OMZ)-like conditions in modern and past oceans as well as a
critical component of air-sea exchange reactions regulating tropospheric ozone
levels. However, a currently limited understanding of the first-order rates and
mechanisms of iodine redox transformations in seawater limits applications,
which our research seeks to address. Specifically: (1) Marine iodate production,
the oxidized and most abundant species, has yet to be observed experimentally
despite the fact that most marine inputs from estuarine and other sources
consist of the reduced species, iodide. Mass balance demands that in situ marine
oxidation is widespread. The oxidant is unknown, but it is unlikely oxygen (O2)
due to thermodynamic barriers. (2) Unconstrained in situ processes drive
significant accumulation of reduced iodide in photic waters globally,
particularly at low latitudes, which ultimately act as a major tropospheric
ozone sink. (3) Constraints on rates and reaction mechanisms in OMZs are limited
despite iodine being amongst the first redox-sensitive species to reduce under
declining O2. We will employ an isotope tracer?iodine-129 as both iodide and
iodate?in shipboard seawater incubation experiments to determine the rates and
mechanisms of iodine redox transformations governing these widespread trends.
This method will be deployed across the largest known gradients in marine iodine
speciation?the Eastern Tropical North Pacific oxygen minimum zone and a
latitudinal transect of photic and sub-photic waters as part of the Atlantic
Meridional Transect. Incubation experiments from these cruises will be used to
place first order constraints on the rates of iodine redox transformations at
high- and low-[O2], the loci of most intense iodine redox cycling (both
vertically and spatially), as well as the mechanisms driving redox
transformations. Controls will test oxidants, biotic versus abiotic processes,
as well as interactions and comparisons with similar redox cycles such as
manganese and nitrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.