* 1829085
* IRES Track II/Collaborative Research: PREEMPTIVE Multidisciplinary Natural Hazards Engineering Institute Series for Advanced Graduate Students
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Erik Johnson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2024
* USD 259,435.00

New technologies for improving the safety of infrastructure during natural
hazards are advancing through ongoing research in the United States (U.S.) and
abroad. Locations that have been recently impacted by earthquakes, tsunamis and
hurricanes form prime opportunities for multidisciplinary groups of graduate
students from the U.S. to learn the lessons of how infrastructure protective
systems performed during recent disasters so that these students can direct
their current and future research in the most contemporary and productive
directions to better prepare the U.S. for future natural hazards. The objective
of this award is to engage U.S. advanced graduate students from various
disciplines in embedded learning through research at the forefront of protective
systems for natural hazards engineering on the Pacific rim and beyond, and to
build a sustained research community between them and their overseas
counterparts. The award will enable six Advanced Studies Institutes (ASIs), each
in a different location, in which the U.S. students learn from local and U.S.
faculty experts, initiate protective systems research in natural hazards
engineering, and experience first-hand the effects of natural hazards on built
environments. Through these activities, this award advances U.S. scientific
capabilities in multidisciplinary components of natural hazards engineering, and
trains a diverse upcoming cohort of the scientific workforce to preemptively
advance new technologies to prepare for future disasters at home; collaborate
with counterparts, senior and early career faculty; and establish a new
multidisciplinary approach to engineering hazard resilience. The project will
involve a total of 81 U.S. graduate students via the six ASIs in different sites
around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PREEMPTIVE (Pacific Rim Earthquake
Engineering Mitigation Protective Technologies International Virtual
Environment) ASIs explore topics in disaster science and resilient
infrastructure from a highly multidisciplinary perspective to train a diverse
group of graduate students in the broad areas of protective systems and disaster
mitigation. A series of six week-long PREEMPTIVE ASIs are planned over three
years, each enabling a cohort of advanced graduate students and senior and
early-career faculty from the U.S. with counterpart faculty and students from
around the world to learn about global efforts in protective systems for natural
hazards, establish new frontiers of multidisciplinary research, and form long-
term global professional relationships. The ASIs will explore the Resilience of
Aging Infrastructure, Tsunami Hazards and Infrastructure Resilience, Structural
Control &amp; Geotechnical Challenges, Extreme Earthquake &amp; Tsunami Hazards,
Hurricane and Multi-Hazards, and Interdisciplinary Disaster Science in Costa
Rica, Thailand, New Zealand, Chile, Puerto Rico, and Japan. Each ASI will
consist of 2-3 day workshops, 1-2 day cultural and technical tours to provide
context to the performance of protective systems in recent natural hazards, and
2-3 day collaborative group projects providing guided experiential learning
experiences in infrastructure protective systems. Through this award, U.S.
graduate student researchers learn to be preemptive in: addressing current and
future research needs in advanced hazards mitigation; collaborating with
overseas counterparts; and establishing a new multidisciplinary approach to
engineering hazard resilience. The U.S. graduate student participants are
selected via rigorous application processes. Student learning outcomes will be
assessed through a variety of modalities, analyzed and disseminated through a
website and in conference and journal publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.