* 1829667
* Field Measurements of Trace Gas Reactions at the Air-Ocean Interface
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Timothy Bertram, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2023
* USD 553,377.00

This project focuses on the emission of reactive gases from the surface of the
ocean. It is well known that marine phytoplankton and bacteria produce a wide
array of reactive gases that are subsequently emitted to the atmosphere. Recent
laboratory experiments have suggested that chemical and photochemical reactions
at the surface of the ocean may also produce significant quantities of reactive
gases. This project is designed to determine both the sea-to-air emission rate
of a wide array of reactive gases and the dominant production mechanisms for
these molecules in seawater. This research will provide new, quantitative
insight on the impact of marine reactive gas emissions on oxidant concentrations
and the production rate of secondary organic aerosol particles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this research are: (1) to
measure the air-sea flux of oxygenated volatile organic compounds (oVOCs), (2)
to partition the observed flux between biochemical, photochemical, and
heterogeneous reaction pathways using in field measurements of oVOC emission
rates from collected seawater, and (3) to determine that factors that control
the emission rate and production pathways for oVOC production at the air-sea
interface. To carry out these objectives we will make new measurements of the
air-sea flux of oVOCs and ozone via eddy covariance alongside flow reactor
measurements of oVOC emission from collected seawater as a function of light
intensity and oxidant exposure. The work here will make up the larger part of
the Ph.D. theses for two chemistry graduate students at University of Wisconsin
(UW) Madison. Elements of the field work will serve as the foundation for
multiple UW Madison undergraduate independent research projects. This project
will also permit the continued involvement of the Principal Investigator (PI)
and Ph.D. students in education and outreach activities that bring small sensor
technology to high school classrooms around the state of
Wisconsin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.