* 1829639
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research Food-Water-Energy Nexus: FEW-meter model to measure and improve urban agriculture, shifting it towards circular urban metabolism
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Nevin Cohen, Research Foundation of the City University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2022
* USD 385,766.00

Many cities across the globe are facing difficult challenges managing their
food, water and energy systems. The challenges stem from the fact that the
issues of food, water and energy are often tightly connected with each other,
not only locally but also globally. This is known as the Food-Water-Energy (FWE)
nexus. An effective solution to a local water problem may cause new local
problems with food or energy, or cause new water problems at the global level.
On a local scale, it is difficult to anticipate whether solutions to one issue
in the nexus are sustainable across food, water and energy systems, both at the
local and the global scale. Innovative solutions that encompass the nexus are
particularly important to enable cities to better manage their food, water and
energy systems and understand the benefits and tradeoffs for different
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a 29-country initiative
through the joint Belmont Forum- Joint Programming Initiative (JPI) Urban
Europe. The Sustainable Urbanization Global Initiative (SUGI)/Food-Water-Energy
Nexus is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that
bring together the fragmented research and expertise across the globe to find
innovative solutions to the Food-Water-Energy Nexus challenge. The call seeks to
develop more resilient, applied urban solutions to benefit a much wider range of
stakeholders. The rapid urbanization of the world's population underscores the
importance of this focus. International partners were invited to develop
solutions for this challenge. The funds requested will be used to support U.S.
participants to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries and that bring together natural scientists,
social scientists and research users (e.g., civil society, NGOs, and industry).
Participants from other countries are funded through their national funding
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to investigate whether
scaling up existing forms of urban agriculture could exacerbate pressures on
food-energy-water systems (FEWs) by increasing water and energy consumption and
contributing to air and water pollution. The project will employ an urban
metabolism framework to create a comprehensive system to evaluate how different
urban agriculture systems and practices perform with respect to food production
and energy and water use and opportunities for increased efficiency. Data on the
resource flows and impacts of urban agriculture will be gathered and analyzed
over three years from 45 case studies in four cities in Europe (Dortmund,
Gorzow, London, and Nantes) and one city in the U.S. (New York). The project
uses a combination of quantitative and qualitative methods, including the
measurement of resource use, material flow analysis, life cycle assessment,
practitioner surveys, and design methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.