* 1829451
* Workshop to Establish a Collaborative Global Experiment to Understand Coregonid Adaptive Response to Changing Thermal Regimes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Jason Stockwell, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2018
* USD 14,865.00

Populations of fish are declining across the globe. While the specific causes of
the declines are unknown it is suspected that they are related to changing ice
and water temperature as lakes have experienced reduced ice cover and
significant thermal warming in response to environmental change. What is needed
is a globally coordinated experiment to test the causes for these declines.
Funds are provided to support US participants in a two-day international
workshop to design and coordinate a cross-latitudinal, cross-continental
experiment to evaluate the ability of freshwater whitefishes (subfamily
Coregoninae) to adapt to changing temperature and habitat changes across global
latitudes. Workshop participants will design a large-scale common experiment to
identify the causes and consequences of global scale changes in lake temperature
and ice cover.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will provide a unique
opportunity to design and implement an international collaborative global scale
experiment to assess the role of changing global thermal regimes on the role of
adaptation and plasticity to changes in life history, physiology, and phenotype
through genetic and epigenetic changes of a key freshwater fish family. It will
be the first experiment designed to evaluate changing thermal regimes across a
broad latitudinal gradient and provide a unique forum to ensure standardization,
coordinated implementation, and robust data management. The workshop offers an
excellent opportunity to integrate and encourage ecological and molecular
approaches to enhance and strengthen understanding of environmental change
impacts on global fish populations. Besides the direct fisheries management
impacts of the research, it will serve as a significant training experience in
team science for the participating graduate students and early career faculty.
The workshop is a joint partnership between universities and federal agencies in
the USA and French National Institute for Agricultural Research, with 25
participants from 13 countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.