* 1829321
* I-Corps:  Assessing the Challenges of Energy Systems and Evaluating the Suitability of Mobile Energy Storage Transmission
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Hiba Baroud, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
electricity access for island communities and enable cost-effective restoration
of coastal energy systems following natural disasters. Grid-weak regions and
island communities typically have poor access to affordable, resilient, and
clean energy solutions compared to their mainland counterparts. The frequency
and severity of natural disasters is increasing; resilient and flexible
electricity supply systems are more critical than ever, especially for island
communities. Making effective recovery decisions addresses the different
strategies of preparedness for energy systems and can drastically improve
resulting economic and community impacts. This project will enable the efficient
transmission of energy to island communities through a new technology, mobile
energy storage transmission (MEST). The recent improvements of energy storage
technology cost, size, and performance have resulted in technoeconomic
feasibility of this innovative technology. Implementation of MEST will both
improve long-term energy access for island communities and provide rapidly-
deployable, flexible, affordable, and resilient electricity delivery systems for
short-term crises. The advent of MEST coincides with the increasing importance
of island energy systems; a market earmarked for high-growth over coming decades
as sea levels rise, island nations continue to develop, and emphasis is put on
development of sustainable energy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on findings which identified a significant challenge in
addressing the interdependency between infrastructure systems, in particular,
pertaining to the role that energy systems play in the disaster recovery process
of other infrastructures and communities. The proposed investigation addresses a
missing link between resilience of infrastructure networks and multi-industry
impacts to more effectively guide preparedness and recovery decisions. This
project will evaluate scenario-specific applications of MEST for island
communities; complementing the shortcomings of conventional cabled transmission.
While on-shore cabled transmission is an efficient and low-cost mode of
transporting electricity, subsea cabled transmission is costly and often results
in poor redundancy of electricity supply. This novel transmission model,
comprised of commercially available components, uses batteries and conventional
freight transportation to move electricity from one market to another; providing
service commensurate to a subsea cabled interconnector, but with added
flexibility, resilience, and many benefits of traditional grid-level energy
storage systems. MEST is founded on established economic theory, energy storage
technology, and various market data. Research indicates potential for MEST in
both long-term island power provision and short-term disaster relief. The
combination of these findings indicates a promising future for impact and
commercialization of MEST following this I-Corps
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.