* 1829154
* Student Support for the Seventh International Brain-Computer Interface Meeting
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Charles Anderson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2019
* USD 19,360.00

Brain-computer interface (BCI) research explores avenues of controlling devices
directly from brain signals. Thus, BCI technology is a powerful control option
for neuro-prosthetic limbs, as well as a potential communication option for
people with severe motor disabilities or disorders such as amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), brainstem stroke, cerebral palsy, and spinal cord injury, who
may have little or even no muscle control and therefore no means of
communication with the external world. The International Brain-Computer
Interface (IBCI) meeting is the flagship conference for the field, the seventh
of which will be held May 21-25, 2018, on the Asilomar Conference Grounds in
Pacific Grove,, California. Effective BCI research requires interdisciplinary
interactions involving neuroscience, psychology, engineering, mathematics,
computer science, and clinical rehabilitation, and the IBCI meeting serves as a
critical catalyst for technology dissemination, new collaborations, and
educational opportunities for students. The primary source of funding for the
meeting is the National Institutes of Health (NIH). This NSF funding will enable
another 22 students, including undergraduate and graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, to attend and participate in the conference. The
organizers are planning innovations to make the 2018 event the most valuable
yet. For the first time the conference will include a series of 12 one-hour
masterclasses, six of which will meet in parallel on Wednesday evening, and the
other six will meet in parallel on Thursday afternoon. Each masterclass will
have a senior researcher as the "master" along with two students each of whom
will present his/her research for 10-15 minutes, after which the master will
provide wise and constructive comments, with audience participation encouraged
in an informal session intended to give students access to senior expertise and
to get good tips for their research. Another new event at this year's meeting
with be the "BCI Hackathon" organized and sponsored by G.Tec Medical Engineering
GmbH, during which participants will work in teams on a number of BCI
applications and will then present their work to the hackathon community. NSF
funding will be used to support student travel, registration, and student-only
event costs. Student participation in previous IBCI meetings has been very
fruitful; a large number of those students have now graduated and are prominent
researchers in the BCI field. The organizers are actively recruiting student
attendees from traditionally underrepresented groups. More information about the
conference may be found online at
http://bcisociety.org/meetings/bci-2018-welcome/.

Because of the growth in the field of BCI research, 300 or more participants are
expected to attend this meeting, including investigators from at least 100 BCI
research groups. All attendees commit to the entire meeting, from the opening
reception and dinner on the evening of Monday, May 21 through the final summary
discussion at breakfast the morning of Friday, May 25. A main objective of the
conference is to give students a significant educational and professional
experience in the BCI field, and to provide opportunities for them to gain depth
in their specific interest areas. The conference will begin with a specialized
student colloquium on the afternoon before the full conference starts, which
will provide lectures from prominent experts in the BCI field. This will give
the students a solid foundation for understanding the rest of the conference.
There will also be a student poster session and prizes for the best student
research projects, as well as giving students access to research leaders for
informal question-and-answer sessions at the end of each day. The students will
participate fully in the main conference as well. Exposure to prominent
researchers in the BCI field will allow students to receive invaluable feedback
on their work, and to make connections that may result in new research
directions; it will also provide students with access to potential mentors,
committee members, and experts to review their future work. A full and detailed
schedule of planned conference sessions and events, along with any updates, can
be found on the conference website. With all participants housed on site and all
meals for all attendees taken together on site, there will be ample opportunity
for informal discussions. This creates a unique opportunity for students and
trainees to mingle with and learn from established researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.