* 1829464
* Southernmost Patagonia: The Connection Between Magmatism, Subduction Zone, Slab Window and Sub-continental Mantle Lithosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Alberto Saal, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2023
* USD 316,348.00

The Earth's mantle represents approximately 82% by volume and 68% by mass of the
Earth, and therefore, it influences the movement of tectonic plates, earthquakes
and volcanism on the surface. A fundamental step to understand the composition
and nature of the Earth's mantle from the study of basaltic lavas (partial melts
of the mantle) is to establish the budget and distribution of volatiles
(hydrogen, carbon, fluorine, chlorine, sulfur) in the Earth's interior.
Volatiles influence mantle melting, magma crystallization, magma migration and
volcanic eruption, and their abundances and spatial distribution provide
important constraints on models of mantle flow and temperature. Moreover,
volatiles are key constituents of the Earth's atmosphere and oceans and, thus,
constraining the cycling of volatiles between the Earth's interior and surface
is of fundamental importance to understand the long-term evolution of our
planet, as they fundamentally affect plate tectonics, climate, and habitability.
The project will support an African-American female graduate student, an Indian
research scientist and a Hispanic Professor at Brown University. It promotes the
collaboration with geochemists from nine institutions from three different
countries: USA, Argentina and Chile, and will enhance the infrastructure for
research and education at Brown University, Oregon State University and Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution. Communication of results will occur through: 1)
peer-reviewed journals, presentations at conferences and invited university
lectures, 2) hands-on science learning activities for local elementary and high
school classes, and 3) outreach to the general audience through public
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diverse hypotheses have been proposed for the
origin of the magmatism in southern Patagonia, from flux melting of the mantle
wedge during devolatilization of the subducted Nazca and Antarctic plate, to
adiabatic decompression melting of a carbonated and hydrous asthenosphere
upwelling through the slab window, to melting of a volatile-rich metasomatized
subcontinental lithospheric mantle. All proposed hypotheses invoke the role of
volatiles. Surprisingly, data on the volatile contents of basalts and mantle
xenoliths from this region are non-existent. This is a glaring omission from the
geochemical data given the importance of volatiles. The focus of this study will
be to examine the regional and temporal variations in volatile contents and
microstructure of geochemically well-characterized Eocene-recent basalts and
associated mantle xenoliths co-located with the seismic array from southern
Patagonia. The lavas and their xenoliths in this region represent smaller melt
volumes tapped locally from areas lacking steady-state magma chambers,
experience relatively less mixing and differentiation, and offer the best
opportunity to determine the composition, lithology and volatile contents of the
mantle sources. The integration of these geochemical and microstructural data to
a previously funded seismic experiment will enable better constraints on the
temperature, composition, viscosity and density structure of the mantle beneath
southern Patagonia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.