* 1829799
* CyberTraining: CIC: The Texas A&amp;M University Computational Materials Science Summer School (CMS3)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lisa Perez, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,822.00

Advances in both hardware and software infrastructure are quickly making it
possible to carry out realistic simulations of materials and materials phenomena
that can lead to a better understanding of their behavior. Simulations
constitute one of the key ingredients necessary to realize the Materials Genome
Initiative (MGI), which calls for the reduction in time and resources necessary
to develop the materials needed to enable potentially transformative
technologies. To push the thriving field of Computational Materials Science
(CMS) forward it is necessary to provide the next generation research workforce
with a broad exposure to as many computational techniques as possible. This
project brings together researchers in materials science and engineering, and in
advanced cyber-infrastructure (CI) to establish the Computational Materials
Science Summer School (CMS3) that aims to train graduate students and junior
scientists and engineers in some of the most advanced and widely used
computational materials science simulation tools. The training provided by CMS3
will equip participating students with the knowledge and skills necessary to
push the frontiers of simulation-enabled materials research. Furthermore, CMS3
will contribute to MGI's mission of maintaining the Nation's overall economic
competitiveness and security by training the scientists and engineers that will
discover and develop the materials that will make technologies of national
importance possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award leverages existing cyber-
infrastructure to expand participation, including from underrepresented groups,
through local and remote training. Expert instructors are selected from
academic, domestic and international institutions, and national laboratories to
cover three modules: continuum micromechanics, mesoscopic simulation and
atomistic modeling, along with an overarching theme of data science. The school
targets 20 on-site and up to 80 remote graduate and post-doctoral researchers,
including industry participants. The activities of CMS3 are to (i) establish a
CMS network among national laboratories and academic institutions to leverage
the expertise of the CMS community at large in developing the next-generation
workforce in materials research across multiple scales; (ii) develop a CMS
curriculum, commensurate with a summer school format, that involves utilizing
and supporting advanced CI for effective scale-up of a series of practica; (iii)
organize shorter seed programs in specialized areas, such as dislocation
dynamics, phase-field modeling and data-enabled materials science; (iv)
integrate the theoretical foundations and practical training into the graduate
curriculum and continuing education at Texas A&amp;M University and elsewhere;
and (v) introduce immersive visualization through virtual and augmented reality
tools to help students with different backgrounds and learning styles interpret
complex material data. Course material and software codes associated with this
project not already disseminated by the original developers are maintained in a
GitHub repository. This ensures that all released materials and packages are
preserved to maintain historical context and broad
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.