* 1829187
* I-Corps Sites: Type I - University of Montana I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Travis Wheeler, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 303,119.00

This project from the University of Montana (UM) creates an NSF I-Corps Site at
this institution. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UM Site promotes commercialization of STEM
research and innovation throughout the campus community. It capitalizs on the
success of the Blackstone LaunchPad (BLP-UM) in fostering an entrepreneurial
ecosystem at UM and the entrepreneurial community in Montana.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaborative effort between BLP-UM and
faculty in the Colleges of Business, Humanities and Sciences, Health Professions
and Biomedical Sciences, and Office of Research. It leverages existing
relationships and expertise to establish a program that facilitates growth of
STEM-related startups. The UM I-Corps Site has five key objectives: expand STEM
participation in entrepreneurship and build entrepreneurial skills amongst
students, postdocs, staff, and faculty at UM; increase participation of women,
Native Americans, and other groups underrepresented in both STEM fields and
entrepreneurship; increase commercialization success of STEM innovation at UM;
generate strong STEM teams that are well-prepared for National I-Corps training;
and develop and assess programming that fosters an entrepreneurial ecosystem in
a rural setting. These objectives are achieved through targeted outreach and
recruitment, education and training, leveraging a network of support for
Entrepreneurial Teams, and project evaluation and participant
tracking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.