* 1829764
* CyberTraining: CIU:Cross-disciplinary Training for Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) science
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Xiaohui Carol Song, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 498,148.00

Addressing the grand challenges associated with growing population, food and
water security, frequently occurring natural disasters, and changing climate
requires not only geoscience domain expertise, but also computational (cyber)
skills to deal with big data analytics and simulations. However, many challenges
exist in providing cyber training to students, including steep learning curve
for instructors, time commitment and lack of resources in terms of training
material. This project creates cyber training programs for earth science
students and working professional in the form of modules or labs for use in an
existing course, an independent one-credit course, summer workshops and boot
camps. Students receive training in running state-of-the-art numerical models,
and in analyzing massive simulated and observational data sets with advanced
data analysis tools. The overall goal is to create a new generation of
scientists to manage data-rich and computationally intensive tasks to become
globally competitive in the STEM, thus fulfilling NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science. The training component of the project will make the science
openly available and transparently reproducible using the best practices in
Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR) science. The estimated
number of trainees from this project is approximately 200 students at Purdue and
potentially more than 400 students, faculty and working professionals outside
Purdue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings cyber-enabled state-of-the-art
computational tools into practice by training students and working professionals
through courses, workshops and boot camps at multiple institutions, including
Purdue University, University of New Hampshire and University of Alabama. The
project creates a cyber training curriculum that is driven by the need to
acquire expertise in the following six areas: data access, geo-processing, time
series analysis, computational simulation, visualization and publication. These
areas form the foundation of a modular cyber training framework that supports
development and implementation of training materials targeting geoscience
learners. The innovation lies in enhancing geosciences curriculum to include
cyber training by providing a range of flexible training options for students
and working professionals. A FAIR Cyber Training (FACT) Fellowship will enhance
computational thinking among graduate students and create an avenue to tap the
most talented students to train the next generation of cyber savvy earth
scientists. This interdisciplinary collaboration from hydrology, climate
science, computer science and instruction design expertise enables holistic
training covering both domain science and computational
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.