* 1829070
* OPERATION OF the NSF Center for High Energy X-ray Science (NSF-CHEXS)
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2024
* USD 54,000,000.00

This award supports the operation of the Center for High Energy X-ray Science
(CHEXS) at the Cornell High Energy Synchrotron Source (CHESS) as a national user
facility. CHEXS consists of a suite of four high-energy X-ray beamlines that
serve the national user community in specifically targeted research areas. Each
beamline seamlessly integrates sample/specimen preparation, data collection, and
data processing, and is optimized for operation by domain scientists rather than
by expert X-ray users. Education and training is being integrated into all
aspects of the facility, addressing the education and training of researchers
having little prior experience with X-rays and the education of undergraduate
students from Under Represented Groups (URGs) in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). NSF funds from the Directorates for
Biological Sciences, the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and
the Directorate for Engineering support the following four specific beamlines:
&lt;br/&gt;- Forming and Shaping Technology, FAST, Beamline which supports sub-
millisecond time-resolved studies of manufacturing processes such as laser
welding and rapid quenching. The rich datasets obtained rigorously benchmarks
transformational new models enabled by advanced computational tools;
&lt;br/&gt;- the High-Pressure Biology,Hp-Bio, Beamline: the sophisticated new
sample cells of the "HP-Bio" beamline enables precise high-pressure structural
studies of the rules of life at the molecular level, a regime not currently
accessible to biologists.&lt;br/&gt;- Q-Mapping for Quantum Materials (QM2)
Beamline provides high-throughput characterization of quantum materials in
reciprocal space (also known as "Q-space") to uncover intertwined quantum
correlations of spins, charges, and orbitals, from high to low temperatures and
spanning entire phase diagrams.&lt;br/&gt;- Photon-in, Photon-out X-ray
Spectroscopy (PIPOXS) Beamline enables spectroscopic studies of valence
electronic states in functional - materials using hard x-rays, allowing access
to opaque materials or sample environments. In situ and operando studies of man-
made catalysts and enzymes is the initial focus with additional applications to
fuel-cells, batteries, and electronic excitations in quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;CHEXS is also engaged in development of X-ray technologies
targeted to achieve CHEXS science goals, including new high-energy undulator
insertion devices, diamond high-heat load optics, and focusing for analysis by
custom-fabricated glass capillary optics or channel arrays. CHEXS supports post-
docs and Ph.D. students, hosts hands-on scientific workshops to train new users
in X-ray methods, provides summer training and mentorship programs targeting
undergraduates from underrepresented groups in STEM fields, and provides high
quality informational materials to the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.