* 1829888
* The fate of lysis products of picocyanobacteria contributes to marine humic-like chromophoric dissolved organic matter
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Feng Chen, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 01/31/2023
* USD 654,590.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study focuses on the sources and composition
of colored dissolved organic matter (CDOM) in the ocean. CDOM is a part of water
that absorbs sunlight. This material is important because it filters out harmful
ultraviolet radiation. Scientists use it to track the movement of carbon and
other important biological and chemical processes in the ocean. Organisms such
as algae living in the open ocean have been shown to be sources of CDOM, but the
chemical composition of these algal natural products remains to be discovered.
Recent results from studying common algae show that viruses may break down algal
cells and release material that looks like CDOM. This study will use new tools
to find out if viruses and algae are creating this material and study its
chemical makeup. This project will support two graduate students and provide
summer internships for undergraduates through the NSF Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) program. The investigators will participate in a range of
education and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sources and
structural nature of marine CDOM within the oceans remain unclear and continue
to be a subject of debate. Marine in situ sources of CDOM have been suggested
and some have been confirmed, but thus far none could explain the ubiquitous
appearance of the so called "humic-like" CDOM component. Unique features of this
component include its unusual exponential behavior in ultraviolet-visible (UV-
Vis) absorbance with the absorbance extending well above 400 nm, and the large
Stoke's shift in fluorescence spectroscopy. Picocyanobacteria are ubiquitous in
the World's Oceans and make up 50 % of the autotrophic marine primary
production. Preliminary results showed that the picocyanobacteria Synechococcus
and Prochlorococcus release CDOM that matched the "humic-like" appearance of
globally observed marine CDOM after virus-induced lysis. The main focus of this
study is the characterization of the optical properties and molecular
composition of viral-lysed DOM (VDOM) from different strains of Synechococcus
and Prochlorococcus and additionally Trichodesmium which was shown in a previous
study to also release CDOM. Associations between the chemical characterization
information and metagenomics and transcriptomics data will be investigated for
picocyanobacteria in the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans. This study includes long-
term incubation experiments to determine the persistence of picocyanobacteria-
derived CDOM as well as changes in microbial communities and processes (gene
expression) that are related to the degradation of VDOM during the incubation
period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.