* 1829686
* Operation of a Community Marine-Atmospheric Sampling Facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Andrew Peters, Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS), Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2022
* USD 376,491.00

This project provides continuing support for the Tudor Hill Marine Atmospheric
Observatory in Bermuda. The marine boundary layer, the lower level of the
atmosphere over the oceans, plays important roles in the global cycles of many
chemical elements and this observatory provides a unique facility for the ocean
and atmospheric chemistry research communities. At present, many aspects of
atmospheric composition, atmospheric transport, and atmosphere-ocean exchange
remain poorly understood. This limits our ability to predict and mitigate the
effects of anticipated future environmental change. Central to improving our
understanding of these topics is the ability to observe and sample the marine
boundary layer. In this regard, oceanic island observatories have played a
crucial role. By virtue of its location in the western North Atlantic Ocean,
Bermuda has been a key location for numerous field studies of the marine
troposphere and is well equipped for such research, with the 23 meter high
atmospheric sampling tower and site laboratories at Tudor Hill. Routine facility
operations include the collection of continuous meteorological data and weekly
bulk aerosol and rainwater samples, which are archived at the Bermuda Institute
of Ocean Sciences and made freely available to the scientific community.
Additionally, samples and data are collected for a variety of external research
programs funded by NSF, NOAA, NASA and other agencies. This project is expected
to make significant educational contributions at a number of levels, including
undergraduate education opportunities through the NSF-funded Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) program, and through other courses taught at the
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continued
operation and maintenance of THMAO site will facilitate research topics that are
central to international research initiatives such as IGAC, SOLAS and GEOTRACES.
The specific objectives of the project are to: 1) Operate and maintain the
atmospheric sampling facility at Tudor Hill, Bermuda; 2) Continue collection of
continuous meteorological data and weekly bulk-aerosol and rain samples, which
will be archived at BIOS and made freely available to other researchers; and 3)
Collect additional atmospheric samples and data for external investigators, and
provide for the use of the facility by external investigators. The continued
operation and maintenance of the Tudor Hill site facilitates research concerning
the chemistry and physics of the marine troposphere and ocean-atmosphere
exchange processes. In a regional context, the Tudor Hill facility will
complement ongoing time-series research in the Sargasso Sea, including
Hydrostation S and BATS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.