* 1829148
* A landscape approach to understanding  child identity development in violent contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Norbert Ross, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 446,987.00

Globally, violence has been found to affect children disproportionately, yet
surprisingly little is known about children's roles and lives in violent
settings. Research has documented child victimization but has not explored
holistically and systematically how children understand the nature, causes, and
interactions of different forms of violence, and the specific actions that
children take to cope with violence in their lives. Working from the premise
that children are active agents living their lives as well as victims of
circumstance, the research supported by this award will investigate these
topics. The research is important: in the United States, violence has been
described as a public health crisis for children. Understanding how exposure to
different forms of violence shapes children's worldviews and coping strategies
is critical for developing programs and policies that support children's
resilience and counter its long-term effects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will be conducted by psychological and cognitive anthropologist, Dr. Norbert
Ross of Vanderbilt University, who is well-known for his cross-cultural research
on cognitive development in children. The researcher has chosen El Salvador as
the research site for two overarching reasons. First, violence of all kinds is
rampant in El Salvador, in the present and in memories of the past, and often is
the impetus for young people migrating to the United States. Better
understanding of these roots of migration can help to develop more effective
policies to control it. Second, the prevalence of violence in a comparatively
small country makes it more feasible (than it would be in the U.S.) to conduct a
scientific study of children's negotiations of and uptakes of pervasively
violent environments. The researcher will collect data through a suite of
methods including observations of children's interactions in a variety of
natural settings at school, home, and play; brief interviews with children using
established, child-specific and child-sensitive protocols; family interviews and
focus groups; and memory mappings of geo-referenced, violence-specific
landscapes. In addition, because of the challenges of working with younger
children ethically and productively, the project introduces novel research
methods that will provide new ways of conducting ethnographic research with
children in violent environments and the research team incorporates local child
psychologists as consultants. Findings from the research will be shared with the
general public, practitioners who work with children, policy makers, and other
social scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.