* 1829326
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The direct and indirect effect of innovation subsidies
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Eric Verhoogen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Fiegener
* 07/31/2019
* USD 13,608.00

Government subsidies to support innovation in firms are a widespread policy.
However, little is known about their effectiveness to promote technological
upgrading and boost firm performance in developing countries. The existing
rigorous studies about this type of intervention are focused on developed
countries and high-tech industries, and infer technological improvement from
patents and R&D expenditure. As a consequence, lessons are hard to extrapolate
to the developing country context, where innovation is concentrated on the
adoption of already established technologies and on performing small
modifications to existing products, which are not suitable for patenting and can
be hardly considered R&D. This project fills this gap in the literature by
investigating the direct and indirect effects of innovation subsidies in Peru, a
developing country, using directly collected data on technology use. The project
opens the black box of the firm and allows to observe the changes that are
triggered within a company when it receives support for innovative activities,
shedding light on the mechanisms through which government support for innovation
affects firm performance. The findings of this research advance understanding of
the relationship between innovation subsidy programs and firm behavior, and also
inform policy design in developing countries and international cooperation
institutions, which have played an important role in the diffusion of
interventions to promote productive development.

The key challenge of the project is detecting technological change in a context
in which R&D expenditure and patents cannot be used to do so. Given that details
on productive methods used by businesses are not regularly recorded in
enterprise surveys, the project includes the collection of data on productive
practices used by the firms that applied to the subsidy programs under analysis.
To establish a causal relationship between the innovation subsidy programs and
firm behavior, the project uses a quasi-experimental method. In particular, it
exploits the fact that the subsidy assignment mechanism is based on a score
assigned to the applications by experts. Applications with scores above a
certain threshold get a change to win the subsidies; while those with lower
scores, do not. This characteristic makes the setting suitable for a regression
discontinuity analysis. The project further explores spillovers operating
through labor mobility and procurement relationships. These are two channels
capable of transmitting information between companies and, therefore, it is
worth assessing the extent to which they contribute to the diffusion of
innovative ideas and of the benefits of innovation subsidies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.