* 1829229
* GRC/GRS Plasmonics and Nanophotonics Harvesting, Generating, and Manipulating Light at the Nanoscale. To Be Held at The Grand Summit Hotel, in Sunday River, ME, on July 8-13, 2018.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Peter Nordlander, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The overarching goal of this GRC is to advance the leading edge of plasmonics
and nanophotonics research by providing a forum where substantial interactions
between top researchers and future leaders can stimulate new thinking,
facilitate collaborations, and connect minds. The speakers and discussion
leaders at the GRC on Plasmonics and Nanophotonics are some of the most active
and world renowned scientists in the field. It includes both senior, well
established leaders in the field along with junior scientists and leaders in
Nanophotonics. After every speaker there is allocated time for discussion on the
speakers topic. There is ample unstructured time in the afternoons for
collaborations. The lively poster sessions that have been a Hallmark of the
meeting also encourage discussions and collaboration. Support from NSF ECCS will
be used to fund speakers, students and some junior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The seventh
biennial Gordon Conference on Plasmonics and Nanophotonics will be held at Grand
Summit Hotel at Sunday River, ME, from July 8-13, 2018, preceded by a Gordon
Research Seminar on Plasmonics (GRS, July 7-8). The fields of plasmonics and
nanophotonics encompass the science and engineering of optical interactions with
nanostructures. Prospects of enhanced light harvesting, subwavelength
confinement and strong local electromagnetic fields near nanoscale objects have
motivated extensive investigation of nanooptical phenomena. As a result of these
investigations, applications of plasmonics and nanophotonics have reached across
various disciplines, ranging from chemistry to material science, biology,
medicine, information, energy, and communications. Examples of topics that have
recently emerged and will be extensively discussed in this year's meeting
include: quantum mechanical effects, plasmon-induced hot carrier generation,
plasmon-enabled photocatalysis and biotechnology, dielectric nanophotonics,
novel sustainable materials, and metasurfaces. In the spirit of the GRC concept,
the intent of this meeting is to promote the exchange of ideas and the building
of strong relationships among academic, industrial, and government researchers
working in the multidisciplinary field of Plasmonics and Nanophotonics. The
preceding Gordon Research Seminar is being held to help include more graduate
students and young researchers in the field. Speakers, as well as poster
presenters, will be encouraged to emphasize advances, unpublished work, new
ideas, and speculations for the future on a variety of current
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.