* 1829425
* Collaborative Research: Isotopic Indicators for Mechanisms of Organic Matter Degradation in the Northeast Pacific (EXPORTS)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Brian Popp, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2022
* USD 430,812.00

The biological pump is largely responsible for the vertical transport of organic
carbon from the surface to the ocean interior. However, only a small fraction of
organic material produced in surface waters is sequestered in the deep ocean.
The rest is consumed, or respired, by bacteria and larger organisms. The
overarching goal of the proposed work is to characterize the relative influences
of bacteria versus larger organisms on the degradation of organic material with
depth. Guided by recent results from the subtropical Pacific, the investigators
will use measurements of stable isotopes of nitrogen in different amino acids
(compound-specific isotopic analysis of amino acids, known as AA-CSIA), along
with measurements of the abundances of different forms of amino acids, and other
parameters derived from these analyses to identify how the partitioning and flux
of large and small particles are affected by different degradation processes. By
improving the interpretive power of the AA-CSIA technique the investigators
propose to determine: 1) the relative importance of microbial and zooplankton
consumption on the efficiency of the biological carbon pump in the subarctic
northeast Pacific, and 2) how much microbially-altered small particles fuel the
metabolisms of mid-water zooplankton. This work capitalizes on an existing,
comprehensive field program (NASA EXPORTS) specifically focused on building a
predictive framework relating surface ocean properties to the vertical flux of
organic carbon. The tremendous amount of data to be collected on all aspects of
the biological pump as part of the EXPORTS program will aid the development and
interpretation of the investigators' amino acid isotopic tool. Results will be
broadly communicated via production and distribution of several episodes of
Voice of the Sea, a local television program that will air in Hawaii and across
many Pacific islands. Episodes also will be posted online and publicized through
social media to the south Florida community. This project will support a Ph.D.
student and an undergraduate student at University of Miami, which serves a 25%
Hispanic population, and an M.S. student and an undergraduate student at
University of Hawaii, which is a designated minority-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work introduces a new geochemical
framework to distinguish microbial versus zooplankton alteration of marine
organic matter. Piloted on samples from the subtropical Pacific, this approach
interrogates unamended sinking material directly, using amino acid compound-
specific isotopic analysis (AA-CSIA) to determine the progressive, cumulative
impact of microbial and zooplankton degradative pathways. The proposed work (1)
will extend this interpretive framework to explicitly define end-member
signatures such as fecal pellets and will apply this refined method to a study
site in the subarctic northeast Pacific to (2) determine the vertical
progression of degradative mechanisms in an oceanographic location with
contrasting productivity and vertical length scales of flux attenuation and (3)
determine whether microbially- degraded biomass is important for fueling
midwater metazoans under contrasting carbon flux conditions. The proposed work
will be conducted in collaboration with the NASA EXPORTS program at the Ocean
Station Papa time-series site. Teaming with this program presents a unique
opportunity to refine AA-CSIA interpretation in parallel with intensive data
collection defining productivity, particle size distribution and flux, and
numerous biological parameters. In comparing subtropical and subarctic Pacific
locations, the proposed work will test how differences in productivity and
plankton community structure influence vertical patterns of consumption and
alteration of phytodetritus by microbes and zooplankton, from surface to
mesopelagic depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.