* 1829898
* Collaborative research: Coral community resilience: testing the role of hidden diversity in pocilloporid corals at Moorea
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 82,822.00

While most coral reefs in the world are threatened by multiple disturbances that
are driving coral cover downward, the coral reefs at Mo'orea, French Polynesia,
provide a striking exception. However, it is not yet clear what makes the coral
communities of Mo'orea an exception to the trend of global decline in coral
cover, and what drives spatial variation in recovery patterns around the island.
The most recent wave of recovery on the outer reefs is dominated by corals in
the genus Pocillopora (the cauliflower coral). While the colonies of this coral
all look similar to one another, they actually represent multiple 'hidden'
species that are genetically divergent but visibly indistinguishable. The
morphological similarity makes it hard to identify species in the field, and
this often forces researchers to pool these corals into a single group, which
has impeded a full understanding of coral recovery. The ecological differences
among these hidden species remain poorly understood, but they may be a crucial
factor keeping the ecosystem in a coral-dominated state. This project is
studying how 'hidden diversity' provides a form of 'ecological insurance' that
provides reef-building coral communities around this island with ecological and
evolutionary options that buffer reefs from unpredictable and unfavorable
environmental conditions. If multiple cryptic species exhibit a diversity of
responses to disturbance and stress, then it increases the ability of the
community to recover and re-organize after impacts compared to that if all the
species responded the same way. By studying the reefs at Mo'orea, this project
provides unique, important, and transferable knowledge to better understand
fundamental mechanism driving coral community recovery following catastrophic
damage, and will provide much-needed information to better manage coral reefs
and favor them remaining in a coral-dominated state. A PhD student and a
postdoctoral researcher at Florida State University (FSU) are being supported
and mentored during the project, and a program of professional growth is being
provided for a technician who will work on the project. The investigators are
working with science educators from Florida schools to introduce marine biology
clubs that will provide outreach opportunities for FSU and California State
University Northridge participants to engage high school students and teachers
in the research themes at the core of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test the hypothesis that the presence of morphologically similar
yet genetically divergent lineages of corals in the genus Pocillopora drives
rapid recovery of coral communities dominated by Pocillopora on the outer reefs
of Mo'orea, French Polynesia. By creating a diverse portfolio in the capacity of
the Pocillopora community to recover and reorganize after disturbance, hidden
ecological differences among coral lineages in their response to disturbance is
expected to promote community resilience. A well-studied genetic marker will be
used to distinguish coral colonies among different lineages. Field-based
projects, co-located with Moorea Coral Reef-Long-Term Ecological Research (MCR-
LTER) sites, will determine how pocilloporid lineages differ in their
distribution and abundance, spatial and temporal patterns of annual recruitment,
symbiont composition, and post-settlement growth and survival. These data will
be used to build Integral Projection Models (IPMs) to compare population
differences among lineages in their sensitivity to size-dependent perturbations,
and their capacity for population growth following disturbance. Results from the
field projects and IPMs will be synthesized to estimate response diversity as
the multivariate dispersion of lineage dissimilarity, and to assess the extent
to which it predicts variation among sites in the recovery rate of pocilloporid
percent cover, estimated empirically from the MCR-LTER time series. The
intellectual merits of this project lie in developing new and transferable
understanding of: i) the ecological differences within an ecologically important
coral genus, ii) why pocilloporids at Mo'orea are an exception to the global
trend of declining coral cover, and iii) the potential for hidden response
diversity to act as a fundamental mechanism determining the capacity for coral
communities to reestablish and reorganize following
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.