* 1829197
* I-Corps Sites: Type II - The Penn I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Tomas Isakowitz, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2022
* USD 194,928.00

This project, from the University of Pennsylvania (Penn), extends its I-Corps
Site. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at
universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to
transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide
infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training and modest
funding to enable groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into
becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation
locally and regionally and contribute to the National Innovation Network of
mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors. The Penn I-Corps Site
supports the translation of research from STEM areas into the marketplace by
providing educational programming, financial support, and strategic guidance
through offering Site e-teams access to commercialization programs at its
innovation hub, the Penn Center for Innovation (PCI). The Site employs a
structured process for business model validation following the Lean Launchpad
methodology. Within the context of technologies arising from STEM research at
Penn, the goals of the Site are to train teams consisting of faculty, staff, and
students by providing hands-on experiential entrepreneurial education, and to
accelerate startup creation at Penn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A direct result of the
Penn I-Corps Site is hands-on training in the Customer Discover Methodology of
faculty and students, applications to the NSF's I-Corp program, validation of
market need for team projects, the creation of new startups and, when
appropriate, licensing of technologies originating from Penn research. The
ultimate goal is to help transition of research to commercialization. Promoting
a hands-on experiential approach the Site's activities integrate education and
traditional technology transfer. More than 75 teams have already been trained
since the Penn Site started operating in the summer of 2015. From these, 32
companies were launched, which have acquired $7.2 million in funding via grant
awards and investments, and 39 jobs created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.