* 1829230
* I-Corps Sites: Type II - NSF-I-Corps Site, The University of Alabama
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Daniel Daly, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 227,333.00

This project, from the University of Alabama (UA), extends their initial I-Corps
Site award for scale up to their next phase of support for innovation and
entrepreneurship. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors. This is
a Type II I-Corps Site project. Type II proposals are submitted by institutions
that have already received a Type I award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
I-Corps Type II Site is to build on, extend and expand the local innovation
ecosystem, and to nurture STEM faculty and students to transition their ideas
into the marketplace so these early stage teams can build sustainable companies,
create new jobs, attract investment, and benefit society. Boosting the local
innovation ecosystem by nurturing STEM faculty and students propelled the
University of Alabama Site into a formal, active, local innovation ecosystem
contributing to the national network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors. The UA Site provides infrastructure, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or become I-Corps Team applicants. In 2016 the US Site
became partners with the regional I-Corps Node, I-Corps South, at the Georgia
Institute of Technology. The UA Site, which has been successful in activities
that increase inclusiveness, will also continue to improve and expand Lean
Launchpad curriculum and training programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.