* 1829096
* Workshop on Data Storage Research Vision
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Ali Butt, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 09/30/2018
* USD 49,999.00

This award funds a focused workshop for bringing together a broad range of
scientists, systems researchers, and information technology (IT) practitioners
to discuss and establish a vision for the future of storage systems. The output
of the workshop will be a public report documenting the discussions and a set of
recommendations on future storage research directions. The workshop and the
report should also stimulate effective research collaborations between the
disparate research communities represented at the workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The big data revolution along with the dawn of the age of
Internet of Things (IoT) is driving the need for novel and innovative storage
systems to store, manage, retrieve, and efficiently utilize unprecedented
volumes of data at increasingly faster speeds. There are a number of open
challenges and research issues that need to be addressed both in the short and
long term to ensure sustained storage systems efficacy and performance. In
particular, the wide variety of applications of modern and emerging storage
systems entail that the fundamental design of storage systems should be
revisited. Existing standards and abstractions need to be reevaluated, and new
sustainable data representations need to be designed to support emerging
applications. New storage software designs are also necessary to take advantage
of the hardware advancements such as persistent memories in order to maximize
efficiency and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will identify the
major issues of designing future storage systems and define a vision for storage
research. Some of the broad set of directions to consider include, but are not
limited to: 1) How to evolve storage systems to meet the challenges of scale,
throughput, and sustainability arising from emerging applications such as deep
learning and IoT? 2) How to address allocation, management, privacy,
performance, and multi-tenancy to meet the demands of the intense migration of
data from on-premise to cloud deployments? 3) How to design file system
programming interfaces and higher-level yet simple-to-use interfaces for new
storage systems? 4) How to design programming models to efficiently support
innovative storage and deep storage hierarchies? 5) How to address pipeline
issues and train the next generation of storage systems researchers? 6) How to
design and make it easy for systems researchers to realize new applications and
storage hardware? Workshop participants will be charged with assessing the
current state and direction of research related to storage systems while making
recommendations for research related to the current, short-term, and long-term
needs of designing sustainable and scalable storage
architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop report, along with
the list and biographies of the participants and the organizers, will be made
available to the community via the workshop website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.