* 1829241
* I-Corps Sites: Type II - Advancing RIT's Early Stage Technology Commercialization and Entrepreneurship Eco-System: Integrating Educational and Commercial Outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Scot Atkins, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 191,937.00

This project, from Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT), extends this
institution's existing Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Site for scale up to their
next phase of support for innovation and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are
NSF-funded entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and
support multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors. Sites that received funding for three years during the early years of
I-Corps may apply for a second award for an additional three years, called a
Type II proposal. This project from RIT is a Type II
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since becoming a Site in 2014, Simone Center has
vetted and counseled several hundred potential teams and advanced approximately
300 of them through I-Corps training. Program learning outcomes and evaluations
with student/faculty participants provided significant insights, which have been
operationalized and employed to improve offerings. Over the past three years,
RIT and the regional ecosystem benefitted significantly from NSF's I-Corps Site
designation and support. It has actively gained from and contributed to the
National Innovation Network (NIN) learning community. RIT's Site Program is also
in close collaboration with the regional NSF I-Corps Node, which is composed of
Cornell University, University of Rochester, and RIT.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are a number of broader impacts for this project:
during the next phase, particular emphasis will be placed on recruiting
traditionally underrepresented participants in entrepreneurship, as well as
training the deaf community, while furthering the advancement of access and
inclusion technology projects; a new generation of students and faculty will be
educated about I-Corps (lean startup) methodologies and fostering the creation
of early-stage ventures; and, the regional ecosystem and National Innovation
Network will profit from the outcomes of the RIT Site
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.