* 1829299
* Plant-Insect Diversity, Paleobiology, and Paleobiogeography From Early Eocene Neotropical Forests
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Carlos Jaramillo, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 101,828.00

The early Eocene hyperthermals were intervals of rapid and extreme warming that
occurred ~56-52 million years ago. The hyperthermals recorded the highest global
temperatures in the last 66 million years, and their fossil record provides a
snapshot of life in a greenhouse world. Most studies of life during these
warming intervals have focused on geographical regions between the tropics and
poles. Very little is known about ancient tropical forests during the early
Eocene. In this project, the early Eocene plant fossil record of northern
Colombia are being intensively sampled. These collections will provide a unique
and previously undescribed record of Central and South American plants from
which their evolution and function can be evaluated in relation to past
environmental change. With such records, our understanding of the limits and
long-term responses of tropical rainforests to warming will advance. This
project will foster the scientific training of undergraduate students in state-
of-the-art lab techniques. The investigators will continue to increase
paleontological awareness in local and rural communities in Colombia through
training of public school teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will use the paleobotanical and sedimentary record from northern
Colombia to test for biotic responses of Neotropical forests to early Eocene
warming events. The research area includes three previously undescribed plant
fossil localities that span the Paleocene-Eocene boundary and complement
previously described Late Paleocene floras in Colombia. Considering that the
plant fossil record provides a natural experiment in which to observe the long-
term response of tropical rainforests to temperature increases, this project is
focussing on 4 questions: 1) Did the early Eocene hyperthermals lead to a
diversification or a collapse of tropical biomes in northern South America? 2)
Did plant evaporative cooling change during these rapid increases in
temperature? 3) How did forest composition and plant-insect interactions change
during the early Eocene? 4) Were the early Eocene forests in northern South
America similar in biogeographic composition to extant forests in the same
region? By involving undergraduates in examining these research questions, this
project will advance discovery and understanding while promoting teaching,
training, and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.