* 1829486
* Developing a new calibrated pressure sensor for the Ocean Observatories Initiative Cabled Array and other applications
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 545,344.00

Measurements of seafloor pressure are useful for understanding the earth and the
ocean because they are sensitive to changes in the height of the seafloor and
the weight of the overlying water and atmosphere. The best pressure sensors
drift unpredictably so their output cannot be used to resolve long terms signals
such as the steady buildup of strain between subduction zone earthquakes and
long term changes in the mass of the oceans. Drift also makes existing pressure
sensors less sensitive to shorter-term signals such as those from slow-slip
earthquakes and ocean eddies. A new method has been developed to remove drift
using the internal pressure inside the instrument housing as a reference and has
been tested successfully with a seafloor prototype. This project will redesign
the prototype so that the instrument is more robust, better calibrated, more
compact and lower power. It will be attached to the Ocean Observatories
Initiative Cabled Array on Axial Seamount, a volcano that is inflating rapidly
following an eruption in 2015. The engineering effort will be led by a female
engineer in a field where women are underrepresented and the project will train
a graduate student in a technical project where they will learn to work with
both engineers and scientists. The cruises that service and deploy instruments
on the Ocean Observatories Initiative Cabled Array incorporate a large number of
undergraduate students, and one will be engaged to conduct a project related to
this instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The A-0-A method is a new approach to
calibrating pressure sensors to remove drift. Periodically, a valve is used to
switch the pressure sensor for a short interval from measuring the pressure in
the ocean to measuring the pressure inside the instrument housing. The drift can
then be determined by comparing the pressure readings to an accurate barometer.
The A-0-A method has the potential to substantially reduce the drift of long-
term seafloor pressure records in a much more economical way than current
approaches. The first non-proprietary seafloor tests at 900 m in Monterey Bay on
the MARS cabled observatory suggests that A-0-A calibrations may reduce pressure
sensor drift to as little as 1-2 mm/year in 1000 m of water. However, design
improvements are required to remove known sources of error and a side-by-side
seafloor test is essential to verify the technique against established methods
of drift removal. The first deployment of the redesigned instrument on Axial
Seamount will allow comparisons with the absolute pressure measurements of the
Scripps Institution of Oceanography Self-Calibrating Pressure Recorder (an
instrument that uses a dead weight tester for periodic calibrations) and the
relative pressure measurements obtained from repeat closed-loop mobile pressure
recorder surveys, both of which have an uncertainty of ~1 cm of water. The
cabled sensor can then be used for future vertical geodetic studies of the
Cascadia subduction zone megathrust aimed at understanding patterns of fault
locking, creep and slow slip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.