* 1829238
* EAGER: Exploring Discrete Event Dynamics to Model and Control Intelligent Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Feng Ju, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2021
* USD 211,827.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will improve
the nation's competitiveness by investigating new models and optimization
techniques for control of intelligent manufacturing systems. Rapid advances in
computer-controlled processes, high-performance computing, and Internet-of-
Things (IoT) lay the groundwork for significantly improving manufacturing
productivity. Despite the opportunity, modeling methodologies and real-time
control methods continue to face two major challenges, namely the lack of
predictive models for the dynamic evolution of manufacturing systems, and the
lack of real-time optimization and control algorithms to generate effective on-
line production control. This project will address these challenges, which will
lead to significant advancement in manufacturing practice. The research is
integrated with an education plan to enhance education and outreach activities
in underrepresented groups such as Women in Operations Research and Management
Science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports fundamental
research in methods to control complex manufacturing systems by leveraging both
real-time information on machine state and synthetic data generated by in-
process simulators. This research will provide new methods for targeted on-
demand simulation, integrated with novel control methodology, to support factory
level decision-making based on instantaneous machine status. Specifically, a
novel simulation and control architecture for intelligent manufacturing systems
will address the following main research objectives: (1) construct approximate
and high-fidelity simulations that can continuously receive information from the
real system and generate conditional statements; and (2) define a class of
dynamic performance specifications to be controlled and optimized. This project
will lead to aggregate-state models and conditional simulators feeding closed
loop predictive controllers that effectively utilize the dynamically changing
system state information to dynamically adapt the control
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.