* 1829339
* Workshop on Empowering Microgrids with Smart Grid Attributes: Developments in U.S. and Africa (To be held January 28-31,2019 in Abuja, Nigeria)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,07/31/2023
* James Momoh, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,996.00

The goal of this project is to organize the first international workshop devoted
to evaluating options for empowering microgrid with smart grid attributes with a
focus on developments in the United States and Africa. The project is jointly
funded by the Division of Electrical, Communications, and Cyber Systems and the
Office of International Science and Engineering. The workshop will involve
energy experts, researchers, and university scholars/students as well as policy
makers and market players as participants and invited speakers at plenary and
panel sessions. It will result in new understanding of renewable energy resource
applications and microgrid development in U.S. and Africa under different
environment and uncertainties in climate change and growing demand for
electricity. Further, it will add to the knowledge base for new technologies for
optimization and control of energy use to reduce cost as well as minimize
greenhouse gases; increase the performance of renewable energy sources in
development of smart microgrid systems; and social, regulatory and policy issues
as they affect design and deployment of microgrid in different African countries
and the United States. It will promote research, education activities and
training of students from U.S. and Africa to accommodate the challenges of
development of microgrid and smart grid technologies, and joint publication
between U.S. and African participants in refereed journals and conference
proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding of recent developments in
deployment of microgrid and smart grid both in the U.S and Africa will lead to a
sustainable future energy delivery in the two continents. The workshop will
expose the U.S. participants to the developmental work of the European and Asian
microgrid developers in Africa, which will enhance the collaborative work
between the U.S. and African researchers. In addition, it will supplement other
efforts being made by U.S. and other international agencies to improve
electricity access in Sub-Saharan Africa, especially with focus on increasing
entrepreneurship and investment into renewable energy deployment in the U.S. and
Sub-Saharan Africa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.