* 1829664
* SBIR Phase II:  Simulation for structural integrity of as manufactured 3D printed parts
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Brady Adams, Teton Composites
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,173,583.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project relates to the notion of distributed
manufacturing using 3D printing, where structural parts may be manufactured
onsite, meeting on-demand needs while eliminating transportation costs and
inventory storage. Unique, one-off prints, such as may often occur in the
medical industry are another virtue of 3D print technology. For these reasons,
virtually every major US manufacturing industry is exploring avenues to utilize
3D printing. While 3D printing is unquestionably entering the mainstream of
manufacturing technology, a glaring gap in advancing the industry is the
simulation of the performance of an "as manufactured" part. A common question
surrounding 3D print manufacturing today is: "How do I know if my part will
perform as envisioned?" The proposed technology brings an industry leading
software simulation to the product engineer and designer to answer this very
question, enabling engineers to predict part performance, prior to attempting a
build. The speed and simplicity of the software solution is transformative,
accelerating the adoption of this disruptive manufacturing
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project addresses the technical challenge of predicting structural
performance of an "as manufactured" fiber-reinforced 3D printed part. Additive
Manufacturing (AM) offers the product engineer or designer tremendous freedom to
create parts not achievable by more traditional processes. However, parts
produced by AM are fundamentally different than those produced by conventional
methods. For example, a machined aluminum part is largely homogenous, while a 3D
printed part allows for internal lattice (infill) structures. A 3D printed part
can also exhibit a multitude of process anomalies such as voids, delamination
between layers, warping produced by residual stresses as the part cools, and, in
the case of fiber filled plastics, fiber orientation that varies throughout the
part. Collectively, these features can have a dramatic impact on the ultimate
performance of the part and must be understood by the engineer early in the
design stage. This project seeks to develop a commercial software simulation
product that predicts the structural performance of a part produced by 3D
printing, while optimizing the infill (lattice) structure for strength and
weight. Speed, simplicity, and high-fidelity results are hallmarks of the
proposed solution and are at the core of the value
proposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.