* 1829761
* Collaborative Research: Determining the isotopic signature of iron released via ligand-mediated dissolution of atmospheric dust in the surface ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Rene Boiteau, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 372,100.00

Iron (Fe) is a crucial nutrient for microbial growth in the oceans, impacting
the carbon cycle and the climate system, but Fe does not dissolve readily in
seawater and so its availability limits phytoplankton growth over much of the
surface oceans. One of the most significant ways by which Fe reaches the surface
oceans is through deposition of wind-blown dust; however, for this Fe to be
available for biological growth, it must dissolve and be kept in solution bound
to organic molecules. Despite this known importance, the mechanisms of dust
dissolution and the identity of the organic molecules keeping Fe in solution
remain poorly understood. This study will focus on using laboratory and field
experiments to better understand how natural organic molecules present in
seawater enhance the release of Fe from Saharan desert dust, the organic
molecules produced by microbes in response to dust, the isotopic fractionation
of Fe associated with dust dissolution, and ultimately the role of ligand-
mediation dissolution in determining the role of dust in the marine Fe cycle.
For outreach activities, the proposers would tutor refugee high school students
from Africa/Asia in math and science to help them get integrated into the U.S.
school system and discuss science with the public by participation in the St.
Petersburg Science Festival. Three graduate students and undergraduate interns
would be supported and trained as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Scientists from the University of South Florida and Oregon State
University will collect natural North Atlantic dust at the Tudor Hill Tower on
Bermuda over a yearly cycle and characterize the weekly bulk and water-soluble
Fe isotopic and elemental composition of the dust. Appropriate subsamples of
this dust, representing both the Saharan and non-Saharan (anthropogenically-
influenced) seasons will then be dissolved in seawater, with dissolution
mediated by ligands with a range of Fe binding stability constants (natural
ligands as well as defined marine siderophores). Incubations of dust will also
be carried out with natural biological communities collected from the Gulf of
Mexico and at the Bermuda Atlantic Time Series site in the North Atlantic. The
investigators will characterize the amount and isotopic signature of the Fe
released in each experiment, the microbial community response to dust in the
incubations (DNA, cell counting and identification), and the ligands present in
the natural organic matter used for experiments and produced in the incubations.
Comparison of the abiotic and biological experiments will allow investigation of
the magnitude of the biological effects on dust dissolution. The experiments
will allow the investigators to provide a mechanistic understanding of factors
that affect dust dissolution rates, especially the role of different specific
organic ligands in enhancing and stabilizing the release of iron in the surface
ocean, and the net signature of iron released. From this, the investigators will
provide new constraints for the marine iron isotope cycle in the ocean,
specifically testing the hypothesis that the net release of Fe from dust is
isotopically heavy due to complexation with organic ligands, but that the size
of this fractionation depends on the binding strength and presence of different
ligands. The outcomes of this process study will provide a framework for models
and interpretation of large scale field studies such as GEOTRACES, as well as
enhancing the research community's ability to interpret aerosol and oceanic iron
isotope data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.