* 1829202
* I-Corps Sites: Type II - Southeastern Wisconsin I-Corps Site: Enhancing Regional Technology Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Ilya Avdeev, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 191,999.00

This project, from the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM), extends their
initial I-Corps Site award for scale up to their next phase of support for
innovation and entrepreneurship. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded
entities established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support
multiple, local teams to transition their technology concepts into the
marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking
opportunities, training and modest funding to enable groups to transition their
work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps
Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the
National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors. This is a proposal for a Type II I-Corps Site - Type II proposals are
submitted by institutions that have already received a Type I
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee (UWM), in
partnership with the UWM Research Foundation (UWMRF), currently operates the NSF
I-Corps Site of Southeastern Wisconsin ("Milwaukee I-Corps Site"), which is the
only NSF I-Corps site in Wisconsin. The site draws academic teams from five
Milwaukee-area academic institutions: UWM, the Medical College of Wisconsin
(MCW), Marquette University (MU), Concordia University of Wisconsin (CUW), and
the Milwaukee School of Engineering (MSOE). This has been an exemplary I-Corps
Site that: reached out across the state; launched a Healthcare initiative;
succeeded in inclusiveness, particularly among women; experimented with a
variety of curricular offerings; and engaged in entrepreneurship research and
published outcomes of their studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.