* 1829158
* EDGE:  Establishing functional genomics in Hydra to study stem cells and regeneration
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Jacob Robinson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 10/31/2022
* USD 1,499,305.00

Important questions in developmental biology relate to how stem cells maintain
the health of adult tissues, both as tissues age under normal conditions and in
response to injury. While human stem cells have only limited abilities for
tissue repair and regeneration, many animals have the ability to regrow large
portions of their body after catastrophic injury. This is accomplished using
largely the same gene families found in all animals, thus understanding the
molecular mechanisms that underlie these impressive feats of regeneration will
shed light on why this does not occur in humans; such basic biology research
could ultimately lead to improved regenerative medicine therapies. A major
barrier to the success of such research is the relative lack of tools to
manipulate gene function in highly regenerative animals. Regeneration research
would benefit from a model organism with the following attributes: 1) adult stem
cells differentiate frequently and enable complete tissue regeneration; 2) cells
can be tracked as they differentiate and migrate; and 3) tools for studying gene
function with spatial and temporal resolution. Currently, no model organism has
all three of these attributes; however, Hydra vulgaris is a promising candidate.
Hydra has remarkable regenerative abilities, and its simple tissue organization
and optical clarity enables cell tracking using optical microscopy. However, the
community currently lacks tools to precisely manipulate gene expression.
Therefore, this project aims to develop these tools, which will ultimately be
used to understand the molecular basis of
regeneration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hydra stem cells indefinitely support adult
homeostasis and can direct regeneration of the entire adult body from a small
piece of tissue, including rebuilding the nervous system from a single stem
cell. This project aims to establish fast and precise control of gene
perturbations in Hydra, thus enabling studies of genotype-phenotype
relationships during development and regeneration. Although transgenesis in
Hydra is established, four bottlenecks hamper functional genomics: 1)
Establishing transgenic lines is slow, 2) The lack of cell-type specific
promoters, 3) The lack of temporal control over gene perturbations and 4) It is
cumbersome to maintain large number of different transgenic Hydra strains. The
following approaches will be implemented to overcome these bottlenecks: 1) To
accelerate the establishment of transgenic lines, Tol2 transposase will be used
to increase the frequency of transgenesis events during embryogenesis. 2) To
gain spatial control over gene perturbation experiments, specific promoters will
be identified and tested for all cell types by leveraging single cell RNA
sequencing data. 3) To gain spatial control over gene perturbation, an inducible
gene expression system will be developed that will also work with CRISPR-Cas9
gene editing. This system will work for all Hydra cell types, but this proposal
will focus on perturbing gene function in neurons. 4) A Hydra vivarium for
automated Hydra care will be developed and implemented for high throughput
maintenance of transgenic lines. The success of these goals will enable
effective genotype-to-phenotype testing in Hydra and thus enable regenerative
biology research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.