* 1829546
* Using Barium Isotopes to Investigate the Origin of Fluids in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Sune Nielsen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2022
* USD 550,651.00

Subduction zones are locations on Earth where oceanic crust and sediments (the
subducted slab) are introduced back into the deep Earth resulting in the
prominent arc volcanoes at the surface that are associated with substantial
volcanic and earthquake hazards. Subduction zones are also the main places of
mass transfer between the surface and deep Earth, which controls long-term
climate and plays a critical role in the evolution of Earth's heat budget. It is
well-known that material released from the subducted slab imparts distinct
chemical signatures to arc volcanism and geochemical evidence suggests that both
subducted sediment and hydrothermally altered oceanic crust (AOC) play
significant roles in arc lava generation. However, the exact physical processes
responsible for transporting slab material into the arc is the subject of
significant recent debate. In essence, one model poses that all the subducted
components are mixed at the top of the slab, forming a 'melange' layer, which
subsequently is the main source region for arc lavas. The second model invokes
that the general structure of the subducted slab is intact through a large
portion of the subduction process and only when sediments become hot enough to
melt and AOC dehydrates are these components released to the mantle wedge and
induce melting. In this project, researchers use a novel isotopic tool to
investigate which of these two models is
correct.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This team has identified the element
barium (Ba) and its isotopes as a geochemical tracer that can be used to
investigate the origin of material released from the subducting slab and,
thereby, distinguish between models that invoke sediment melting and ocean crust
dehydration versus melange melting as the primary source of slab material in arc
lavas. Physically, the two end-member models of slab material transport are very
different and have different consequences for the thermal structure,
distribution of volcanoes, and chemical budgets of crustal recycling in
subduction zones. However, both models equally predict most of the unique
chemical and isotopic characteristica of arc lavas. It is, therefore, critical
to develop scientific tests that are capable of distinguishing the two different
models. In both models, fluids are important vectors of slab material transport.
However, the ultimate source of these fluids are different in that fluids are
sourced from melange layers in one model and primarily extracted from AOC in the
other. Barium is a highly fluid mobile element that displays characteristic
enrichment over similarly incompatible elements like lanthanum and thorium in
arc lavas. These researchers argue that Ba isotopes likely displays different
values in melange, sedimentary and AOC sources of fluids. The isotope
composition of the excess Ba is, therefore, likely to constrain the ultimate
source of the fluids that carry the Ba. They hypothesize that evidence based on
Ba isotopes can provide new constraints on the slab material transport mechanism
in the subduction zones they have selected for study. In terms of Broader
Impacts, this project will support graduate students who will incorporate this
work into their theses, and will train them in cutting-edge geochemical tools.
The results of this research will also be of broad interest to other fields that
investigate the physical parameters that govern subduction zone magmatism, like
seismologists and magnetotelluricists who use their tools to locate fluid flow
in subduction zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.