* 1829782
* Development and Field Testing of a Spectral Radiometer for Measurements in Extremely Low-Light Marine Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Rick Reynolds, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 668,552.00

Low-light conditions in the ocean have critical significance in the lives of
marine animals due to various light-dependent physiological mechanisms and
behavioral patterns associated with animal vision, communication, reproduction,
predation, antipredator tactics, and vertical migration within the water column.
Therefore, low-light environments have multiple implications for oceanic
habitats, water quality, and commercial fisheries production. Measurements of
extremely low-light marine environments including twilight (sunset and sunrise)
conditions in the surface ocean layer as well as very dim solar daylight within
deeper layers extending from about 200 to 1000 m depth are not possible with
existing conventional instruments. As a result, such measurements have been very
scarce and greatly limited in scope. The instrument to be developed in this
project, called LARS (Low-light Aquatic Radiometer System), will have an
unparalleled capability to accurately measure extremely low light, which will
pave the way to improved characterization of deep-sea light and twilight
conditions in the ocean beyond oversimplifying historical descriptions. This
instrument will aid in expanding research of deep-sea habitats to protect the
biodiversity and integrity of these largest ecosystems by volume on Earth, an
important goal recognized by international community of scientists and policy-
makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed development of LARS will be based on
state-of-the-art highly sensitive photon counting technology which will allow
measurements of extremely low levels of underwater spectral irradiance of 10 -
20 photons/(cm2 s nm) within the visible spectral range. This will enable
measurements of dim daylight at ocean mesopelagic depths (~200-1000 m) not only
of blue light but also, for the first time, potentially biologically significant
levels of green and red light generated locally at depth by inelastic radiative
processes such as Raman scattering by water molecules. In addition, LARS will
provide the capability to measure both the downward and upward irradiances in
low-light marine environments, which has never been done before. Field
demonstrative data will be collected to comprehensively characterize the deep-
sea light field and provide first experimental evidence for the role of
inelastic processes and approach to the asymptotic light regime at depth. The
measurements of poorly characterized twilight and moonlight conditions in the
ocean surface layer will be also demonstrated. The broader utility of LARS will
be demonstrated by data analysis in support of the study of specific biological
questions related to low-light marine habitats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.