* 1829074
* Collaborative Research: Unmanned Aerial Vehicles for Emissions and Chemistry of Volatile Organic Compounds over the Amazon Tropical Forest
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Alex Guenther, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 412,807.00

This project will improve the understanding of atmospheric chemistry processes
over tropical forest ecosystems. A mobile profiling system will be used to
characterize emissions and deposition of volatile organic compounds (VOC) over
horizontal and vertical scales across different forest sub-types. The data will
be collected during a series of drone-enabled experiments conducted in both wet
and dry seasons in the Adolfo Ducke Forest Reserve, located on the northern
outskirts of Manaus Brazil in central Amazonia. The results will be used to
improve atmospheric chemistry modeling and databases that characterize the
emissions of biogenic compounds from vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific questions that will be addressed during this project include the
following: (1) What is the horizontal heterogeneity in the magnitude and types
of VOC emission and deposition for forest landscapes that vary on intermediate
scales of 100's m? (2) What is the vertical heterogeneity and diel cycle of
reactive VOCs in a turbulent planetary boundary layer? and (3) What is the
vertical heterogeneity in the speciation and concentration of semivolatile
organic compounds (SVOC) produced as photochemical reaction products of VOC
oxidation?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The horizontal protocol will characterize the
spatial variability of the sampled VOCs at intermediate scale and be used to
constrain and improve MEGAN (Model of Emissions of Gases and Aerosols from
Nature), a framework used for modeling biogenic emissions. The data obtained by
the vertical protocol will be used with the mixed-layer inverse-model technique
to estimate VOC fluxes. The data and insights gained from this effort will be
used to constrain and improve current chemical transport models of atmospheric
oxidation and to provide a better understanding of regional and global chemical
transport in Amazonia, especially as related to mechanisms of SVOCs and
particulate matter production and susceptibility to future Earth-system
changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.