* 1829138
* Collaborative Research: Lidar Studies of Coupling in the Arctic Atmosphere and Geospace
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Bifford Williams, GLOBAL ATMOSPHERIC TECHNOLOGIES AND SCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 349,103.00

This research is a three year collaborative effort between researchers at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF) and G &amp; A Technical Software
Incorporated (GATS) that is aimed at extending the understanding of the dynamics
of the complex Arctic atmosphere and geospace regions. Specifically, the
dynamical and neutral-plasma coupling in the middle and upper atmosphere would
be investigated with a new resonance lidar at Poker Flat Research Range (PFRR),
Chatanika, Alaska, that is a sodium resonance wind-temperature lidar (W&amp;T)
system that was recently relocated to PFRR and made operational with
observations starting in January 2018. The operations of this instrument would
acquire wind and temperature profiles through the mesosphere and lower
thermosphere (MLT) region of 80-110 km that would be coordinated with the on-
going operations of six key instruments at PFRR: namely, the volume imaging
sodium lidar, the Poker Flat Rayleigh density-temperature lidar, the Poker Flat
metal resonance density lidar, a three-channel all sky imager, the Poker Flat
Meteor Wind Radar, and the Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar. The research
would have a variety of broader impacts addressing fundamental processes in
fluid dynamics, aerosol and plasma science while developing new remote sensing
technology. The W&amp;T resonance lidar will be operated at the Lidar Research
Laboratory at PFRR, and would support the participation of two UAF graduate
students as well as visiting students in scientific investigations and
engineering projects. The W&amp;T lidar system operations would enhance the
Poker Flat Rocket Range research infrastructure, extending the cluster of
ground-based suite of instruments at PFRR that would in turn allow new rocket-
based investigations at PFRR. The activity will advance integration of satellite
and ground-based measurements and inter-comparison, calibration, and validation
of remote sensing techniques. The observations, analyses and results of this
activity will contribute to national and international programs, including the
CAWSES, CEDAR, SEARCH, and SPARC programs. The results of the activity will be
disseminated widely through both professional and public outreach programs
associated with UAF and NASA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic atmosphere can be
considered as a unique laboratory for investigating atmospheric coupling and
understanding how terrestrial meteorology forcing (from below) and space weather
activity (from above) combine to determine the overall structure and circulation
of the middle and upper atmosphere. The W&amp;T instrument would acquire
measurements of sufficient accuracy and precision to allow comparative studies
of temperature and wind over daily, seasonal, and yearly time scales. These
measurements would provide excellent data supporting studies relating to dynamic
coupling, ion-neutral coupling, and aerosol-plasma coupling. The program of
lidar measurements would address these topics through observations of specific
phenomena: gravity waves, tides, planetary waves, instabilities, mesospheric
inversion layers, mesospheric metal layers, extended thermospheric metal layers,
sporadic layers, Joule heating, ion drag, ion composition, and noctilucent
clouds. The overarching aim of the series of observations would be to achieve a
coherent framework for understanding these
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.