* 1829378
* Collaborative Research: Diel physiological rhythms in a tropical oceanic copepod
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ann Tarrant, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 226,979.00

The daily vertical migration (DMV) of zooplankton and fish across hundreds of
meters between shallow and deep waters is a predominant pattern in pelagic
ecosystems. This migration has consequences for biogeochemical cycling as it
moves a substantial portion of fixed carbon and nitrogen (an estimated 15 to 40
% of the total global organic export) from the surface directly to depth where
it feeds the midwater food chain and sequesters nutrients away from atmospheric
mixing. Estimates and predictions of these fluxes are, however, poorly
understood at present. New observations have shown that one source of
uncertainty is due to the assumption that metabolic rates and processes do not
vary over the course of the day, except based on changes in temperature and
oxygen availability. Rates are, however, also driven by differences in feeding,
swimming behavior, and underlying circadian cycles. The objective of this
project is to improve the ability of scientists to understand and predict
zooplankton contributions to the movement of carbon and nitrogen in the ocean by
detailing daily changes in physiological processes of these organisms. By
producing a set of respiration and excretion measurements over a daily time
series, paired with simultaneously collected gene and protein expression
patterns for an abundant vertically migratory species, the investigators will
provide unprecedented and predictive insight into how changes in the environment
affect the contribution of zooplankton to biogeochemical fluxes. The sampling
design of the project will advance discovery and understanding by providing
hands-on training opportunities to at least two undergraduate researchers. The
project will broaden dissemination of the research via development of an
educational module, focusing on rhythms in the ocean. The module will initially
be piloted with the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences (BIOS) summer camp
students and then disseminated through the BIOS Explorer program, the Teacher
Resources Page on the BIOS website, and published in a peer-reviewed educational
journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will characterize the metabolic
consequences of daily physiological rhythms and DVM for a model zooplankton
species, the abundant subtropical copepod Pleuromamma xiphias. Flux processes
(oxygen consumption, carbon dioxide production, production of ammonium and fecal
pellet production) will be interrogated using directed experiments testing the
effects of temperature, feeding and circadian cycle. Circadian cycling will
further be examined using transcriptomic and proteomic profiling. These
experiments will be related to field samples taken at 6-h intervals over the
course of the diel migration using an integrated suite of molecular and
organismal metrics. Combined organismal, transcriptomic and proteomic profiles
will provide an understanding of which metabolic pathways and associated flux
products vary in relation to particular environmental variables (food, light
cycle, temperature). Diel variation in metabolic rates will also be assessed
across seasons and species using other important migratory groups (pteropod,
euphausiid, and another copepod). The metabolic data will then be contextualized
with abundance estimates from archived depth-stratified tows to allow scaling to
community-level patterns and will be used to improve calculations of zooplankton
contribution to particulate organic carbon, nitrogen and respiratory active
flux. The results of this study will both improve our flux estimates and provide
predictive insight into how various environmental variables influence the
underlying physiological pathways generating carbon and nitrogen
flux.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.