* 1829221
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Tracking the Flood Pulse of a Record Discharge of the Brazos River in the Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Timothy Dellapenna, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 02/28/2019
* USD 44,996.00

The transport and fate of sediment carried by rivers to the coastal ocean is of
great ecological and societal importance. River input is the primary source of
land-derived sediment to the marine environment. These particles have
significant impacts on the health of coastal ecosystems and the geology and
bathymetry of coastal oceans and shipping channels. They directly and indirectly
affect fisheries and navigation. This research focuses on the movement of
sediments carried into the Gulf of Mexico, via the Brazos River, during the
unprecedented rainfall and flooding event that occurred during Hurricane Harvey.
The Brazos River ranks as the second largest contributor of nutrients and
organic matter to the Gulf of Mexico, after the Mississippi River. Unlike the
Mississippi, however, most sediment delivered to the Gulf of Mexico from the
Brazos is carried during flooding events like that which accompanied Hurricane
Harvey. Little is known about the fate of this sediment. It is not clear if it
is retained in the coastal zone, where the nutrients and chemicals it carries
affect the coastal environment, or is carried offshore and deposited in the deep
waters of the Gulf of Mexico. Through intensive sampling of sediments just
offshore the mouth of the Brazos River and further offshore in the Gulf of
Mexico in what is known as the Texas Mud Blanket, this project will determine
the principal repository of sediments delivered to the western Gulf of Mexico by
a major Texas river.

The overall goal of this research is to investigate the hypothesis that flood-
borne sediment from the Brazos River is initially deposited in the coastal zone
and subsequently mobilized and carried offshore with a large fraction of it
being deposited in the Texas Mud Blanket. The work builds on the analysis of
sea-bottom sediment samples collected in 2017 during flooding associated with
Hurricane Harvey. This new program will include two sampling cruises to augment
already collected data. The first cruise will entail acquisition of ~25 cores
that will indicate sediment deposition and transport in the near-shore region
near the Brazos River mouth. Preliminary work indicates that much of the initial
deposition of Brazos River sediment occurred east of the original sampling
region. The second cruise in will collect additional Brazos region cores and
expand sampling into the Texas Mud Blanket, with the goal of documenting changes
in Brazos sediment deposition from the Hurricane Harvey flooding. During both
cruises, complementary hydrography data will be collected. This includes water
column velocities and suspended sediment loads. Provenance of individual layers,
within the sediment samples and box cores, will be determined by digital photos
and x-radiographs of intact core slabs that show sediment fabric and structures.
To differentiate Gulf of Mexico from Brazos River sediments, sub-samples of
collected cores will be geochemically analyzed and profiled for short-lived-
radioisotope geochronology, water content, grainsize distribution, and mercury
and carbonate content. These indicators will help identify the origin of the
sediments deposited in the system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.