* 1829678
* Travel Grant Proposal for Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC) 2018
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Piya Pal, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides travel support for graduate students from US institutions,
who are co- authors of one or more accepted papers, to participate and present
their work at 2018 IEEE International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances for
Wireless Communications (SPAWC), to be held in Kalamata Greece, June 25-28,
2018. This is the 19th workshop in the SPAWC series, and is devoted to advances
in signal processing for wireless communications, networking, and information
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed graduate student participation is
poised to have a positive impact on signal processing for wireless
communications research in US institutions. The workshop will be a great
opportunity for graduate students to learn about emerging areas, and meet with
worldwide experts. More importantly, the students will gain new ideas leading to
stronger and more complete entrepreneurial learning, and will put their
contributions in perspective to ongoing research activities at the international
level.The broader impact of the proposed student participation will materialize
as these students joining the US workforce will be better positioned to
spearhead research and development activities in diverse industrial sectors,
such as those serving wireless communications, homeland security, defense, and
the automotive industries. The gender diversity of the plenary and thematic oral
session presenters will inspire female graduate students to remain and pursue
careers in the field of signal processing for wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.