* 1829952
* Measuring the turbulent kinetic energy (TKE) budget and momentum flux beneath breaking waves using an autonomous underwater vehicle
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Alexander Fisher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 679,144.00

Surface gravity waves are fundamental to the exchange of momentum, energy, heat,
and gases between the atmosphere and the ocean. This project will make detailed,
comprehensive measurements of the turbulent stress beneath surface waves using
an autonomous underwater vehicle. The data will be analyzed to quantify momentum
and energy transfer, and are expected to inform how turbulence is parameterized
and accounted for in numerical models. Advancing our understanding of the nature
of turbulent exchange driven by surface gravity waves has important and
immediate implications for coastal wind-driven circulation and heat exchange
within the world's oceans. In coastal margins, where natural and built
environments often interact, in situ-measurements of wind- and wave- driven
mixing can inform research and management efforts in predicting the fate of
pollutants, larvae, sediments, and nutrients. Additionally, this investigation
enhances the measurement capabilities of a highly-capable autonomous underwater
vehicle. Such enhancements to research infrastructure will enable lines of
inquiry into other areas of interest, including internal wave breaking over
continental shelves and enhanced mixing due to biophysical interactions of coral
and submerged vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few studies have measured the
turbulent kinetic energy and dissipation beneath breaking waves, because direct
measurements of turbulent Reynolds stress and the full TKE budget in the oceanic
surface boundary layer are hampered by constraints associated with typical
observational platforms. While significant advances have been made using
observations from stationary or floating platforms in combination with numerical
simulations, we still lack the necessary data to understand the structure and
transiency of wave-driven turbulence in the coastal ocean, where swell and a
dynamic wind environment contribute to an ever-evolving sea state. Consequently,
the inclusion of surface wave effects in turbulence closure schemes relies
heavily on numerical modeling results rather than direct observations. This
project will measure the turbulent Reynolds stress and terms in the turbulent
kinetic energy budget of a wave-affected surface layer using an autonomous
underwater vehicle equipped with microstructure probes and fast velocimeters.
This will provide an unprecedented picture of how surface gravity waves
structure turbulent mixing and hence momentum transfer beneath the water surface
and how that turbulent structure changes in the presence of swell, variable wind
forcing, and with the evolution of a wind sea. The novel AUV-based measurements
conducted for this project will be transformative because these high-resolution
observations are necessary to advance understanding of how to simultaneously
parameterize both vortex straining and turbulent injections as mechanisms of
momentum exchange across the air-sea interface, particularly in transient
conditions. The results will inform future modeling efforts through analysis of
momentum and energy transfer within the framework of second moment closure
schemes and ultimately improve our ability to predict the fate and transport of
nutrients, sediments, plankton, larvae, and pollutants in the coastal
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.