* 1829311
* I-Corps:  Engineered bio-inspired surface for passive flow control
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Burak Aksak, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from the
fact that the micro-textured surface proposed in this project can reduce drag -
the force experienced by an object moving through air or water. Ground
transportation vehicles, airplanes, drones, underwater vessels, wind turbines,
and HVAC fans all experience the adverse effects of drag in terms of increased
fuel/electricity consumption, increased greenhouse gas emissions, and reduced
energy production. Potential efficiency gains using the proposed technology can
save numerous industries significant energy costs, reduce greenhouse gas
emissions, and solve a multitude of problems associated with
aerodynamic/hydrodynamic inefficiencies. For example, a 5% increase in
efficiency due to drag reduction translates to $5 billion in fuel savings for
the trucking industry and the equivalent energy production of an additional 2000
wind turbines per year for the wind energy industry. Micro-textured surfaces for
passive flow control presents a unique opportunity in enhancing efficiency in
that it can be designed for optimal performance depending on the application to
yield the highest possible efficiency gains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project features a micro-structured coating inspired by shark-skin, which
passively modifies the flow close to the surface of an object resulting in drag
reduction both in air and water applications. Experimental results performed
using the section of a wind turbine airfoil in a water tunnel showed that the
proposed micro-structured film, made out of a commercially available
polyurethane, can delay and reduce the size of the separation bubble, the
phenomenon responsible for increased drag, by 60%. The effect of this reduction
on drag was also confirmed in wind tunnel experiments. Reductions of up to 30%
and 13% were recorded over an airfoil and a cylinder, respectively.
Additionally, enhancements of up to 45% in lift generated by an airfoil was
measured when the micro-structured coating was applied to the surface. The
ability of the proposed technology to increase fuel and conversion efficiencies
will have a transformative impact in many industries including ground
transportation, aerospace, and wind energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.