* 1829778
* Drivers of coral and reef-scale calcification in the North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Andreas Andersson, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 265,466.00

Millions of people around the world are dependent on the ecosystem services
provided by coral reefs, which include the provision of nutrition, fishing,
tourism, and protection from storms and waves. The foundation for these services
is based on the basic principle that coral reefs maintain positive calcium
carbonate accretion, which is facilitated by the production of calcium carbonate
by corals and other marine calcifiers. For the past several decades, coral reef
calcium carbonate production has declined in many reef systems throughout the
world primarily due to coral bleaching, coral disease, and poor water quality.
Current projections suggest that this production will continue to decline in
response to future ocean warming and acidification. However, our knowledge of
how environmental parameters control coral and reef-scale calcification rates in
situ is not complete and limits our understanding of the underlying mechanisms
for past and future changes in coral and reef-scale calcium carbonate
production. Thus, the research proposed here seeks to quantify how coral
calcification rates, determined from image analysis of coral cores collected in
Bermuda, have varied as a function of environmental parameters across space and
time. This analysis is made possible by the existence of time-series datasets of
physical and chemical parameters offshore in the Sargasso Sea and inshore where
the coral cores were collected. The combination of data will offer new insights
to the environmental controls of coral and reef-scale calcification.
Furthermore, the investigators will engage in educational field and classroom
activities with Ocean Discovery Institute (ODI) in San Diego. ODI's mission is
to engage, educate, and inspire youth from diverse backgrounds through
scientific explorations of the ocean and nature, and specifically work with
students from underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research to be
conducted here seeks to understand the relative importance of different
environmental drivers of coral and reef-scale calcification on seasonal to
interannual timescales. To accomplish this, the investigators will characterize
the skeletal density, extension, and calcification rates of 42 coral cores
extracted from three different species (Diploria labyrinthiformis,
Pseudodiploria strigosa and Orbicella franksi) at five different sites from the
Bermuda coral reef platform using computed tomography (CT) scanning techniques.
Seasonal measurements of coral skeletal parameters will be analyzed in
conjunction with a unique decadal time series of monthly resolved in situ
seawater physical-biogeochemical parameters. The investigators will also conduct
stable isotope and trace metal geochemical analyses (18O, 13C, Sr/Ca, Cd/Ca) of
the coral skeleton to evaluate and construct additional proxy records of
environmental conditions for the duration of the coral cores. This combination
of coral growth, environmental, and geochemical datasets provides an
unprecedented opportunity to evaluate the relative importance of different
environmental drivers on coral and reef-scale calcification rates between three
dominant coral species along inshore-offshore gradients and over seasonal and
interannual timescales. No such other datasets currently exist and the proposed
research has strong potential to contribute to scientific advancement in several
areas. The coral calcification record coupled with the geochemical proxies and
the monthly in situ seawater biogeochemistry data will help to elucidate causal
links between coral calcification and its environmental drivers, including
interannual variability linked to the North Atlantic Oscillation. In addition,
evaluation and validation of the trace metals and isotopic proxies in the
context of the well-constrained environmental data have the potential to greatly
assist the coral paleoceanography community in generating more robust
reconstructions of past environmental conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.