* 1829623
* Vision-mediated influence of low oxygen on the physiology and ecology  of marine larvae
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Lisa Levin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 09/30/2022
* USD 520,623.00

Oxygen is being lost in the ocean worldwide as a result of ocean warming and the
input of nutrients from land. Vision requires a large amount of oxygen, and may
be less effective or require more light when oxygen is in short supply. This is
especially true for active marine animals with complex eyes and visual
capabilities, including active arthropods (crabs), cephalopods (squid), and
fish. The California coastal waters exhibit a sharp drop in oxygen and light
with increasing water depth. This project examines how visual physiology and
ecology in young (larval) highly visual marine animals respond to oxygen loss,
with a focus on key fisheries and aquaculture species. Experiments and
observations will test the hypothesis that oxygen stress will change the light
required for these organisms to see effectively, influencing the water depths
where they can live and survive. The project will provide interdisciplinary
experiences to students and an early career scientist and inform both the public
(through outreach at the Birch Aquarium at Scripps Institution of Oceanography)
and policy makers about the effects of oxygen decline in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Negative effects of oxygen loss on vision have been
described for humans and other terrestrial organisms, but never in the marine
environment, despite the large changes in oxygen that can occur with depth and
over time in the ocean, and the high metabolic demand of visual systems. This
project will test the effects of low oxygen on vision in 3 combinations of eye
design and photo-transduction mechanisms: compound eye with rhabdomeric
photoreceptors (arthropods), simple eye with rhabdomeric photoreceptors
(cephalopods), and simple eye with ciliary photoreceptors (fish). A series of
oxygen- and light-controlled laboratory experiments will be conducted on
representative taxa of each group including the tuna crab, Pleuroncodes
planipes; the market squid, Doryteuthis opalescens, and the white sea bass,
Atractoscion nobilis. In vivo electrophysiology and behavioral phototaxis
experiments will identify new oxygen metrics for visual physiology and function,
and will be compared to metabolic thresholds determined in respiration
experiments. Hydrographic data collected over 3 decades by the CalCOFI program
in the Southern California Bight will be evaluated with respect to visual and
metabolic limits to determine the consequences of oxygen variation on the
critical luminoxyscape (range of oxygen and light conditions required for visual
physiology and function in target species) boundary in each species. Findings
for the three vision-based functional groups may test whether oxygen-limited
visual responses offer an additional explanation for the shoaling of species
distributions among highly visual pelagic taxa in low oxygen, and will help to
focus future research efforts and better understand the stressors contributing
to habitat compression with expanding oxygen loss in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.