* 1829753
* Collaborative Research: The Effect of Ocean Acidification on Fe Availability to Phytoplankton in Coastal and Oceanic Waters of the Eastern North Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Kristen Buck, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,954.00

Collaborative Research: The Effect of Ocean Acidification on Fe Availability to
Phytoplankton in Coastal and Oceanic Waters of the Eastern North
Pacific&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron is an important nutrient for algae
in the ocean. Different forms of iron and their availability to algae are
influenced by many factors including the acidity of seawater (or pH). This
research project focuses on understanding the effects of ocean acidification
(low pH) on the associations between iron and chemical substances that bind with
iron in seawater. The investigators will work in coastal and oceanic waters of
the Pacific Ocean. These waters are characterized by substances that have weak
and strong associations with iron. Samples will be collected from coastal waters
off Washington State, the northern edge of the North Pacific gyre, and Ocean
Station PAPA in the northeast subarctic Pacific. Water samples will be collected
to test phytoplankton responses to light, pH, forms of iron, and the composition
of the substances that bind with iron. This project will support graduate and
undergraduate students. The investigators will participate in a range of
education and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
addresses oceanic responses to rising anthropogenic CO2 and is broadly relevant
to ocean biogeochemistry. The investigators will study the role of ocean
acidification on iron availability in the Eastern North Pacific Ocean. The study
location is characterized as a high nutrient low chlorophyll (HNLC) region of
the ocean, where phytoplankton may be particularly sensitive to iron
availability. The study region is also characterized by gradients in ligand
composition and binding strength. This study will investigate how the
associations between iron and different ligands (organic compounds that bind
with iron) are influenced by pH and how this, in turn, influences primary
production and microbial community structure in the ocean. The investigators
will use batch cultures, at pH 8.1 and 7.6, and under high and low light
regimes, to examine the iron demand of phytoplankton. Understanding how pH
influences iron and its relationship with ligands will provide important
information for assessing the impacts of ocean acidification on primary
production and biogeochemical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.