* 1829922
* Collaborative Research: The role of a keystone pathogen in the geographic and local-scale ecology of eelgrass decline in the eastern Pacific
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* J. Emmett Duffy, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2022
* USD 343,776.00

Pathogens may be unrecognized key species in many ecosystems, causing massive
impacts on other species and habitats despite the microscopic size of disease-
causing organisms. Yet the triggers to disease epidemics likely involve complex
interactions among changing environmental conditions and associated biological
communities. In the ocean, understanding disease outbreaks has been hindered by
inadequate knowledge of how these various influences interact to determine
susceptibility and resilience to disease. This project integrates research in
community and disease ecology with microbial genomics, geospatial analysis, and
state-of-the-art computational approaches toward an unprecedented understanding
of the causes and consequences of wasting disease in eelgrass, an important
vegetation type supporting coastal and estuarine ecosystems throughout the
northern hemisphere. The research advances frontiers in understanding the
growing but poorly appreciated threat of marine diseases, how disease ecology
interacts with environmental change, and its consequences for the extensive
ecosystems and coastal communities that depend on eelgrass, across 23 degrees of
latitude along the Pacific coast of North America. The research will inform
better management of threatened seagrass ecosystems, which provide important
services including fisheries habitat, erosion control, carbon storage, and
capture of nutrient runoff. The research will foster integrative approaches in
the next generation, including high school students, undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs working on the project, and each investigator's
institution will work to recruit participants from under-represented groups.
Best practices developed under this award, including the Eelisa disease app and
drone mapping, will be disseminated for broader surveillance of seagrass disease
and coastal habitat quality by both professional and citizen scientists in
coordination with the Global Ocean Observing System's (GOOS) develpoment of
seagrass extent as an Essential Ocean Variable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
triggers to marine disease epidemics are likely complex, and progress in
understanding them has been hindered by a poor understanding of the multifaceted
ecological context of the host-disease interaction. This project's overarching
goal is to disentangle the web of direct and indirect interactions by which
changing climate mediates prevalence of eelgrass wasting disease, and its
consequences for threatened but important eelgrass ecosystems. The centerpiece
is a comparative, cross-scale survey of eelgrass community composition,
microbiome, and disease prevalence along thermal gradients of latitude and
exposure to the ocean, providing the first coast-wide picture of disease
dynamics in response to environmental change. In situ sampling will be linked to
dynamics of eelgrass at landscape scales using unmanned aerial systems (drones)
to quantify high-resolution changes in eelgrass extent and habitat quality.
Experiments will test how the diverse biological community mediates impacts of
the pathogen on eelgrass ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.