* 1829436
* IRES Track III: Global Engineering Education Exchange Graduate International Research Experiences (Global E? GIRE)
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Laura Hille, Institute of International Education Inc
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

This award supports the Institute of International Education (IIE) to manage the
Global Engineering Education Exchange Graduate International Research
Experiences (Global E3 GIRE) program. The program supports research experiences
abroad for American graduate students in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields to develop the knowledge and skills to succeed in a
globalized world while increasing collective scientific knowledge, thus
enhancing U.S. economic competitiveness. Students are introduced to new research
approaches and methods in an international setting, which improves their
expertise and qualifications as scientists and engineers, and allows them to
contribute to the global scientific community. Expanding the international
perspectives of future STEM leaders in the U.S. enables them to produce
creative, original, and collaborative work that will advance America's
scientific knowledge and pursue solutions to shared global problems. Emerging
American STEM leaders build relationships with their peers in other countries
through long-term collaborative research, which in turn leads to future
partnerships between the global host institutions participating in Global E3
GIRE and the current and future research institutions with which the U.S.
participants are affiliated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Global E3 GIRE program
enhances U.S. leadership in STEM education and strengthens economic
competitiveness by developing America's STEM researchers and future leaders who
are not only superb engineers and scientists, but also have the research
knowledge and skills, cross-cultural leadership, communication abilities, and
international networks to advance STEM innovation in a globalized world. The
Institute of International Education (IIE) manages the program, which provides
approximately 75 American STEM graduate students from diverse backgrounds,
institutions, and fields of study with international long-term research
experiences and short-term study tours between fall 2018 and summer 2021.
Participants hone their research skills through exposure to international
methods and approaches, develop global competencies such as intercultural
leadership and communication abilities, expand their professional networks of
host country peers and participants from other U.S. institutions, and gain
exposure to private sector STEM employers. Through outreach and support for U.S.
faculty advisors, the program encourages their international activities and
networks as well, while also promoting their ongoing support for graduate
student research abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.