* 1829160
* Understanding the Socio-Ecological Drivers and Consequences of Seasonal Air Pollution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Mary Mostafanezhad, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 276,897.00

Air pollution affects an astounding 92 percent of the world population,
including numerous U.S. cities, and is responsible for one out of nine deaths
globally. While environmental scientists have documented the sources of air
pollution and social scientists have demonstrated how the effects of air
pollution are unevenly distributed, scholars still know markedly little about
the socio-ecological drivers and consequences of seasonal air pollution and by
what mechanisms such pollution comes to be constituted as a crisis or triggers a
political response. An adequate explanatory framework accounting for these
social dimensions of seasonal air pollution - particularly when its causes are
recurring yet uncertain - is needed to improve environmental governance
practices, and avert social conflict. Findings will be disseminated to
organizations and individuals that influence policy debates related to air
pollution. The project also provides training for graduate students in methods
of rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis; broadens participation in
the sciences through the training of students and a postdoctoral researcher from
underrepresented groups; and it improves scientific infrastructure through
international scientific collaboration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Mary
Mostafanezhad of the University of Hawaii at Manoa will examine the socio-
ecological drivers of air pollution, and the ways that air pollution, or haze,
becomes constituted as a crisis in national and international circles. The
research will take place in northern Thailand provides, which is an illustrative
case since airborne particulate matter levels have themselves remained
relatively constant over the past two decades; it is only the framing of air
pollution as a crisis that has changed. In Asia, a thick shroud of pollution,
dubbed the "brown cloud of Asia", blankets many countries for half of the year.
And its impacts reach far beyond the region, since particulate matter can travel
long distances: research has shown that Asian pollution has even affected the
west coast of the United States. The once quotidian, annual occurrence of what
is commonly called the "smoky season" (February-April) in this region, now
registers as a crisis for many (but not all) residents, some of whom demand an
urgent political response. Additionally, while uncertainty exists surrounding
the socio-ecological drivers of air pollution, multiple narratives of its causes
and effects circulate throughout the region, and blame is frequently placed on
smallholder farmers who have recently entered into new market relations. These
circumstances make the region an ideal site to examine the ways in which crises
are contingent on cultural and political factors, rather than fixed metric
thresholds. This project will collect discursive, ethnographic and geospatial
data to understand its specific socio-ecological drivers (e.g. social
inequality, fire use, worldviews) and consequences (e.g. crisis and blame
narratives, regulatory regimes). The mixed methods approach of this study will
contribute both to policy understandings of environmental change and to
political ecology debates over the ways such change becomes a crisis and a
political field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.