* 1829527
* The neural mechanisms of predictive coding during language comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Albert Kim, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 571,321.00

During skilled reading, people recognize words from written character strings
and combine words into a larger message-level interpretation. Reading is a
pervasive part of modern human life, and impaired reading is highly detrimental
to scholastic and professional success. Despite its importance, the neural
processes that enable skilled readers to comprehend multi-word combinations
remain poorly understood. In this research, Dr. Albert Kim and Dr. Phillip
Gilley of the University of Colorado Boulder will use cutting edge
neurophysiological methods to understand how the brain generates and uses
predictions about the upcoming words within a text during reading, guided by
prior linguistic context. Predictions are thought to support the fast pace of
normal reading, which is typically 3-5 words per second, by allowing the brain
to prepare in advance for anticipated text before it arrives in the retinal
input. Predictions are also thought to be crucial to the common ability to
perceive words accurately in the face of impoverished inputs, such as conditions
of poor lighting, print quality, or visual acuity. The research in this project
is expected to produce knowledge that guides the identification of reading
disorders and distinctions between different sorts of disorders, which can in
turn guide clinical and pedagogical approaches to reading
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use scalp-recorded
encephalography (EEG) to observe neural oscillatory activity -- reflecting the
dynamic coupling and uncoupling of neural networks -- while healthy young adults
read sentences. The sentences that participants read will be manipulated so that
some sentence contexts render a specific word likely to occur, according to
computational language models. Under these conditions, brain activity that
occurs before and after the appearance of a word in the linguistic input will be
examined for evidence of predictions. The project will investigate the role of
neural oscillations in conveying predictions about upcoming words from high
level brain regions to low level visual cortical areas and also in assessing the
match between predictions and the bottom-up sensory input. The researchers will
also study the types of linguistic contexts and processing demands that engage
such predictive activity. Results of this research are expected to contribute
significantly to cognitive neuroscience by combining three critical areas of
research that have typically been studied separately: language processing,
prediction in cognition, and neural oscillations. The project will develop new
analytic methods for characterizing neural oscillations in EEG data, which will
be developed into a toolbox to be shared with other researchers. The project
will also produce a rich database of brain activity during the reading of
naturalistic stories, which will be shared with the scientific community as a
resource for further research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.