* 1829431
* Low temperature hydrothermal vent fluxes as traced by radium isotopes
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Matthew Charette, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2023
* USD 378,244.00

Iron is one of the most abundant elements in fluids released from mid-ocean
ridges, yet it has been thought to be mostly removed from seawater near to its
hydrothermal vent source. Recent evidence has emerged showing this
hydrothermally-derived iron can be transported great distances in the ocean,
including toward the sunlit surface layer where it is an essential nutrient for
phytoplankton growth. This study will use naturally-occurring radium isotopes,
which are also enriched in hydrothermal fluids but are non-reactive compared to
iron, as tracers of hydrothermal iron in the deep ocean. With a range of half-
lives from days to centuries, radium isotopes can be used as "clocks" to measure
the precise rates at which hydrothermal iron is carried by ocean currents toward
the ocean interior. Such information can be incorporated into ocean models
designed to determine the role of hydrothermal iron on ocean productivity, which
has societal relevance due to its role in regulating the carbon dioxide
concentrations of Earth's atmosphere. This project will support research
opportunities for two students through the Woods Hole Partnership in Education
Program, which seeks to increase diversity in ocean and environmental science by
inviting college juniors and seniors to gain practical experience through a
summer of classroom study and hands-on research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A scientist from Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution will quantify rates of iron (Fe) transport above a major ocean
spreading center to evaluate the role of hydrothermal venting in supplying this
essential micronutrient to the surface ocean. Special attention will be paid to
the role of low-temperature hydrothermal Fe fluxes, which are hypothesized to
arrive at the seafloor in a stable form that mitigates significant removal
during transport. If true, low-temperature fluids may supply a disproportionate
amount of the "transportable" dissolved Fe that has not been observed in large-
scale deep ocean plumes. Assessment of process rates will be accomplished
through concurrent measurements of Fe concentration and speciation and the
radium (Ra) "quartet" (224Ra, 223Ra, 228Ra, 226Ra) during an expedition along
the southern East Pacific Rise (EPR; 15-18 degrees South). Autonomous underwater
vehicle and towed-CTD surveys will be used to identify locations of low- and
high-temperature discharge. At selected target areas, the investigators will
test the hypotheses that low-temperature hydrothermal inputs have a distinct
radium isotopic ratio fingerprint, and that the relative rate of Fe scavenging
removal is lower in low-temperature sources. Given their wide ranging half-
lives, Ra isotopes have the unique ability to integrate over biogeochemically-
relevant time scales of Fe transport in the deep ocean. The combination of
concurrent Ra isotope and total dissolved Fe measurements will allow the
investigators to quantify Fe residence time for any Fe phase that is transported
on large horizontal scales, as has been observed previously along the EPR.
Together, Fe loss and transport from Ra measurements will lead to improvements
in the predictive capabilities of ocean circulation and biogeochemistry models
that assess the importance of hydrothermal Fe in supporting primary productivity
and carbon drawdown in overlying surface waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.