* 1829763
* Constraints on absolute magma chamber volume from geodetic measurements: Trapdoor faulting in the Galapagos
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Paul Segall, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 119,371.00

As magma rises from the Earth's mantle it accumulates in magma chambers in the
Earth's crust. As magma pressure in these chambers increases it causes the
Earth's surface to bulge upward, a process termed "inflation". Inflation can be
measured with a variety of instruments, both ground-based and space based, and
is a useful predictor of impending eruptions. Standard analysis methods can be
used to derive the change in volume during an inflation episode but are
insensitive to the total chamber volume. It would be extremely useful to
scientists and those monitoring volcanic hazards to know the volume of active
magma chambers. The total volume provides an upper bound on the possible
eruptive volume and is a constraint on models of magma chamber evolution. This
project uses unique observations at Sierra Negra volcano in the Galapagos to
place rigorous bounds on the total volume of Sierra Negra's magma chamber. The
Broader Impacts of this study are particularly timely because the observations
suggest that an eruption and/or earthquake at Sierra Negra may be imminent. The
volcano has been uplifting since mid-2015 and is now higher than it was prior to
the most recent (2005) eruption. The project also supports a graduate student to
work on this problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between 1992 and the 2005 eruption
Sierra Negra uplifted by nearly 5 meters, with maximum uplift in the center of
the caldera. This data is well fit by a shallow sill-like magma chamber with its
top at roughly 2 km depth. Inflation has been punctuated by three trapdoor
faulting events, with slip along an intra-caldera fault system. The most recent
trapdoor event occurred only 3 hours prior to the 2005 fissure eruption. The
response of the magma chamber to the faulting depends on both the volume of the
chamber and the compressibility of the magma contained within and is clearly
expressed in observable surface displacements. By constraining the relative
compressibility of the magma and the elastic chamber, which can be achieved with
observations from the 2005 eruption, the researchers will be able to estimate
the absolute chamber volume. This will permit estimation of the fraction of
total magma that was erupted in 2005, a useful parameter for forecasts at other
volcanoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.