* 1829656
* Collaborative Research: Deployment of Laser Induced Breakdown Spectroscopy System from ROV Jason
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Susan Humphris, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,232,988.00

This project supports the test deployment of a completed laser induced breakdown
spectroscopy (LIBS) system at seafloor hydrothermal vents using the remotely
operated vehicle Jason as the support platform. Jason serves to align and orient
the LIBS system using a three degree-of-freedom mechanical platform, and also
provides high data rate bidirectional communication with the spectrometer. The
testing will be based on two scientific use cases that are highly relevant to
hydrothermal vents in a generic (i.e., not site specific) sense: the study of
near-critical behavior of vent fluids and understanding chemical variability
over a tidal cycle. Upon validation, the LIBS system will be made available to
the hydrothermal vent science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LIBS utilizes a
laser focused to a beam 10 cm in diameter that creates a plasma once the
breakdown threshold of the material is exceeded. A gated spectrometer covering
the near infrared to ultraviolet range is used to capture the plasma spectrum
and hence the elemental composition. LIBS operates on solids, liquids, gases and
aerosols, and has been shown to operate under deep ocean pressure conditions. A
real-time, non-invasive, simultaneously multi-elemental chemical sensing
capability such as LIBS that does not require sample preparation would be a
significant advance over current oceanographic
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.