* 1829360
* I-Corps: Low-cost Enrichment Kit for Fast Lead Detection in Water with Low Detection Limit
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Debora Rodrigues, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 03/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a lead
enrichment kit that can allow fast detection of lead in water with low cost and
low detection limit. Lead contamination in drinking water is a threat to human
beings. Due to its health concern, the Lead and Copper Rule (LCR) has set an
action level of 15 Âµg/L for lead in tap water. Considering the great threat of
lead to health even with low concentrations, it is necessary to have lead
measurements in water at a regular basis. The proposed project aims to
commercialize an inexpensive kit which would allow fast lead detection in water
with low detection limit to meet Lead and Copper Rule (15 ppb). The kit provides
two main benefits to customers: a lower cost ($4) than current kit ($11) for
lead detection which meets Lead and Copper Rule and convenience for field sample
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to evaluate the
commercial adoption of our inexpensive lead enrichment kit for lead detection.
Interviews will be conducted to help identify the potential customers and the
market needs, evaluate the commercialization feasibility of the new technology,
and optimize the technology to meet the demand of targeted customers. Inspired
by findings from our current NSF-project, special enrichment kit was designed to
accumulate Pb from water, allowing quick detection of lead in water with low
concentrations using the inexpensive detection kit. Additionally, the proposed
work will provide the basis for future development and commercialization of new
enrichment kits to detect other aqueous contaminants in water with low detection
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.