* 1829365
* RESEARCH-PGR: Discovering new metabolic constraints and regulatory nodes in oilseeds engineered for enhanced fatty acid synthesis and seed oil
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2024
* Dong Xu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 10/31/2024
* USD 3,437,639.00

Plant oils are a renewable source of food, fuels, and chemicals; world output of
plant oils must double by 2030 to meet projected demand. A major source of plant
oils comes from seeds. While research has yielded improvements in seed oil
quantity and quality, there are tradeoffs for other seed attributes such as
protein content and yield. For example, plants that are bred or engineered to
produce high seed oil often have decreased protein content or make fewer seeds.
The molecular mechanism driving such tradeoffs remains unclear and creates a
barrier for making improved crops with specific amounts of oil and protein
content. This project seeks to unravel the genetic and molecular mechanisms
related to the tradeoffs between oil, protein content, seed size, and seed set
in order to enhance seed oil content of crops. By using an integrated approach,
this project will investigate biochemical steps used by seeds to prioritize
protein or oil production. Using this knowledge, this project will generate
plants with improved seed oil production. In addition, this project promotes
STEM education using the science of seed oils to train tomorrow's scientists as
well as develops a science literacy program using hands-on research experience
for students who are training to become future STEM teachers. The scientific and
educational outcomes of this project will have broad impacts for both research
and society through improved oil production in crop
plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantitative, comparative profiling of high-oil
soybean, Camelina, and Arabidopsis will reveal the coordinated metabolic
response to de-regulated de novo FAS. These findings will reveal the next
metabolic constraint for engineering seed oil content, discover new genes
involved in acyl lipid metabolism, and provide the plant lipid community with
characterized, high-oil germplasm for gene stacking and comparative genomics.
This project will integrate comparative transcriptomics, proteomics, and
translatomics during three stages of seed development of FAS-engineered, high-
oil plants to develop correlative and kinetic models to make metabolic
predictions, and discover coregulated gene networks. Flux analyses and
clustering models will be used to link high-oil germplasm to causal effects
within combined central and lipid metabolic networks and used to make hypotheses
for next-generation crop improvements. Aspects of in vivo FAS rates, the
uncoupling of FAS from TAG synthesis that can lead to futile cycles of FAS and
breakdown; and acyl fluxes through the lipid metabolic network will be
investigated to elucidate new bottlenecks for TAG accumulation as a result of
de-regulating FAS. Web resources (fatplants.net) developed as a part of this
project will serve to educate the community and provide an interactive tool to
integrate metabolism and gene regulation Integrated tools are necessary to
inspire tomorrow's scientists and engineers and enable multidisciplinary
training of all ages. This project will also develop a hands-on science literacy
program for future educators of science and technology (Sci-FEST) and high
school science teaching modules on plant metabolism and biotechnology will be
created by the program participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.