* 1829947
* Collaborative research: Using individual amino acids N isotopes in sinking particles and surficial sediments to reconstruct euphotic zone N sources and trophic structure
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lin Zhang, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 375,085.00

Nitrogen is a limiting nutrient over most of the surface ocean. Fixed nitrogen
(N) such as nitrate controls absorption of atmospheric carbon dioxide and
production of organic matter by marine plants and algae. Nitrogen availability,
use patterns, and biological community structure in the surface ocean help
determine the amount of organic matter passed onto higher organisms. Nitrogen
availability also controls how much organic matter sinks into deep waters. This
project will reconstruct past sources of nitrogen, use patterns, and trophic
structures in surface waters of the Gulf of California, equatorial Pacific, and
Sargasso Sea. The tool employed by the principal investigators from Texas
A&amp;M University in Corpus Christi and University of Massachusetts Dartmouth
is nitrogen isotope ratios of individual amino acids. The investigators will
measure isotope ratios in sinking particle samples collected by sediment traps
such as those used by the Ocean Flux Program in the Sargasso Sea. This study
will train graduate students in stable isotope biogeochemistry and oceanography.
This project will also provide research funds for students in the McNair
program. McNair students come from underrepresented and economically challenged
backgrounds to pursue degrees in STEM fields at Texas A&amp;M University Corpus
Christi, a Hispanic and Minority Serving Institution. Data from this project
will be made available to the public through the Biological and Chemical
Oceanography-Data Management Office (www.bco-
dmo.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is great interest in reconstructing past
climate-forced variations in nitrogen sources, their patterns of utilization,
and euphotic zone community structure using compound specific N isotope ratios
in amino acids liberated from preserved proteinaceous materials in sediments and
coral skeletons. However, it has not yet been verified whether 1) the nitrogen
isotope ratios of individual amino acids produced in the euphotic zone are
transported with fidelity by sinking particles to deep-sea corals and sediments
and 2) the nitrogen isotope ratios of individual amino acids liberated from
sedimentary organic matter have been altered by diagenesis. Through analysis of
sediment trap material collected over time, this project seeks to verify that
nitrogen isotope ratios in individual amino acids reflect the 1) overall spatial
contrast in N sources, utilization patterns, and trophic structures among the
Gulf of California, equatorial Pacific, and Sargasso Sea and 2) temporal
variations in nitrogen sources, utilization patterns, and trophic structures
within both the Gulf of California and equatorial Pacific due to seasonal
upwelling and/or El Nino-Southern Oscillation. This study will also test if the
nitrogen isotope ratios of total hydrolysable amino acids in sedimentary organic
matter from the three locations retain the unaltered nitrogen isotope patterns
carried by sinking particles. This project will, for the first time, compare
nitrogen stable isotope ratios in amino acids collected from sediment trap
samples with surficial sediments from deep-sea oxic sites to verify whether
total hydrolysable amino acids in deep-sea sediments preserve unaltered nitrogen
isotope signals produced in overlying euphotic zone, which can provide insights
on addressing diagenetic alteration of bulk N isotope ratios that have hindered
paleo-nitrogen cycle reconstruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.