* 1829534
* ISS: Tissue Engineered Muscle in Microgravity as a Novel Platform to Study Sarcopenia
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ngan Huang, Palo Alto Veterans Institute for Research
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2023
* USD 359,999.00

Sarcopenia results in progressive deterioration of skeletal muscle with age,
leading to increased risk of frailty and poor health outcomes. As the incidence
of sarcopenia is expected to rise in the elderly population, identifying cost-
effective interventions that improve muscle formation and health is a major
public health challenge. Efforts to identify potential drugs have been hindered
by sarcopenia's slow progression in clinical studies. Microgravity is known to
accelerate the process of aging and muscle disuse. Therefore, by taking
advantage of the microgravity environment aboard the International Space Station
National Laboratory, it will be possible to develop a tissue engineered model of
sarcopenia. Once validated, this model can be used to study the progression of
muscle deterioration and serve as a useful platform for testing potential
treatments in a short period of time. The overarching hypothesis is that
engineered skeletal muscle in microgravity mimics relevant features of
sarcopenia. This platform has the potential to improve the quality of life of
patients with sarcopenia or other muscle wasting diseases. In addition to the
anticipated societal benefit of the research, the project includes educational
outreach activities that have the goal of increasing the exposure and interest
of Veteran college students from a Hispanic-serving local community college to
pursue careers or majors in STEM areas. These activities include teaching
bioengineering concepts in a STEM seminar series; developing curriculum and
teaching a bioengineering workshop; and offering science research internships in
the laboratory of the principal investigator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
proposes to design and characterize an in vitro engineered skeletal muscle
platform in microgravity to model sarcopenia. The model will be validated based
on genomic and proteomic features, as well as by the remodeling of the
extracellular matrix. The first two aims involve developing the engineered
muscle model on Earth and then taking advantage of a 7-day experiment on the
International Space Station to induce the tissue changes seen in sarcopenia.
Once the sarcopenia model has been validated, it will be applied to demonstrate
the feasibility of testing candidate drugs for treatment of sarcopenia. If
successful, the proposed studies will significantly impact the pace of
identifying drug candidates for effective treatment of sarcopenia, by serving as
an important intermediate step prior to clinical trials. In addition, the
validated model will be a novel system to study the pathology of muscle
degradation as a result of sarcopenia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.