* 1829955
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Theory and Algorithms for Real-Time Threat Detection from Massive Data Streams
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Dustin Mixon, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 76,730.00

National security interests demand a heightened awareness of the actions of
various adversaries. This voracious appetite for information results in an
overwhelming stream of spatiotemporal data. New mathematics is necessary to
effectively manage this data deluge; this research project aims to develop new
theory and algorithms for this cause. The approach is guided by the following
abstract description of the threat detection problem: Given a massive stream of
spatiotemporal data, the task is to maintain a slowly evolving model of
"normalcy," any deviations from which are to be further investigated as
potential threats. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on the following
two objectives: (1) develop algorithms and optimal encodings to process massive
data streams, and (2) develop fast certificates and guarantees for cutting-edge
learning algorithms. To this end, the research aims to solve some of the big
open problems in optimization, frame theory, and machine learning: (a) to
quickly solve convex relaxations of NP-hard unsupervised learning problems from
streaming data; (b) to construct optimal line packings, including the packings
conjectured to exist by Zauner; (c) to find sub-linear a posteriori
approximation certificates for NP-hard learning problems; (d) to explain the
well-behaved optimization landscapes exhibited by generative adversarial
networks; and (e) to develop fast, after-the-fact explanations for black-box
classification, enabling well-informed human decision
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.