* 1829814
* Operation of a Hydrographic Data Office at UCSD/SIO, 2019-2023
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* James Swift, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,099,542.00

The project is to continue to operate the CLIVAR and Carbon Hydrographic Data
Office (CCHDO) at the UCSD Scripps Institution of Oceanography funded by NSF
previously. The CCHDO's primary mission is to deliver the highest possible
quality global Conductivity-Temperature- Depth (CTD) and hydrographic data to
users. These data are a product of decades of observations from multiple
programs, past and present, around the world. The project will enhance research
infrastructure, disseminate results broadly, and integrate research and
education. While the CCHDO does not generate new data, it improves data quality,
usability, and accessibility, thus widening the reach of the data and its
scientific and social relevance. CTD, routine hydrography, ocean carbon, and
tracer ocean profile data are gathered, quality controlled, and put in a
standardized format all located on one website so that the data is usable to a
much wider audience in the research, educational, and broader communities who do
not employ data specialists. The CCHDO puts into play the fundamental concept
that ocean data belongs to the community, and should be available to the
community. The CCHDO directly contributes to research of high societal
importance, such as the ocean's response to and role in climate change. The
CCHDO contributes to education and STEM activities, including training of
undergraduate research assistants and enhancing the oceanographic aspects of
their experience, and participation of the CCHDO leadership in STEM and Career
Day events in the San Diego area. Commitment to broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups extends to every aspect of the
CCHDO.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CCHDO performs meticulous curation and
dissemination of the highest quality CTD, hydrographic, carbon and tracer water
column data. The CCHDO supports climate and ocean carbon science programs, and
is a critical component of a global observing system for the physical
climate/CO2 system. It is the official international GO-SHIP data center for CTD
and water sample profile data and related documentation. In addition, the CCHDO
is responsible for data from WOCE, CLIVAR, the International Ocean Carbon
Coordination Project, and other oceanographic research programs. The CCHDO's
user-oriented data management structure and functions were developed to pull
together and verify data and information from diverse, disparate sources,
placing the data into near lock-step agreement with community-agreed standards,
and organize the documentation to make information about the data complete and
easy to locate. The users of CCHDO data benefit from the CCHDO's activities,
saving them from performing these time-consuming, expertise needing tasks. This
"data assembly center" structure thus facilitates gaining broader scientific
understanding well beyond the collection and interpretation that can be gained
from individual data sets. The CCHDO assures that these data and their
associated documentation are readily available for immediate research and
education uses, easily accessible through an intuitive and well known online
search and download site, can be used in a variety of applications, and are
promptly provided to NOAA's NCEI for long-term archive. This ensures that these
data have maximum utility to the scientific community and a long service
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.