* 1829224
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research Food-Water-Energy Nexus: Innovative Initiatives for Governing Food, Water and Energy Nexus in Cities
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Karen Seto, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 06/30/2022
* USD 553,836.00

Many cities across the globe are facing difficult challenges managing their
food, water and energy systems. The challenges stem from the fact that the
issues of food, water and energy are often tightly connected with each other,
not only locally but also globally. This is known as the Food-Water-Energy (FWE)
nexus. An effective solution to a local water problem may cause new local
problems with food or energy, or cause new water problems at the global level.
On a local scale, it is difficult to anticipate whether solutions to one issue
in the nexus are sustainable across food, water and energy systems, both at the
local and the global scale. Innovative solutions that encompass the nexus are
particularly important to enable cities to better manage their food, water and
energy systems and understand the benefits and tradeoffs for different
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a 29-country initiative
through the joint Belmont Forum- Joint Programming Initiative (JPI) Urban
Europe. The Sustainable Urbanization Global Initiative (SUGI)/Food-Water-Energy
Nexus is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that
bring together the fragmented research and expertise across the globe to find
innovative solutions to the Food-Water-Energy Nexus challenge. The call seeks to
develop more resilient, applied urban solutions to benefit a much wider range of
stakeholders. The rapid urbanization of the world's population underscores the
importance of this focus. International partners were invited to develop
solutions for this challenge. The funds requested will be used to support U.S.
participants to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries and that bring together natural scientists,
social scientists and research users (e.g., civil society, NGOs, and industry).
Participants from other countries are funded through their national funding
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improved governance of the interactions
between food, water and energy in cities can provide significant benefits in
addressing some of the most complex global problems, including climate change
and biodiversity loss, as well as help achieve other developmental goals such as
food security and health. This research will advance knowledge about urban
governance at the different levels related to the food-energy-water nexus using
natural and semi-natural landscape techniques and approaches, by developing new
concepts and approaches to understand how to assess, govern and build solutions
and policies. The project will involve remote sensing data of water and land-use
change as well as high performance computing to create the various scenarios and
test the different solutions. The project will develop a framework and tools to
assess changes in the food-energy-water nexus, their related trade-offs and the
building of innovative capabilities in cities for developing innovative
solutions to the food-energy-water nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.