* 1829560
* Collaborative Research: Causal Discovery in the Presence of Measurement Error Theory and Practical Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Changhe Yuan, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2020
* USD 39,999.00

The discovery of cause-and-effect relationships is a fundamental notion in
science. To find such causal relationships, traditional methods based on
interventions or randomized experiments are usually expensive or even
impossible. Causal discovery aims to find the underlying causal structure or
model from purely observational data and has many applications in various
disciplines. Despite its successes on a number of real problems, the presence of
measurement error in the observed data can produce serious mistakes in the
output of various causal discovery methods. Given the ubiquity of measurement
error caused by instruments or proxies used in the measuring process, this
problem has been recognized as one of the main obstacles to reliable causal
discovery. It is still unknown to what extent the causal structure for relevant
variables can be identified in the presence of measurement error, let alone how
to develop practical algorithms to solve this problem. This project aims to fill
the void. It will investigate what information of the causal model of interest
can be recovered from observed data and what assumptions one has to make to
achieve successful recovery of the causal information. Based on such theoretical
results, the project will then investigate efficient estimation procedures. The
project will establish theoretical identifiability results for the underlying,
true causal structure and, in light of such results, develop practical causal
discovery algorithms. Preliminary results show theoretically how measurement
error changes the (conditional) independence and dependence relationships in the
data, i.e., how the (conditional) independence and independence relations
between the observed variables are different from those between the measurement-
error-free variables. Based on the preliminary results, several research tasks
will be carried out. First, classical causal discovery often assumes a linear-
Gaussian model for the data, in which the causal relations are linear and the
variables are jointly Gaussian. This project will establish the conditions under
which the underlying causal model is identifiable up to an equivalence class or
only partially identifiable. Second, this study will investigate how the
identifiability of underlying causal structure in the presence of measurement
error can actually benefit from the non-Gaussian noise assumption. Third, this
study will develop statistically more efficient estimation procedures, by
extending the GES method, by exploiting suitable sparsity constraints, or by
extending the A* Bayesian network learning procedure. Finally, the above ideas
will be extended to deal with related models in causality or statistics,
including other contamination models, nonlinear causal models, and Markov
networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.