* 1829601
* Imaging Upper-Mantle Structure under USArray using Long - Period Reflection Seismology
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 244,490.00

This project will study the structure of the mantle below the United States at
depths up to 800 kilometers (500 miles). Researchers will use data provided by
the USArray project, which deployed ~2000 seismic stations across the United
States over a 7-year period. Scientists will analyze records from distant
earthquakes, called teleseisms, which contain seismic shear waves that reflect
off layers and other features in the upper-mantle. By applying methods similar
to those used by the oil industry to resolve crustal layering and oil
reservoirs, this project will provide 3D images of the deep subsurface below the
contiguous United States (i.e., excluding Alaska and Hawaii). The analyses
should have superior resolution compared to most existing studies and will help
resolve outstanding questions regarding the composition and tectonic evolution
of the North American continent. The project will support a postdoctoral
researcher and an undergraduate summer student from a program designed to
increase the diversity of students in Earth and ocean sciences career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will image upper-mantle structure
under the contiguous United States using reflection-seismology methods applied
to topside S-wave reverberations recorded by USArray. Products will include new
maps of the 410- and 660-km mantle discontinuities, as well as shallower
regional upper-mantle reflectors seen in many areas, and reflections off the
ancient subducting Farallon slab. The results should help relate Farallon
subduction to current and past tectonics in the western United States and
clarify the role of the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary with respect to the
deep cratonic root of North America. Improved resolution of sharp changes in
upper-mantle structure will help address these and other issues regarding mantle
composition and dynamics. Because these results are sensitive to the impedance
contrast (seismic velocity and density), they provide a useful complement to
seismic receiver-function studies, which are primarily sensitive to the S
velocity jump alone. Preliminary results suggest the proposed method provides an
exciting new way to probe upper-mantle structure, particularly when integrated
with other models and data constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.