* 1829281
* I-Corps Sites: Type I - Center for Innovation, Commercialization, and Entrepreneurship (ICE) I-Corps Site
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Gwen Holdmann, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 255,000.00

With this project, the Center for Innovation, Commercialization, and
Entrepreneurship (Center ICE) hosts a National Science Foundation I-Corps Site.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and
investors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Center ICE is an innovation hub located at the
University of Alaska Fairbanks (UAF), which is the flagship research campus at
the University of Alaska. This I-Corps Site is administered out of UAF but is
open to all members of the UA community - UAF, the University of Alaska
Anchorage (UAA), and the University of Alaska Southeast. This I-Corps Site
capitalizes on Alaska's existing entrepreneurial ecosystem and amplifies its
effect. An I-Corps Site also complements current efforts from the Office of
Naval Research to solidify and grow innovation and entrepreneurship, including
bringing experienced Lean Launch educators to Alaska. In addition, there is a
goal to set up a system that uniformly serves the entire state and not just the
UA Fairbanks campus, including a focus on native Americans and rural
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.