* 1829257
* I-Corps Sites: Type I - University of Texas at El Paso I-Corps Site for Innovation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Aaron Cervantes, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 304,513.00

With this project, the University of Texas at El Paso establishes an Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Site through its Mike Loya Center for Innovation and Commerce
and bridges the Colleges of Business Administration and Engineering. Innovation
Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities established at universities whose
purpose is to nurture and support multiple, local teams to transition their
technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites provide infrastructure, advice,
resources, networking opportunities, training and modest funding to enable
groups to transition their work into the marketplace or into becoming I-Corps
Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also strengthen innovation locally and regionally
and contribute to the National Innovation Network of mentors, researchers,
entrepreneurs and investors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UTEP I-Corps Site, in
close collaboration with the University's Office of Technology Commercialization
(OTC) and Entrepreneurship Community of Practice (ECop), fosters and accelerates
transition of customer-driven research into the commercial world. This UTEP
I-Corps Site reinforces local and regional innovation and contributes to a
regional/national pool of professional mentors, professionally trained
entrepreneurs and customer-driven innovators. The site provides researchers with
a critical component of validation that helps them propel their innovations out
of UTEP's labs and into regional and national commercial activities. This
I-Corps Site, located in a Hispanic-serving institution, synergizes innovation,
research commercialization and new business creation across the region served by
the university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.