* 1829597
* Laboratory Technician Support: UW-Madison Rock Mechanics Laboratory for Teaching, Service, and Decadal Testing
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Hiroki Sone, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 743,580.00

This award supports a new laboratory technician for the Rock Mechanics
Laboratory (RML) at the University of Wisconsin-Madison (UWM). The scope of
earth science research that takes place in UWM-RML spans from fundamental
questions in tectonophysics and fault mechanics, to optimization of energy
resource recovery. The research mission of the RML is to provide rock mechanics
facilities for basic rock mechanics testing needs in various
scientific/engineering projects, and to host advanced rock mechanics research
addressing cutting edge issues in geomechanics and tectonophysics. The RML also
hosts active educational experiences to undergraduate and graduate students
through classroom activities and by providing access to advanced equipments in
their researches. The new laboratory technician will help train/mentor the
various users of the RML and greatly enhance the capacity to which the RML
serves these roles. The dedicated technician in the RML will also foster a
safety-conscious culture and environment amongst the users, and a collaborative
environment to serve the US earth science community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
geomechanical problems, it is fundamental to conduct accurate reliable
measurements of rock mechanical properties to properly interpret the causal
relationship between the driving forces and deformation of the solid-earth. In
UWM-RML, specific emphasis is on quantifying the long-term time-dependent
ductile properties of crustal rocks, which have been relatively under-
investigated in the rock mechanics community until recently, due to common
notion that rocks more or less behave linear elastically in the crust. The new
technician will contribute to the design of a robust decadal-scale testing
facility which will require the development of a conventional triaxial apparatus
with rigorous high-precision temperature controls. New findings from the UW-
Madison RML is expected to provide the much needed data to evaluate the true
impact of the ductile behavior of crustal rocks, potentially leading to
transformative interpretations in geomechanics and tectonophysics. Better
physical understanding of how the solid earth stores stress and deforms over
decadal to geological time scales will help the society mitigate damages caused
by devastating natural hazards such as earthquake, volcanoes, and landslides.
Such knowledge also leads to better practices in the industry to recover
subsurface resources more efficiently minimizing the impact to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.