* 1829903
* Collaborative Research: Hydrothermal Fungi in the Guaymas Basin Hydrocarbon Ecosystem
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Paraskevi Mara, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 891,525.00

Fungi that can derive energy from chemicals, yet consume other organisms or
organic material to obtain carbon have been reported from diverse marine
subsurface samples, including from hundreds of meters below the seafloor.
Evidence exists that Fungi are active in subsurface marine sediments globally,
yet there is a dearth of knowledge on their role in the marine subsurface, and
specifically on their role(s) in hydrocarbon degradation within deep-sea
sediments. This team is isolating a broad collection of environmentally relevant
filamentous Fungi and yeasts from hydrothermally-influenced and hydrocarbon-rich
seep sediments of Guaymas Basin using high-throughput culture-based approaches.
They aim to reveal the diversity of Fungi and Bacteria in these hydrothermal
sediments, how temperature and hydrocarbon composition shape their distribution,
and how Fungi cooperate to enhance the degradation of hydrocarbons by Bacteria.
By hosting six undergraduates through the WHOI Summer Student Fellows program
and the Woods Hole Partnership Education Program, the project contributes to
increasing diversity in marine science by offering opportunities for promising
undergraduates from disadvantaged populations. High school students are involved
in summer projects and in intensive summer workshops. One postdoc, a graduate
student, and two Research Associates are supported, and international
collaborations are strengthened. The postdoc and graduate student are gaining
valuable cruise-based experience. An e-lecture on Fungi and their role(s) in
biodegradation of hydrocarbons will be made publicly available by the end of the
project. Fungal isolates with accompanying information will be secured in a
reference culture collection for long-term storage and are available to any
interested researcher throughout the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs are
isolating a broad collection of environmentally relevant filamentous Fungi and
yeasts from hydrothermally-influenced and hydrocarbon-rich seep sediments of
Guaymas Basin using high-throughput culture-based approaches, with the aim to
reveal their ability to degrade individual hydrocarbons under in situ pressures
and temperatures. Culture independent methods marker gene analyses are used to
characterize in situ fungal and bacterial diversity and to examine how
temperature and hydrocarbon composition shape fungal community composition and
distribution. Traditional and comprehensive two-dimensional gas chromatographic
analyses are used to examine the complexities and subtle changes in inventories
of hydrocarbons within sediment cores, and provide evidence for in situ
microbial alteration of individual hydrocarbons. Incubation experiments are used
to test the ability of fungal isolates to utilize different hydrocarbons as a
sole or auxiliary carbon source under in situ pressures and temperatures and
their ability to stimulate biodegradation of hydrocarbons by hydrocarbon-
degrading bacteria. Expressed genes within these incubation studies tell us how
Fungi and Bacteria couple metabolisms to increase overall specificity and extent
of biodegradation of hydrocarbons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.