* 1829252
* SBE-RCUK: Co-location of manufacturing and innovation:  drivers and impacts of technological innovation along the wind energy global value chain
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Nathan Hultman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2021
* USD 270,918.00

Many high-technology industries, including clean technology industries, have
seen major geographical shifts over the past two decades in which companies
expand or move manufacturing of their component supply chain to new countries.
These manufacturing shifts raise questions that are important for policy,
economic competitiveness, and research. Specifically, what are the reasons for
firms to alter or refocus their geographic strategies and physical locations,
and whether doing so changes the nature and direction of innovation that such
firms undertake. This project examines these questions through the case of the
global wind technology industry, where both the demand for and manufacturing of
wind turbines have shifted from the United States and Europe to emerging
economies, including China. The shifts in the location of manufacturing from
countries at the frontier of technology to newer markets can potentially shape
R&amp;D strategies, technological innovation, and competitive advantage in the
wind sector. Given policy targets for wind deployment in emerging and developing
countries, additional expansion of the manufacturing of different wind turbine
components to new countries is expected, which means it is important to
understand the possible tradeoffs associated with the manufacturing shifts. This
research informs the design of policies that spur local manufacturing, economic
competitiveness, and technology development in globally-distributed, modern
manufacturing industries. It also highlights the ways in which manufacturing
shifts affect the ability of technological innovation to meet climate and
environmental challenges in the long term, thus supporting design of national
and international policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes the
types of manufacturing that have shifted geographically and, most crucially,
whether and how these international shifts in manufacturing impact the direction
of innovation in the wind industry. The research focuses on component
manufacturers who are often small and medium enterprises (or SMEs) that supply
to original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), i.e., the 10-15 manufacturers that
assemble wind turbines worldwide. SMEs are particularly relevant for a country's
economy as they comprise, for example in the United States, over ninety percent
of employer firms. Manufacturing SMEs must innovate to produce goods at
increasingly lower costs and/or to develop new capabilities to stay competitive.
The project relies on novel data of the wind supply chain at the firm level and
a comprehensive mixed-methods approach, including the analysis of global data on
OEM-supplier relationships, public policies, component technologies, semi-
structured interviews, and patents. In understanding innovation in the global
value chain for wind energy that includes both SMEs and larger OEMs, the results
of the project contribute to the understanding of what drives decisions by
different types of firms to manufacture in their home country or
internationally, and whether the location of manufacturing influences the
technological focus of innovation and the time-horizon of R&amp;D activities
undertaken in a particular industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.