* 1829495
* Neurobiologically-informed risk assessment: An empirical examination
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kent Kiehl, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 538,827.00

The need to anticipate who will reoffend, relapse, or recover is an important
responsibility of clinical and legal practitioners and a prerequisite for the
provision of effective healthcare and social services to adjudicated individuals
with different risk-needs. It is widely accepted that the brain plays an
essential role in shaping antisocial behaviors, but the precise nature of these
processes is poorly understood. Previous scholarship has raised the possibility
that methods of assessing risk in adjudicated individuals could be improved by
including measures of brain function along with traditional behavioral and
social measures. This project examines whether the inclusion of noninvasive
brain measures can enhance the ability to correctly distinguish between those
inmates most and least likely to experience antisocial outcomes, such as
rearrest. The project also supports the training and professional development of
students in cognitive neuroscience. The results of this project are expected to
support the development of clinical tools, procedures and treatments for
assessing and remediating risk in forensic populations, thereby reducing the
associated costs to society. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
project are achieved by conducting the first large, out-of-sample longitudinal
test of a neurocognitive model of persistent antisocial behavior. The model is
developed in a sample of 600 adult criminal offenders who have undergone task-
driven functional magnetic resonance imaging and been assessed for reoffense
risk 12 months following release from prison (the training sample). This model
is then used to classify a separate sample of 100 criminal offenders who are
similarly scanned, released, and followed (the testing sample). The project
employs both theory-driven (null hypothesis testing of a neurocognitive model of
impulse control) and data-driven (e.g., whole-brain machine learning
classification) analytical approaches. This project will advance basic and
clinical knowledge of how neurobiological and behavioral risk factors interact
to produce antisocial behavior by characterizing their combined and relative
utility in assessing risk. This knowledge can, in turn, be used to inform the
development of treatment approaches that are more sensitive to individual
defendants' unique risk needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.