* 1829222
* I-Corps Sites: Type II - Michigan Tech I-Corps Site Program - A Regional Ecosystem Partnership
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2022
* James Baker, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 160,000.00

This I-Corps Site at Michigan Technological University builds on the
accomplishments and lessons learned during years 1-3 of the Michigan Tech
I-Corps Site Project. Innovation Corps (I-Corps) Sites are NSF-funded entities
established at universities whose purpose is to nurture and support multiple,
local teams to transition their technology concepts into the marketplace. Sites
provide infrastructure, advice, resources, networking opportunities, training
and modest funding to enable groups to transition their work into the
marketplace or into becoming I-Corps Team applicants. I-Corps Sites also
strengthen innovation locally and regionally and contribute to the National
Innovation Network of mentors, researchers, entrepreneurs and investors. This is
a proposal for a Type II I-Corps Site - Type II proposals are submitted by
institutions that have already received a Type I
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the first Site award, Michigan Tech was able
to create a partnership with Western Michigan University, doubling the number of
workshops offered and the number of teams participating in those workshops in
one year. During the Site's next phase, Michigan Tech will offer Workshops each
year and recruit teams to participate each year; increase the diversity of
participants in the Workshops; expand the mentor pool to broaden participation
of experienced mentors from academia, industry, and investment capital; continue
to refine the I-Corps curriculum to best meet the needs of participating teams
by offering a follow-up workshop in order to prepare teams for National I-Corps
and to build and support communities of innovators; expand their interaction
with the Midwest Node; revise the mini-grant process to encourage more teams to
apply for these grants; and continue to build the local, regional, and state-
wide innovation culture and ecosystem. The Michigan Tech Innovation Center for
Entrepreneurship will use a cadre of Outreach Ambassadors to serve as advocates
across campus and within their spheres of influence to help recruit high quality
teams to participate in the I-Corps program. Project evaluation will focus on
the effectiveness of specific curriculum improvements and on the impact of the
project on the local, regional, and state innovation ecosystem and
culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.