* 1829398
* Functional Organization of Navigational Coding in the Human Brain
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Elizabeth Chrastil, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 669,803.00

With funding from NSF, the researchers will study how the human brain represents
dimensions that are needed for finding our way around in the world. The
interdisciplinary approach combines cognitive and visual neuroscience methods,
aimed towards understanding how the human brain processes spatial navigation
information. The studies incorporate behavioral, cognitive, and neuroimaging
techniques to examine how the human brain codes for distance, heading direction,
speed, and time, which may contribute to higher-level navigation mechanisms,
such as planning a route to a known destination or finding one's way home. The
results have the potential to impact other fields, including robotics and
spatial sciences. In robotics, autonomous systems have difficulty determining
whether they have successfully returned back to their origin after an outbound
journey, which robotics researchers call the loop closure problem. In contrast,
humans and animals can readily solve this problem. Understanding how visual
information is used to localize and orient will provide knowledge that could
potentially facilitate innovation in mobile robots and self-driving cars or
training for more efficient navigation in humans. Greater knowledge of the basic
properties of navigation in humans could also lead to improved electronic
navigation systems, emergency response training, and more effective
transportation signage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals harness the
strengths of cognitive neuroscience, visual neuroscience, and spatial sciences
to examine navigation in humans. While much is known about the navigation system
in rodents, the rat and primate have fundamentally different visual systems.
Contributions from the visual system provide critical information necessary for
self-motion guided navigation, and the theoretical basis for this proposal stems
from computational models that posit that perceptual information, including
optic flow, speed, and direction signals, are necessary for successful
navigation. The researchers propose a framework in which spatial representations
transform from a retinotopic to a spatiotopic organization. This framework
posits testable hypotheses about the nature of self-motion guided navigational
representations in the brain. A series of experiments will examine how the human
brain codes lower-level representations, such as distance, heading direction,
speed, and time, which may serve as basis functions for generating higher-level
level navigational representations. The studies will examine how these selective
properties are spatially organized in the brain, as well as the higher-level
computations that bring this information together to compute path integration.
To do so, the proposed studies employ innovative functional MRI paradigms
adapted from visual neuroscience, including population receptive-field mapping,
phase-encoded analyses, and model-based time-series analyses. The proposed work
is critical for extending computational models of navigation to the systems
level in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.