* 1829986
* Understanding Whitecap Foam Decay using Shipboard Infrared Remote Sensing
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Steven DiMarco, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 532,414.00

This work is motivated by the need to improve parameterization of the fractional
coverage of whitecaps on the ocean surface. Whitecaps, which are created during
wave breaking (stage A) and linger on the surface afterwards (stage B), have
considerable influence on the boundary layer and climate. For example, they are
critical to the exchange of heat, mass, and momentum, the production of
aerosols, upper-ocean mixing, gas diffusion, and tropical storm intensity.
Whitecap coverage is used expansively to estimate these and other processes, yet
the routinely employed wind speed dependence has orders of magnitude uncertainty
that is, in large part, due to large variations in stage B lifetime. In order to
understand the factors influencing foam lifetime, a ship-based field study of
whitecaps will be conducted with infrared imagery, acoustic characterization of
bubble plumes and additional oceanographic and meteorological measurements. The
data will be analyzed statistically to yield a model that will predict stage B
lifetime in various environments leading to more accurate estimates of whitecap
coverage and the surface processes they infer. Whitecaps are used during
satellite remote sensing to estimate surface winds and surface albedo both of
which are initializing variables in climate models. A more robust knowledge of
whitecaps will therefore improve these models. Furthermore, whitecaps must be
accounted for when using satellites to retrieve ocean color and primary
production estimates. This will also be more accurate as a result of this
research. A great deal of anthropogenic CO2 is sequestered into the ocean and
exchanged across the air-sea interface, in part, through whitecap air
entrainment and bubble bursting. Small droplets produced when whitecap bubbles
burst scatter solar radiation and act as cloud condensation nuclei, affecting
cloud albedo. Understanding the complex interactions at the air-sea interface
that influence whitecaps in the contemporary ocean will enable researchers to
construct better informed models of the impact whitecaps have on climate and may
be used to predict the role of whitecaps in the future Earth system. Deaf and
Hard of Hearing (HoH) students from Texas A&amp;M University will be recruited
to work on this project. These high impact learning experiences will provide
Deaf and HoH students from other disciplines the opportunity to participate in
STEM research which may otherwise not be available. It is expected that this
will lead to more Deaf and HoH students earning undergraduate degrees in STEM
fields leading to graduate degrees and STEM careers. A graduate student will be
supported through this research and receive training in physical oceanography.
Science majors from across the Texas A&amp;M University campus will be offered
an opportunity for hands-on research experience in oceanography, and several
undergraduate students will become active partners in the research by conducting
individual research projects. Results from the research will primarily be
disseminated through peer-reviewed publications and presentations at scientific
meetings, with students playing an active role at all stages in the
dissemination process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
develop a parametric model that can predict stage B whitecap lifetime. The model
will be created using data from shipboard infrared images of whitecaps captured
simultaneously with measurements of meteorological and oceanographic conditions
at the air-sea interface. Infrared remote sensing will be used because it
provides clear, unambiguous separation of whitecap stages not afforded by other
remote sensing techniques. These data will be analyzed using a principle
component analysis to determine each parameter's relative contribution to the
lifetime of stage B whitecaps and to develop the model. Infrared images will be
recorded in the Gulf of Mexico during multiple cruises in order to capture a
wide variety of conditions that will lend strength to the model. Shipboard data
will be supplemented with wave information taken from existing buoy networks.
This research is a collaboration between the Naval Research Laboratory (NRL) in
Washington, D.C. and the Department of Oceanography at Texas A&amp;M University.
Both institutions bring equipment that the other does not have, leading to
collaboration much greater than its parts. This project may cultivate a
longstanding academic-government partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.