* 1830894
* Collaborative Research: Cranial Base Development in Primates
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Valerie DeLeon, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2022
* USD 129,925.00

This project will address questions about primate and human biology using
cutting-edge visualization techniques to map the cellular processes involved in
growth and development of cranial cartilage and bone across a wide range of
primates. Findings from this project will advance knowledge about the ways in
which cranial growth determines overall skull shape, which is important for
understanding primate adaptations and life history through time. The project
will support research infrastructure and training of young scientists, and may
inform clinical research and treatments for children with cranial
malformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study relates differences in cranial
base structure (including degree of basicranial flexion and facial orientation)
to direct evidence of growth processes. Nine primate species are studied using a
novel combination of micro-computed tomography and histological procedures to
create 3D virtual reconstructions of the developing skull. Growth patterns in
cranial base synchondroses are quantified using linear and cross-sectional area
measurements of cartilaginous zones. Cranial shape in perinatal and older
subadults is described using volumetric, angular, and landmark-based
morphometric data. A combination of descriptive and inferential statistics are
applied to address four specific aims: 1) describe the structure of the
perinatal cranial base in a comparative sample of primates; 2) document evidence
of cellular and tissue-level mechanisms contributing to growth; 3) test for a
phylogenetic effect in perinatal cranial base structure; and 4) test the
association of cranial base growth patterns with cranial base angle and facial
orientation in the perinatal period and in the adult. This project is the first
to assess early postnatal synchondroseal patency or fusion in a broad range of
primates and advance understanding of growth characteristics of bone and
cartilage by directly observing indicators of chondrocyte proliferation and
hypertrophy, two drivers of interstitial growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.