* 1830056
* Collaborative Research: Long (Tsunami) Waves in Riverine Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Patrick Lynett, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 397,314.00

Physics of tsunami propagation through riverine environments is not understood
well enough to quantify the hazard with reasonable confidence. Unanticipated
tsunami behavior in rivers can be harmful to riverine ports, marinas, bridges,
and other critical infrastructure. Tsunami penetration in rivers is largely
determined by the interaction among the flow components of the tsunami, river,
and tide as well as by river morphology. This project utilizes analytical,
laboratory experimental and numerical modeling work, designed to reveal the
conditions that determine tsunami intrusion and propagation in rivers. The
findings would enable accurate predictions of riverine tsunami transformation
that is directly beneficial for public safety and for reducing infrastructure
damage in areas along rivers. The research program emphasizes education for
undergraduate and graduate students entering the fields of physical
oceanography, applied mathematics and engineering. Because of the topic's
appeal, the project will be effective in promoting students to further advance
their education and research, thereby potentially leading them to academic
careers. The laboratory experiments will yield the time evolution of complex
long-wave patterns which will be packaged into visual material that could be
used in classrooms from high school to college graduate levels; the material
will emphasize the tight linkage between mathematics and oceanography. In
addition, outcomes from laboratory experiments will yield solid benchmark cases
for the validation of numerical codes for simulating tsunamis in rivers suitable
for benchmark testing within the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research is designed to advance fundamentals in tsunami mechanics through the
integration of theoretical approaches, numerical simulation, and laboratory
experiments, all guided by field data analyses. It will bring insight into the
mechanics associated with tsunami transition into a river, thereby leading us to
identify which adjustments should be made to improve numerical representation of
these critical tsunami processes. The specific questions to be addressed are: 1)
how incident tsunamis transmit their energy through the river-mouth environment,
2) explaining why tsunami intrusion into a river results in a prolonged water
accumulation, and 3) exploring interactions of tsunamis with river discharge.
For analytical considerations, the large body of work from the tidal research
community, will be utilized to determine which existing theoretical
consideration for propagation of tides in rivers are applicable to tsunamis.
Numerical simulations will be implemented for field-scale conditions, guided by
2011 Japan observations, to determine the physical parameters necessary to
properly design the laboratory experiments. In addition, numerical experiments
will be carried out in tandem with the controlled laboratory experiments to
further explore the hydrodynamics associated with the tsunami transition from
ocean to river. The laboratory research makes use of two different but
complimentary experimental facilities: 1) a 2D flume designed to study the
interaction between free surface waves, internal waves, and vertically sheared
currents at the University of Southern California, and 2) a 3D wave basin
designed for the high-precision study of nonlinear free surface wave
transformation in the horizontal plane at Oregon State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.