* 1830131
* Arctic evapotranspiration: A diagnostic synthesis and model assessment
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* John Walsh, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colene Haffke
* 03/31/2022
* USD 191,331.00

In this study, the investigators will use available data and modeling tools to
understand a key component of the water cycle in a changing Arctic terrestrial
environment. Changes in the wetness of Arctic land surfaces can have
consequences for vegetative stress, susceptibility to wildfires, and terrestrial
release of greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane. Land surface
wetness may also affect wildlife, as well as human activities such as
subsistence hunting and fishing, overland travel, access to resources, and water
availability. Global climate models are unanimous in projecting increases in
Arctic precipitation and nearly so in projecting increases of runoff.
Projections of net moisture flux, or the difference between precipitation and
evapotranspiration, vary widely among models, especially during the warm season.
Observational data point to recent decreases in soil moisture for at least some
parts of the Arctic, consistent with increasing evapotranspiration in a warming
climate, but increases in surface water in other areas. This study will
synthesize different types of existing data to optimize model projections of
anticipated changes to Arctic surface wetness. In addition to improved
understanding of how a key Arctic process is represented in global models, the
broader impacts of this project include training for a graduate student and
dissemination of results to policy and stakeholder communities through the
Scenarios Network for Alaska and Arctic Planning and Alaska Center for Climate
Assessment and Policy programs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The investigators will
synthesize three types of existing data on Arctic evapotranspiration (ET): in
situ measurements from observing sites, remote-sensing-derived estimates of ET,
and global climate model output. They will use these diverse data sources to: 1)
clarify the drivers of ET variations over time in different vegetative types and
2) evaluate climate model simulations of terrestrial ET and its variability in
the Arctic. The field sites will include various tundra and boreal vegetation
types, both with and without permafrost, and observations will include incident
radiation, humidity, and wind speed to assess the drivers of ET in the data and
in climate models. Global climate model output will come primarily from the
Coupled Model Intercomparison Project. Satellite remote-sensing-derived
estimates will come from MODIS archives and will bridge the scale discrepancy
between models and in situ measurements. Validation of model output against in
situ and remote-sensing derived estimates will focus on variation in ET over
timescales of days to years. Synthesis of the three types of information will
assess key processes that climate models must capture to produce credible
projections of Arctic terrestrial hydrology. Based on their ability to capture
seasonal cycles and ET over various vegetation types, the investigators will
identify the most realistic global models, along with their formulational and
structural characteristics. Results will help set priorities for model
improvement and model selection to enable more robust conclusions about the
trajectory of Arctic terrestrial surface wetness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.