* 1830719
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Consumption Of Food And Social Distinction
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Patrick Williams, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2019
* USD 15,664.00

Under the direction of Dr. Patrick Ryan Williams, Marie Elizabeth Gravalos will
investigate shifting trade relationships through the lens of food consumption in
households. Previous research on prehistoric trade relations has centered on the
analysis of prestige commodities at political and religious centers,
demonstrating long-distance economic interaction. But what does it mean when
small communities gain access to new goods and how does this affect wider social
distinction and authority? How do small-scale social entities contribute to
shifting political economies? Archaeology is well positioned to examine these
questions because of its emphasis on studying material remains from a
chronological perspective. Although this research centers upon one case study,
findings will be compared to regional datasets to contextualize site-level
findings within a broader political economy. As a collaborative effort between
colleagues in the US and Peru, this project has already had significant broader
impacts through the employment of rural community members living near the
archaeological site of focus as well as the education of undergraduate and
graduate students. Additionally, the researchers will co-curate a temporary
museum exhibit in Peru to display findings to the public. This research also
supports US and Peruvian women in science and leadership roles. This research
will result in one Ph.D. dissertation as well as multiple conference papers and
academic publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gravalos and her team will evaluate
the material remains of food consumption from every day eating and specialized
feasts to identify differences in local authority, economic access, and cultural
traditions through the lens of cuisine. Researchers will analyze and compare
data from diverse household contexts at the archaeological site of Jecosh - a
prehispanic village in the Callejan de Huaylas valley of highland Ancash, Peru.
Established during the Early Intermediate Period (1-700 CE) near several
intersecting trade routes within the valley, this community was likely engaged
in new politico-economic networks that developed during the subsequent Middle
Horizon (700-1000 CE). Researchers will examine various datasets to understand
changes in cuisine and access across these time periods, including 1) macro- and
micro-botanical, 2) faunal, 3) ceramic geochemical and mineralogical, and 4)
architectural. By examining differences in food consumption across discrete
architectural contexts, researchers will gain a detailed understanding of a
small-village's participation or isolation from a regional political economy
over time. Further, this diverse dataset will elucidate the daily lives of a
small prehispanic village, contributing to broader understandings of the lived
human experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.