* 1830726
* Collaborative Research: Constraints on sediment physical properties at the Cape Fear and Currituck landslides from velocity analysis of new, open access seismic reflection data
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Derek Sawyer, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 130,498.00

Seafloor landslides that occur just offshore of continents can have significant
impacts on coastal areas. On the continental margin offshore of the heavily
populated U.S. Mid-Atlantic, about 15% of the continental slope shows scars from
large submarine landslides. This study aims to understand the driving mechanisms
behind these common features. The role that fluids within the sediments play in
triggering landslides will be examined by applying new analysis techniques to
existing data. Slope failure can occur gradually or catastrophically, and the
type of failure will control the severity of the impacts to coastal areas.
Results of this study will provide a better understanding of the following: (1)
the natural hazard risk from tsunamis generated by catastrophic slope failures,
(2) potential impacts when trapped greenhouse gases are released from both
gradual and catastrophic failures, and (3) sedimentary systems along continental
margins in a broader scientific sense. The project supports the training of two
graduate students and a post-doctoral investigator.

The Cape Fear and Currituck submarine landslides offshore North Carolina will be
examined using open-access seismic reflection data. A key question for these and
other slope failures is "What is the role of elevated pore-fluid pressure in
promoting slope instability?" Using pre-stack waveform inversion (PWI) and high-
quality seismic data, detailed information on variations in P- and S- wave
velocity of sediments inside and outside of these two slide complexes will be
obtained. The new velocity information will be integrated with other available
information on sediment properties from coring and drilling to constrain
variations in sediment physical properties between failed and un-failed regions.
Variations in pore-fluid pressure will be estimated using an effective-medium
approach relating velocity and effective stress. Also, the seismic profiles will
be reprocessed through pre-stack depth migration using velocities obtained by
PWI to improve imaging of slide features. This study will add critical new
constraints on in situ sediment properties and the stress state within and
around the Cape Fear and Currituck slide complexes to the growing body of
information on these slides.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.