* 1830360
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: Optimal Design of Robust Compliant Actuators for Ubiquitous Co-Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Robert Gregg, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 12/31/2019
* USD 431,244.00

Motion of robotic devices is achieved by enabling the movement of its joints by
devices called actuators. This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) project seeks
to understand how to design compliant actuators for human-interactive robots
that are energy-efficient and safe across a wide variety of tasks and
situations. Unlike rigid actuators, compliant actuators can store and release
mechanical energy for greater efficiency and absorb shocks for greater safety,
which has made them especially popular in wearable robots (i.e., prostheses and
exoskeletons). However, the compliant element of the actuator (e.g., a spring
between the motor and the robot joint) must be carefully chosen to achieve these
benefits, which has restricted previous implementations to specific use cases.
The mathematical framework in this project will enable design of compliant
actuators that change their physical properties to guarantee safety and
efficiency as interactions vary from gentle to forceful. Compliant actuators
that are robust to a wide range of conditions can be used for many applications,
allowing mass production at lower cost. The energy efficiency of these actuators
will increase the battery range of mobile co-robots and allow the use of
smaller, lighter batteries in wearable robots. This work is significant to the
ubiquity of compliant actuator technology for safe, energy-efficient
interactions between robots and humans in uncertain real-world situations
outside the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a
robust convex optimization framework for designing series elastic actuators
(SEAs) that globally minimize electrical energy consumption while satisfying
actuator/safety constraints. When designing an SEA, a parametric representation
of the elastic element (e.g., the stiffness of a linear spring) is typically
optimized for a single task (trajectory and load). However, this paradigm has
two key limitations: 1) solutions are only optimal within the given space of
parameters, and 2) the benefits of the elasticity (i.e., efficiency and
compliance) can be entirely lost outside of specific operating conditions. A
nonlinear series elastic element can potentially solve these problems by
providing different stiffness characteristics at different operating points, but
the ideal parameterization of the spring is unknown. A non-parametric, robust
optimization framework is therefore needed to develop SEA technology that can
achieve a variety of tasks in a variety of situations (customizability) for
ubiquitous interaction with humans (scalability). Tools exist to solve convex
optimization problems with uncertainty in their parameters, but the design of
SEAs is not currently known to be a convex problem. The overall goals of this
project are then to 1) understand the convexity of SEA energy consumption as a
function of stiffness characteristics, 2) understand how to design nonlinear
series elastic elements to achieve maximal efficiency while satisfying
constraints, and 3) understand how to design SEAs that are robust to
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.