* 1830639
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Synergetic Drone Delivery Network in Metropolis
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Ranxiao Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,037,687.00

Synergetic Drone Delivery Network in
Metropolis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapid growth of e-commerce
demands has put additional strain on dense urban communities resulting in
increased traffic of delivery trucks while slowing down the pace of delivery
operations. With recent quick-purchase innovations like the Amazon Dash button,
e-commerce drastically modified the consumers behavior to buy smaller products
separately and regularly, adding more load to delivery operations. Another
growing trend is the offering of fast delivery services such as same-day and
instant delivery. Instacart, Uber Eats and Amazon Now are examples of services
that can fulfill a delivery order in just under 2 hours. These services rely
heavily on the infrastructure of ride-sharing vehicles as Uber or Lyft drivers.
This solution offers great flexibility to the consumer, but a single person can
only deliver one purchase order to a customer at a time, and it is not scalable
or cost-effective. There is an unquestionable need to redesign the current
method of distribution packages in urban environments. This project envisions a
framework that synergizes manipulatable distribution networks, comprising
autonomous flying robots (drones) with existing transport networks, towards
enhanced autonomy and economics in logistics. Imagine that a ride-sharing
vehicle outfitted with a docking device for packages on its roof is traveling
through a distribution center towards downtown. A drone can place a package on
the vehicle's roof while it drives by the distribution center, and another drone
can recover the package once the vehicle is driving through another distribution
center in proximity to its destination. An operator that owns several base
stations, at each of which it employs a network of drones to pick packages from
the respective base station and drop it on a ground vehicle assigned to the
package, is a required assumption by the framework. The ground vehicles can be
public transport vehicles (PTVs), ride-sharing vehicles (RSVs), or operator
owned vehicles (OOVs), which carry the package for most of the
distance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach relies on three main thrusts: i)
socially aware robotics, ii) safe and robust motion planning and execution, iii)
cooperative network logistics. Motion planning for robots will be developed with
account of peoples perception of safety, privacy, and comfort. Socially-aware
motion planning methods to generate trajectories with guarantees of safety in
the presence of obstacles and humans will be developed. Psychological
experiments will be developed to study human's subtle behavior in response to
the presence of multiple drones using virtual reality test environment. Local
control algorithms will be developed for each drone to follow a feasible
collision free path. Robust local communication protocols will be investigated
so that flying robots can perform collaborative tasks over busy air/ground
traffic conditions and unreliable communication networks. Another objective is
to achieve robust and safe rendezvous with fast moving vehicles under
communication, schedule, and other modeling uncertainties. Algorithms that
generate (possibly multi-hop) routes for each package, consisting of vehicle
route segments, with the objective of minimizing cumulative delivery time, will
be developed. The series of vehicle segments on which each package travels, and
the associated schedule, is required as input for drones. This in turn
necessitates solving the underlying network design problem for the centralized
entity, to determine locations of distribution centers (bases) and number of
OOVs required for feasible and reliable delivery of all packages, while
explicitly estimating uncertainty from traffic trends and overall frequency of
travel of RSVs between various points in the network. Game-theoretic mechanisms
that incentivize cooperation among multiple independent operators of PSVs and
RSVs will be developed. Mechanisms have to be specifically designed to ensure
truthful bidding, because the objectives of the operator, the RSVs and the PSVs
are not naturally aligned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.