* 1830609
* Active Asteroids: Investigating Surface Structural Failure As a Source of Mass Loss
* MPS,AST
* 10/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Noemi Pinilla-Alonso, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 09/30/2023
* USD 503,603.00

Comets and asteroids are leftovers of the early stages of the creation of the
Solar System when planets began to form. Astronomers are interested in them as
they are objects representative of the primitive Solar System material that made
the planets. Some asteroids have been observed with telescopes to show dust-loss
activity normally seen only with comets. These are called "active asteroids", as
they have orbits and surface characteristics of asteroids. This grant will study
whether an asteroid spinning around its axis disrupts dust or particles on its
surface, which are then shed off the surface of the asteroid in a landslide,
creating the comet-like activity that is observed. If this process is happening,
it is linked to the types of materials in the dust layer on the surface of the
asteroid. The investigators will study how and why this is happening, using
experiments and comparing the results with telescopic observations. This project
supports the mission of the NSF by promoting our understanding of the
composition and structure of primitive materials used to create the early
planets in our Solar System. The lead investigator will recruit and guide
undergraduate students for experiment design, manufacturing, operation, and data
analysis in the Center for Microgravity Research laboratory, exposing them to
hands-on space-related activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The active asteroids are
classified as asteroids because their dynamical and spectral characteristics
clearly tie them to asteroid taxonomy classes, yet they display activity in the
form of particle loss at rates ranging from 10^-2 to 10^-4 kg/s. The central
hypothesis of this proposal is that mass shedding on small asteroids can occur
due to landslides, a process intimately linked to the material and mechanical
properties of regolith (the asteroid's surface dust layer). The proposed work
will investigate regolith structural failure from rotational disruption as a
possible origin for the dust ejection activity observed on a number of these
asteroids, for which other dust production mechanisms were ruled out. The
investigators combine laboratory experiments with regolith simulants, numerical
simulations, and corroboration with ground-based telescopic
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.