* 1830688
* Workshop: RoL: FELS Integrating Critical Phenomena and Multi-Scale Selection in Virus Evolution; November, 2018; Santa Fe, New Mexico
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Santiago Elena, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2019
* USD 42,268.00

Viruses infest (or parasitize) every organism on Earth. In most cases, viruses
peacefully co-exist with their hosts, but some viruses produce disease.
Researchers from different disciplines study viruses at specific levels of
biological organization. Initially, a virus expresses its genes and kidnaps the
cellular machinery to produce its own proteins. Subsequently, the virus can be
transmitted and spread in the host populations and, ultimately, to diverse
ecosystems. This conference will bring together virologists, ecologists,
epidemiologists and theoreticians working to develop a predictive, multi-level
theory of virus evolution. The participants will discuss the latest next-
generation sequencing technologies and how they can be used to characterize
virus changes across these levels of selection. A better understanding of virus
changes will allow predictions of viral population behaviors, including the
development of new approaches to manage infectious diseases and thus, advance
national health and welfare. The workshop products may be of value for training
advanced undergraduates, Masters or PhD students in virology, ecology and
evolution of infectious diseases, and epidemiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
recent advent of microfluidic techniques coupled with high-throughput, next-
generation sequencing (NGS) allows for the characterization of selection
dynamics across all levels of biological organization. Single-cell infection
dynamics, both in terms of virus replication and host responses makes it
possible to get a precise picture of the evolutionary dynamics of a virus
spreading among cells within tissues. NGS allows for characterization dynamics
of viral populations and chains of transmission at the entire individual host
level (e.g., recent responses to Chikungunya, Ebola and Zika outbreaks).
Finally, NGS allows one to explore the virome of entire ecosystems through
metaviromics and metatranscriptomics. To make use of these methodological
advances, there is a need for a complete theory linking these levels of
selection. Understanding basic dynamics across levels of biological hierarchy
may further allow prediction of viral population behaviors at higher
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.