* 1830182
* Vp/Vs Structure of the Crust and Reflection Fabric of the Upper Mantle beneath the Southern Appalachians using Teleseismic and Global Phases
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Robert Hawman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2021
* USD 119,928.00

The purpose of this work is to gain a better understanding of the deep geologic
structure of the southeastern U.S., from the Appalachian Mountains to the coast.
By using seismic waves generated by distant earthquakes the investigators are
able to conduct echo soundings of the Earth's crust and mantle to a depth of 300
km (180 miles). The methodology is adapted in part from exploration techniques
used by the petroleum industry. The results from this work, when added to
parallel analyses by other researchers, will allow the construction of a three-
dimensional model of the subsurface. This model will help us to unravel the
sequence of geologic events that led to the formation of the Appalachian
mountains and adjacent terrain and the mineral resources found there. The
research will provide financial support and valuable technical training for
graduate students pursuing careers in the geosciences. The grant will also
provide valuable research experience for undergraduate students and will support
our ongoing education/outreach program for students in grades 4-6. As of October
2017, the principal investigator had worked with over 2150 elementary and
middle-school students (in groups of 15-20 at a time) in outdoor, hands-on
exercises in plate tectonics and seismology. The current plan is to expand those
activities to additional school districts across the state of
Georgia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The passage of USArray across the
eastern United States has resulted in fundamentally new insights into the fine-
scale structure of the continental lithosphere and has helped to rekindle
interest in old mountain belts. The proposed work will use a combination of body
waves (Ps, SsPmp, PpPmp. and reflections generated by PKIKP/PKiKP) to enhance
our images of the crust and upper mantle across a portion of the southern
Appalachians, beneath stations of the SESAME array. The goal of this work is to
address the following questions: 1) Can more reliable estimates of average
crustal Vp/Vs be obtained across the Atlantic Coastal Plain, where
reverberations within very low-velocity sediments tend to overwhelm Ps
conversions from the Moho, and what do those values of Vp/Vs tell us about the
degree to which the basement in this highly extended region was modified by
mafic intrusions during Mesozoic rifting? 2) Are there fundamental differences
in small-wavelength reflection fabric that might be used to distinguish
lithosphere from asthenosphere? 3) Does strain in the lithosphere occur as
distributed shear, or is it typically localized along well-defined shear zones?
4) Can we distinguish between different flow patterns in the mantle - e.g.,
vertical versus horizontal flow, and if so, can we improve on the vertical
resolving power of SKS/PKS/SKKS arrivals to place stronger constraints on depth
ranges responsible for observations of shear-wave splitting? Improved estimates
of Vp/Vs will be obtained by first constructing localized models of crustal
thickness and average crustal P-wave velocity using SsPmp and PpPmp arrivals.
The resulting set of localized estimates of crustal thickness and average
crustal P-wave velocity will be used to help constrain the grid search for Vp/Vs
for stations deployed in the Coastal Plain. For the upper mantle, we will use
the global seismic phase PKIKP (PKPdf) as a virtual source to construct normal-
incidence reflection sections that are analogous to those produced by active-
source reflection profiling of the crust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.