* 1830157
* I-Corps: Analytic Tool Discovery System for Interdisciplinary Data Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Etienne Gnimpieba, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
significantly improve end-users' data analysis productivity and result accuracy.
The Resource Enhancement and Advanced Discovery System (READS) technology
streamlines users approaches to locating the most relevant analytic tools for
their specific problems through natural language capabilities. While focusing on
geoscientists, financial analysts, and biotechnologists as potential users at
the inception of this I-Corps project, READS can be customized for any
discipline and its specific data analytic tool requirements. The three user
examples listed above are only the beginning of the potential applications for
which this analytic tool discovery system can be utilized. The ability to query
resources with discipline-specific language and increase result accuracy by
annotating the queried resources with domain-specific terminology will
drastically reduce the amount of time required to locate requisite tools, and
ultimately attract users. New users will not need to start from scratch in their
analyses, but will be able to build upon the resources discovered by others,
therefore maximizing productivity. This broad range of appeal, combined with an
accessible user interface not seen in other tools, underscores the potential for
significant commercial impact of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project aims to assist users in easily locating the "best" analytic
tools for their specific task through an analytic tool discovery system for
interdisciplinary data analysis. Data manipulation challenges are emerging and
the integration of dataset analytic tools into a comprehensive framework is
needed to further knowledge discovery. Abundant tools and methods are available
to the research and business communities to analyze datasets across disciplines,
but it is often difficult to locate the most relevant tools for a specific task.
Adding context to queries greatly enhances a users' ability to retrieve
requisite analytic tools. READS integrates analytic tool information into a one-
stop-shop retrieval system capable of accessing valuable metadata from multiple
repositories. The system allows end-users to retrieve analytic tool information
by submitting either keyword-based queries and/or free text-based questions. The
system leverages natural language processing, text mining, and an ontology-based
metadata annotation system to allow collections of analytic tools and methods to
be linked and discovered with high accuracy. This allows end-users to discover,
reuse, validate, share, and exchange knowledge related to their chosen data
analytic tools. This novel approach facilitates the accessible analysis of
cross-domain datasets, greatly enhancing end-users' ability to more efficiently
answer challenging questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.