* 1830742
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Microbial Biodiversity and Functionality in Deep Shale and its Interfaces
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Paula Mouser, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Simon Malcomber
* 09/30/2019
* USD 205,971.00

This research will probe microbial life and function in a rarely examined
habitat: kilometer-deep black shale, which is a critical component of the U.S.
energy portfolio. It also represents an ecosystem under immediate risk for
biodiversity change as a result of energy industry use of new horizontal
drilling and hydraulic fracturing technologies. The deep shale biosphere stores
an abundance of methane and other oil hydrocarbons that provide carbon and
energy resources for microorganisms both within the shale and along its bounding
formations. The extreme conditions encountered within these rocks include the
absence of light for photosynthesis, sub-micron pore-spaces, elevated
temperatures, high pressures, and brine fluid chemistry. Each of these
environmental factors may strongly influence the origin, adaptation and function
of the microbial population. The Marcellus and Utica-Point Pleasant shale within
the Appalachian basin of West Virginia and Ohio is one of the largest
unconventional reserves in the U.S. This shale will serve as a case study to
broadly characterize the microbial biodiversity and function in black shale and
its bounding rock interfaces. Research objectives include inferring the origin
of microbial life with respect to geologic history of these formations,
exploring how microorganisms have adapted to the current deep biosphere
environment, and investigating the metabolic strategies used to sequester
nutrient resources given the extreme environmental conditions encountered in
this ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will undertake the first
genomic survey of indigenous microbial populations in shale and its interfaces.
This research will greatly expand our knowledge of microbial life and function
in shale prior to broad-scale environmental disturbance as a result of energy
exploitation. The project will also provide further insight into microbial
carbon cycling in the deep terrestrial biosphere. The project participants will
develop exhibit materials for local venues (e.g. schools, libraries, museums)
where the broader public can get to know the residents of the deep subsurface,
learn about their characteristics and preferences, match microbes with their
deep-sea cousins, and witness what this research has revealed about community
structure before and after drilling. Research findings will be communicated to
students and the broader public through a variety of educational activities at a
joint Ohio State University (OSU)-West Virginia University (WVU) Shale Energy
and Environmental Laboratory. Investigators and trainees will also disseminate
knowledge on shale energy topics to non-profits, regulatory agencies, academics,
and other stakeholders in the Appalachian region through regular workshops and
workgroup meetings led by OSU?s Subsurface Energy Resource Center and OSU/WVU
Extension Offices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.