* 1830581
* Collaborative Research: Biogeochemical Fingerprinting of the Megatoothed ("Megalodon") Shark: A Dual Study in Thermophysiological Evolution and Seawater Chemistry
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Martin Becker, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2022
* USD 257,595.00

The biology of iconic megatoothed 'megalodon' shark-the largest shark species to
have existed on Earth-and other extinct sharks remain largely unknown. For
example, it is unclear whether 'megalodon' was 'cold blooded' or 'warm blooded'
and how other fossil shark species compare. Understanding these biological
details coupled with environmental reconstructions could help researchers
understand what led to the demise of 'megalodon' during the late Pliocene (about
2.6 million years ago), and thus help to better understand the sensitivity of
large shark species to ecosystem changes. This project uses isotopic
'fingerprinting' of teeth to reconstruct not only the body temperatures, but
also dietary behavior and seawater chemistry of 'megalodon' and other shark
species during the past 15 million years. In addition, this work supports a PhD
student, a postdoctoral research fellow at a Hispanic Serving Institution, and
undergraduate research experiences for under-represented minority (URM)
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shark teeth are the most abundant vertebrate
fossil and their resistance to diagenetic alteration provides a substrate for
gechemical analysis. This project explores the phylogenetic history of
endothermy within lamniform sharks using a coupled paleoecological and
geochemical framework. Specifically, this work consists of four objectives: (1)
estimate body temperatures of modern and ancestral marine vertebrates using
'clumped' isotope thermometry (i.e., thermodynamic preference of 13C and 18O to
form bonds, or 'clump', in the carbonate mineral lattice), and assess foraging
behavior using calcium isotopes (44Ca/42Ca) and 3D microwear analysis in
bioapatite; (2) reconstruct and compare shark habitats using oxygen isotopes (
18O) of shark tooth phosphate and carbonate; (3) infer changes in seawater Sr/Ca
between the mid-Miocene Climate Optimum (17-15 million years before present) and
Pliocene (~5.3-2.6 million years before present) from bioapatite; (4) build a
research community of under-represented minority students. Coupling 'clumped'
isotope thermometry-a relatively new method to determine body temperature-with
other stable isotope and biogeochemical proxies to explore shark paleoecology
through geologic time is the first of its kind. In addition, this project
coincides with an upsurge of interest in the debate surrounding the rise and
extinction of 'megalodon.' This research, therefore, combines paleontological
questions with geochemical techniques to bring scientists one step closer to
tackling the 'megalodon extinction hypothesis'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.