* 1830714
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Economic Resources, Parental Status and Changing Gender Norms:  The Case of Marital Name Choice
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Youngjoo Cha, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 11,970.00

Through the mid-1990s, gender attitudes related to work became more egalitarian,
but gender attitudes related to family, such as marital name choice attitudes,
have been slower to change. Many people perceive women who take partner names as
selfless, and women who keep their birth names as individualistic. This project
will examine how marital name norms may evolve by identifying the conditions
under which norm-breakers are given more leniency. The project examines whether
women and men who are middle-class or working-class, women and men who are
primary breadwinners or secondary breadwinners, and women and men who do or do
not plan to have children are viewed differently when they make unconventional
marital name decisions, e.g., when women keep their names or when men hyphenate
their names. Findings will add nuance to public discourse about marriage
equality by showing how the public views unconventional actions, how female and
male characteristics shape the consequences they face, and how views of name
choice speak to larger public discourses about gender equality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes three survey experiments to examine
whether and how economic resources and parental status change the effect that
marital name choice has on views of women and men. Respondents will evaluate the
female and male likability, dominance, interpersonal hostility, femininity and
masculinity, perceived parenting ability and answer open-ended questions
assessing their approval of marital name decisions. Qualtrics, an online survey
platform that recruits respondents, will collect data for each experiment. The
first study will examine whether and, if so, how views of norm-breakers differ
based on gender and social class. Hypotheses suggest that middle-class women and
men may have more freedom to break the norm because middle-class Americans are
viewed more positively than working-class Americans. The second study will
examine how perceptions of norm-breakers differ based on relative income, in
addition to gender and class. Hypotheses suggest that individuals who are
primary earners in their relationships may have more bargaining power and
leverage to break norms. The third study examines how views of norm-breakers
differ based on parental status, and how this relationship may vary by gender
and class. Hypotheses suggest that gender norms will be more rigid when a couple
has children, so women may have less flexibility to break name norms if they
express plans to have children. Each of the three experiments randomly assigns
respondents to conditions that systematically vary the respondent marital name
choice (woman takes name of husband, both keep names, both hyphenate), gender
(woman, man), as well as class (working/middle-class; Study 1), relative income
(woman/man primary earner; Study 2) and parental status (plan/do not plan to
have children; Study 3). Findings will inform theories related to gender,
family, and changing gender norms in U.S. society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.