* 1830904
* EFRI CEE: Sculpting the genome by design: epigenetic and chromatin looping inputs to measure and manipulate chromatin organization and dynamics
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Simon Mochrie, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,209,968.00

The ability to design genomes towards new functions has the potential to exert a
broad, positive influence on society. Built from deceptively simple four bases
(A, T, C and G), DNA is packaged by association with proteins into chromatin,
which helps to condense the DNA into the nucleus and to regulate the DNA output.
Previous work has established the importance of several factors, including
chromatin compaction, the identity and modifications of the chromatin-associated
proteins, as contributors to DNA output. However, we still lack understanding of
the mechanisms that will allow us to effectively design DNA and chromatin
architectures towards new functions. This project will take on the challenges of
discovery and synthesis to meet this need by engaging teams of scientists
bridging engineering and biology. For the graduate students who participate in
this project, Yale's Integrated Graduate Program in Physical and Engineering
Biology will serve as a framework for training a new generation of powerful
practitioners of interdisciplinary science. This project will also recruit
undergraduates studying biology, engineering and physics from under-represented
groups to this interdisciplinary team to participate in well-defined, yet
independent, projects. Engaging these students in mentoring and leadership roles
for outreach programs at the high school and middle school levels will enhance
their growth and confidence as scientists, engineers and scholars, while also
bringing the fundamental concepts of bio-inspired design to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of this project are to
define the design principles that underlie chromatin organization and to
leverage the genome as a device to measure and record dynamic chromatin states.
Historically, a major barrier to the quantitative and comprehensive
understanding of chromatin organization is the lack of versatile, tractable
systems in which to probe and interpret chromatin dynamics. This project
leverages methods to combine high-resolution observations of the dynamic
behavior of specific chromatin loci in individual living cells with a systems-
level image and data analysis pipeline that sorts single-particle-tracking data
from a population of cells into discrete diffusive states. Powerful genetic
tools will be employed, in combination with modular engineering strategies, to
alter key factors that influence chromatin structure, including the SMC protein
complexes, cohesin and condensin, to create changes in the local epigenetic
landscape. Simulations will be employed to test emerging models for the origin
of topologically-associating domains, such as loop extrusion; these models will
be further enhanced by accounting for both the dynamics and excluded volume of
the chromatin polymer in three dimensions as well as the processes that drive
loop formation. These insights will be leveraged to develop an entirely novel
method to record transient chromatin conformations as "memories" in the genome
itself through recombinase-based state machine designs, extending biological
computing to the dynamic sampling of a cell biological
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological
Sciences Directorate, by the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division
of Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and by the
Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation Program in the Division of
Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.