* 1830399
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: Distributed Bayesian Learning and Safe Control for Autonomous Wildfire Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Tajana Rosing, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2021
* USD 689,000.00

Wildfires destroy millions of hectares of forest, sensitive ecological systems,
and human infrastructure. A critical aspect of mitigating wildfire-related
damages is early fire detection, well before initiating fires grow to disastrous
proportions. Current practices are based on expensive assets, such as
satellites, watchtowers, and remote-piloted aircraft, that require constant
human supervision, limiting their use to high-risk or high-value areas. This
project aims to take advantage of the hyperconvergence of computation, storage,
sensing, and communication in small unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to realize
large-scale mapping of environmental factors such as temperature, vegetation,
pressure, and chemical concentration that contribute to fire initiation. UAV
teams that recharge autonomously and communicate intermittently among each other
and with static sensors is a compelling research objective that will aid
firefighters with continuous real-time surveillance and early detection of
ensuing fires.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal offers three fundamental
innovations to address the scientific challenges associated with autonomous,
collaborative environmental monitoring. First, a new Satisfiability Modulo
Optimal Control framework is proposed to handle mixed continuous flight dynamics
and discrete constraints and ensure collision avoidance, persistent
communication, and autonomous recharging for UAV navigation. Second, a
distributed systems architecture using new uncertainty-weighted models will be
developed to enable cooperative mapping across a heterogeneous team of UAVs and
static sensors and avoid bandwidth-intensive data streaming. Lastly, a new
Bayesian learning and inference approach is proposed to generate multi-modal
(e.g., thermal, semantic, geometric, chemical) maps of real-time environmental
conditions with adaptive accuracy and uncertainty quantification. This project
with its focus on multi-robot teams benefits, e.g., conservation management and
search-and-rescue operations. Both applications demand robot coordination,
cooperation, and autonomy, including multi-modal mapping, collaborative
inference over heterogeneous networks, and multi-objective navigation with
safety, communication, and energy constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.