* 1830870
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Programmable Skins for Moldable and Morphogenetic Soft Robots
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Joshua Bongard, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,120,522.00

This project seeks to address the problem of preparing a robot to perform a set
of known tasks, despite the lack of any information about the task to be
performed or the environment in which it occurs. The approach taken is to
construct an active robotic skin, integrating motion, sensing, and decision-
making into a single conformable material skin with embedded sensors and
actuators, and wrap it around a passive, moldable core material. The skin acts
to deform the core, in such a way as to make the robot move, in a manner which
is optimized for its surroundings using evolutionary algorithms. In preliminary
work, the PI team has demonstrated an initially spherical robot first causing
itself to roll, and then morphing to a cylinder and switching to an inchworm-
type gait. This project will leverage novel insights from biological systems to
derive new operational principles for robots capable of editing their own
algorithmic control structure to make use of a changing anatomy, enabling more
robust functionality. The results of this research will enable morphing robots
that can adjust their morphology to accomplish different tasks or move more
efficiently to meet the demands of changing environments or contexts. This
project addresses the producing of a transformative tool that can adapt for
exploration or discovery of unknown, dangerous, or unpredictable environments.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Rigid-bodied robots generally excel at specific tasks in
structured environments, but lack the versatility and adaptability required to
interact-with and locomote-within the natural world. This project will introduce
robotic skins that wrap around arbitrary soft bodies to induce the desired
motions and deformations. With the addition of robotic skins, passive soft
bodies may be turned into active soft robots. Robotic skins integrate actuation,
sensing, variable stiffness, and computation into a single conformable material,
and may be leveraged to create morphing robots capable of editing their own
morphology and control in unstructured and dynamic environments. The objective
of the proposed work is to develop and implement an end-to-end procedure that
begins with behavior specifications and ends with a physical self-morphing soft
robot and its software environment. The approach will employ robotic skins as
the foundation of morphing machines by wrapping them around moldable materials
(e.g. clay), enabling surface-driven shape change. Robotic skins will mold the
underlying body into a desired shape through controlled surface strains, surface
pressures and selective stiffening. As the environment or task changes, the skin
will re-mold the body into a new shape that is optimized for its context. This
approach will leverage novel insights from diverse biological systems to derive
new mathematical models, evolutionary algorithms, and multifunctional materials
to enable unparalleled contextually-sensitive morphing capabilities for soft
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly sponsored by the National
Science Foundation, Office of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary
Activities (EFMA) and the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.