* 1830007
* Tracking Subtropical Water Mass Anomalies to the Tropics and Their Potential for Re-emergence
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Geoffrey Gebbie, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 760,573.00

How tropical oceans, which are strong drivers of global climate variability, are
influenced by subtropical processes remains unresolved. Tropical-subtropical
teleconnections occur either via the atmosphere, which can set up within a
season, or through subsurface ocean pathways operating over years to decades.
The formation in the subtropics and subsequent advection of anomalous heat due
to water mass anomalies is a potentially important ocean pathway. Some
theoretical studies suggest this process controls multiyear to decadal climate
variability. Anomalies are created in two ways: at the surface by wind, heat and
freshwater flux changes or in the subsurface by anomalous advection. Using the
recent record from the Argo array of profiling floats, many regional studies
have identified the formation and propagation of water mass anomalies in most
ocean basins. Modern ocean general circulation model studies with realistic
surface forcing can form and advect anomalies similar to the observed ones.
However, the two descriptions do not agree on whether these anomalies can
survive to reach the equator, and then re-emerge to the surface. This project
will take a globally consistent observational and modelling approach to
quantitatively understand the source, fate and potential re-emergence of
subtropical water mass anomalies, and thus their potential to influence the
climate. As part of this project, an improved gridded global Argo analysis will
be made freely available with particular focus on water mass variability and
realistic estimates of resolved scales and errors. A production system will be
put in place to ensure ongoing updates and distribution of the analysis. A
graduate student in the MIT-WHOI Joint Program will learn both numerical
modelling (including the analysis of ensembles) and observational analysis
techniques. Since the targeted processes are a prime candidate for enabling
longer term climate forecasting, results will discussed directly with climate
forecasting teams in the US and Australia via collaborator Peter
Oke.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine a novel analysis of Argo
data with a set of tailored ensembles of OGCM runs to identify source regions of
observed water mass variability. A model-based ensemble optimal interpolation
(OI) will be used for the first time to map Argo data, both on depth and density
surfaces. Global observed surface conditions will be used to force a numerical
model specifically configured and tuned to simulate the water mass variability
in the Argo period. This all-forcing ensemble will then be compared to parallel
ensembles with restricted tropical and subtropical/hemispheric forcing where the
temperature, salinity and wind components will be varied to examine the
generation and fate of anomalies generated in different regions. The goal is to
attribute observed equatorial variability in each ocean basin to local and/or
remote drivers and assess if there is any evidence for re-emergence. Examining
all basins, which vary in source strength, advective pathways, mixing rates and
throughflows, will result in a more unified view of where and when subtropical
variability impacts the far field. The observational approach will involve
carefully checking and removing sensor errors and using a dynamically-
intelligent model-based ensemble OI framework. Rather than diagnosing formation
mechanisms through incomplete observations or from a single all-forcing model
run, the study will use dedicated ensembles of simulations with controlled
regional surface forcing. An ensemble approach will clearly quantify the role
that intrinsic variability (due to instabilities) plays in the model system and
in turn, will help better understand the observed record. By focusing on the
feeder flows to the equatorial upwelling systems, the team will then assess the
importance of the proposed ocean tunnel to climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.