* 1830154
* Osteoimmunology As A New Frontier in Treponemal Infection
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Sharon DeWitte, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2023
* USD 59,240.00

Dr. Fabian Crespo together with colleagues will undertake research to test the
potential for integrating experimental osteoimmunology with bioarchaeology in
reconstructing human host immune response and inflammatory phenotype (IP)
focusing on immune responses against acquired syphilis's causal bacterium,
Treponema pallidum; and ultimately explore how changes in inflammatory responses
impact bone cell physiology. This project represents an experimental
immunological complement to a more traditional bioarchaeological analysis (PI:
Zuckerman), wherein host IP during the stages of infection will be reconstructed
through biomarkers of other inflammatory conditions, specifically periodontal
disease (PD). This project will establish the potential immunological interplay
between systemic inflammatory responses against T. pallidum and other pathogens,
such Porphyromonas gingivalis, which is causal to PD, and how this interplay may
influence localized bone microenvironments, enabling skeletal biomarkers, such
as PD, to be used to reconstruct IP with empirical certainty. Dr. Crespo and
colleagues are committed to giving multiple public and K-12 lectures in
collaboration with local and national educational organizations regarding health
and social consequences of sexually transmitted infections (STIs), such as
syphilis; and ultimately, emphasizing how the integration of skeletal analyses
of disease in past populations, through bioarchaeology, with modern biomedical
analysis, through osteoimmunology, can transform current understandings of human
health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Crespo and colleagues will try to answer the
following research questions: (1) Does exposing human immune cells to T.
pallidum induce a systemic inflammatory shift that affects the host immune
response to P. gingivalis; (2) Does exposing immune cells to P. gingivalis
induce a shift that affects the host immune response to T. pallidum? (3) Does
this potential shift have downstream effects on localized bone
microenvironments, affecting bone cell differentiation and activity? (4) Lastly,
can the potential inflammatory shift and physiological changes observed in vitro
be associated with PD in skeletons with documented T. pallidum infection? These
questions will be answered using peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) from
healthy donors, splitting the cell population in two groups: a) whole PBMCs to
explore evidence for an inflammatory shift when cells are alternatively exposed
to antigens and lysates from T. pallidum and P. gingivalis; and b) isolated
CD14+ monocytes, which differentiate into bone cells, from PBMCs (same donor),
to assess how the potential shift might affect bone cell differentiation and
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.