* 1830704
* Enabling Quantum Leap: Using the Scientific Method to Create Theatre About Science
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Nancy Kawalek, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 269,997.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Embedded within the University of Chicago's
Institute for Molecular Engineering (IME), STAGE (Scientists, Technologists and
Artists Generating Exploration) is a laboratory devoted to meaningful
collaborations among scientists and artists. The STAGE lab creates and develops
emotionally engaging, entertaining theatre and film work inspired by science and
technology, and explores the use of new technologies in the staging of its
productions, to inform the public about science and technology. Utilizing a
creative methodology modeled on the exploratory process of experimental science,
a postdoctoral scholar is driving a collaborative project to create an original
theatrical script that bridges the gap between public perception and scientific
reality in complex research areas, focusing on the field of quantum mechanics.
The culminating production fosters understanding of the key scientific theme,
and more broadly, the scientific process and the importance of discovery, while
also addressing the need to promote the understanding of the sciences in the
public arena. In addition to the quantum physics play Entanglement, the
postdoctoral scholar is collaborating on parallel projects about the science of
food, symmetry in nature, and artificial intelligence. Under the mentorship of
the PI, the postdoctoral scholar is leading all aspects of developing
Entanglement and is driving the play to public performances using the resources
available to them through the University of Chicago.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The theatre project
Entanglement, led by the postdoctoral scholar, is promoting the understanding
and appreciation of the complex scientific topic of quantum information in the
public arena. STAGE, with its method of finding subtle parallels and metaphors
between scientific themes and human experience, is translating the richness and
nuances of this topic into a relatable form of expression. Participants include
scientists, engineers, technology/media experts, professional artists (e.g.,
actors, directors, writers, dramaturgs, cinematographers, editors, as well as
set, lighting, sound, projection, and costume designers), and undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars from all disciplines, all
working simultaneously whenever possible. Much of the script is created through
improvisation, and each improvisation is akin to running an experiment, i.e.,
the improvisation is used to generate and investigate new ideas, with continuous
analysis and feedback. The project participants weigh and examine what each
improvisation reveals, and, just as scientists analyze their results and use
that information to revise an experiment, the project team adjust the
circumstances of a scenario and improvise again to guide the creation of the
script, as well as what will eventually be performed publicly. Moreover, the
STAGE lab has a team of quantum physicists and nanotechnology experts actively
collaborating on the theatre piece. Through this project, students, scientists,
and the public engage with the University of Chicago students and faculty, the
surrounding neighborhoods of Hyde Park, Chicago's South Side, and the greater
Chicago area, all of which provide a diverse, multicultural audience, including
underrepresented minority and at-risk students. By engaging in interdisciplinary
collaborations and unique creative methods in the STAGE lab, UChicago's students
sharpen qualities fundamental to their work: intuitive skills, the ability to
think and act spontaneously, and imagination, all of which are invaluable to the
practice of science. This kind of awareness increases research skills, efficacy
of teaching, and the communication of scientific
knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.