* 1830185
* Workshop: ADVANCE and Beyond; Thinking Strategically about Faculty-Based Institutional Change
* EHR,HRD
* 06/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Sandra Laursen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 07/31/2019
* USD 88,204.00

The workshop will focus on the processes that are needed to link multiple
interventions and work at different institutional levels to accomplish systemic
and cultural changes that become embedded in the values, norms, and behaviors of
faculty working in institutions of higher education. Drawing on the experience
of past NSF ADVANCE grantees the workshop will document the structural processes
that facilitated the institutional change within ADVANCE institutions. This
project will document this important aspect of learning that past NSF ADVANCE
grantees have accumulated through many years of experience. This information
will be shared broadly with others interested in pursuing organizational
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop complements prior work by the PIs on
the web-based StratEGIC Toolkit which provides text and video resources
describing specific interventions of past NSF ADVANCE grantees. The toolkit
helps organizational leaders decide what to include in an institutional change
effort to enhance STEM faculty gender equity. This workshop will focus on issues
of process that the past NSF ADVANCE grantees have identified as critical for
achieving change goals. Preliminary information suggests that processes such as
constructing a diverse leadership team, planning and delivering strategic
communication, and leveraging multiple change interventions are all strategies
that facilitate systemic change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.