* 1830549
* NRI: FND: Robotic Collaboration through Scalable Reactive Synthesis
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lydia Kavraki, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 749,291.00

As human-robot collaboration is scaled up to more and more complex tasks, there
is an increased need for formally modeling the system formed by human and
robotic agents. Such modeling enables reasoning about reliability, safety,
correctness, and scalability of the system. The modeling, however, presents a
daunting task. This research aspires to formally model scenarios where the robot
and the human can have varying roles. The intent is to develop scalable
methodologies that will endow the robot with the ability to adapt to human
actions and preferences without changes to its underlying software or hardware.
An assembly scenario will be used to mimic manufacturing settings where a robot
and a human may work together and where the actions of the robot can improve the
quality and safety of the work of the human. The project is a critical step
towards making robots collaborative with and responsive to humans while allowing
the human to be in control. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a
framework for human-robot collaboration that integrates reactive synthesis from
formal methods with robotic planning methods. By tightly combining the
development of synthesis methods with robotics, it will pursue the development
of a framework that is intuitive and scalable. The focus is on task-level
collaboration as opposed to physical interaction with a human. The framework
takes as input a task specification defined in a novel formal language
interpreted over finite traces: a language suitable for robotics problems. It
produces a policy for a robotic agent to assist a human agent regardless of
which subtask or execution order for this subtask that the human agent chooses.
The policy includes both high-level actions for the robotic agent as well as
corresponding low-level motions that can be directly executed by the actual
robot. One key novel component of the approach is the automated construction of
abstractions for robotic manipulation that can be used by synthesis methods. The
scalability of the proposed work will be investigated along different
dimensions: the extent to which symbolic reasoning can be applied, the
development of new synthesis algorithms, and the proper use of abstractions
including their automatic refinement and the construction of factored
abstractions. The trade-offs in using a combination of partial policies and
replanning will be investigated as well as how to account for incomplete
information due to incomplete observations. The theoretical contributions will
be implemented on real robot hardware and demonstrated in experiments that are
analogous to real-world assembly tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.