* 1830782
* I-Corps:  Low False Negative 3-D Facial Recognition
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Thomas Sterling, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the expansion
of facial recognition technologies into the emissive infrared bands and the
reduction of false negatives in the presence of large facial pose variation.
Visible 2-D image-based machine learning techniques dominate the commercial
facial recognition landscape while heterogeneous facial recognition techniques
including 3-D to 2-D matching and infrared to visible matching have not seen
similar widespread commercial deployment. The patented technology originates
from an NSF Award and brings a crucial algorithmic component for commercial
deployment that enhances heterogeneous facial recognition techniques while not
relying on machine learning nor its concomitant large training database
requirements. This in turn opens up the potential for improved automated
surveillance against a given watch-list deployable in a host of public and
private spaces and under a wider range of surveillance conditions than currently
possible using 2-D commercial matching algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is a result of technology developed under an NSF Award which
enables a radical improvement in 3-D facial recognition by reducing the
computational costs for facial implicit surface generation and biometric capture
originating from multispectral (visible and infrared) sources. The technology
results in robust recognition in the presence of large facial pose variation and
occlusion using 3-D facial implicit surfaces. The improvement over existing 2-D
commercial facial recognition algorithms is evident under conditions typical of
automated surveillance where large facial pose variation and poor lighting
result in false negatives using conventional practice. The method and apparatus
for 3-D facial recognition underlying this research, however, performs equally
well under large facial pose variation and is able to seamlessly integrate
multiple band infrared input along with visible image input for vastly lower
false negative facial recognition even in the presence of low-light and
nighttime conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.