* 1830471
* NRI:INT: Ad-Hoc Collaborative Human-Robot Swarms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Hadas Kress Gazit, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,490,568.00

This project addresses the challenge of creating ad-hoc collaborative teams
(swarms) of robots and people, where the people are not robotics experts and are
interacting with the robots to accomplish an ad-hoc task such as emergency
evacuation. The project investigates what the robots should look like, how they
should behave, and how they should interact with people without prior experience
with robots, to make sure the overall task is accomplished. The scientific
insights of this project can apply to different tasks such as crowd control and
large scale search missions. Here the research is grounded in a series of room
and building evacuation scenarios where robots work autonomously, provide
information and guidance, and respond to people's requests and behaviors. This
project will impact three graduate classes taught by the researchers, will
support undergraduate and masters projects and the results will be incorporated
into activities targeted at increasing the participation of groups traditionally
underrepresented in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances
knowledge in three subfields of robotics and especially at their intersection;
swarm design, autonomy, and human-swarm interaction. The challenge includes
development of hardware platforms that can traverse and modify their environment
and permit safe human-robot interaction, while remaining inexpensive, robust,
and low maintenance. Specifically, this will involve blimps to facilitate and
provide broad situational awareness by projecting images on the ground, and
ground robots with inflatable, interactive bladders. For autonomy, this project
considers a top-down approach where individual robot control is synthesized from
a high-level task. In addition, algorithms will be developed that enable robots
to automatically modify their behavior and provide intuitive feedback based on
interactions with humans, the humans' behaviors, and the observed environments.
This project will contribute to the field of Human-Robot Interaction by
designing and evaluating distributed interactions where the role of the human
fluidly changes between being a leader providing instructions to the robots, a
cooperative swarm member guided by the robots, an uncooperative member who acts
in opposition to the swarm guidance, and a passive member who needs to be
physically assisted. Evaluating the human-swarm behavior using established
metrics in a variety of increasingly complex environments will provide unique
insights into the opportunities and challenges of creating ad-hoc human-robot
swarms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.