* 1830732
* Collaborative Research: Facility Support for Operation of the National Center for Airborne Laser Mapping (NCALM)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2024
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,383,346.00

This award continues the support of the National Center for Airborne Laser
Mapping (NCALM), which is a collaboration between the operational facility at
the University of Houston and the data-processing center at the University of
California Berkeley. Also known as airborne Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR),
airborne laser mapping allows for the measurement of surface topographic
features with very high accuracies and spatial resolution. The data collected
are used to construct very detailed digital elevation models (DEM) that offer an
unprecedented high-resolution representation of topographic features and
illuminate the processes that shape them. Examples include fault scarps, hill
slopes, river channels, barrier beaches and sand dunes, mountain and continental
glaciers, volcanic edifices and the structure of the forest canopy. This
facility gives researchers access to the sophisticated technology and
operational support needed to gather the data and the expertise required to
convert that data into visual products. DEMs developed from LiDAR have a wide
range of applications in civil engineering and hazards assessments to see how
much the land surface has moved over a specific time interval, and in
archaeological investigations of how past civilizations have modified
landscapes, especially in tropical regions where such structures are hidden from
view by dense forest cover. NCALM is dedicated to meeting three goals: 1)
providing research-quality LiDAR data to the scientific community, 2) advancing
the state of the art in airborne laser mapping, and 3) training and educating
graduate students to meet the rapidly growing needs of academia, government, and
the private sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This continuing award will allow NCALM
to augment collection platforms with a flexible and portable helicopter-based
system, expand the use of multi-wavelength LiDAR and coincident hyperspectral
imagery, work with other NSF centers to explore unmanned aircraft, focus on
open-source software tools and methodology for change detection between
temporally spaced LiDAR collections, and provide workshops and community
engagement to disseminate the LiDAR knowledge that NCALM has acquired and
developed. Airborne laser systems fire laser pulses at high frequency from an
aircraft whose position and orientation are monitored via on-board and ground
Global Positioning System (GPS) control and an aircraft Inertial Measurement
Unit (IMU). The instrumentation measures the round-trip travel time for
individual pulses to reflect from encountered surfaces and return to a detector.
Raw travel-time data are combined with position information to generate
georeferenced coordinates of each laser return from the surface or "point
clouds." The system's high-frequency laser postings allow for penetration of
dense vegetative canopies and, with developed post-processing routines, can
yield maps of both the upper surface of the vegetative canopy and the bare Earth
surface that is obstructed from a bird's-eye view.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.