* 1830002
* Collaborative Research: Teasing apart coexisting cyanobacteria in the Laurentian Great Lakes
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Anne Thompson, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 90,126.00

The Laurentian Great Lakes hold 20% of our planet's surface freshwater and 84%
of US surface freshwater, comprising the largest freshwater ecosystem on Earth.
They provide critical ecosystem services such as fisheries and recreation, and
serve as the drinking water source to 40 million people. In recent decades, the
Great Lakes have experienced significant environmental changes, such as nutrient
pollution and invasive species, that have altered water chemistry and food web
structure. In particular, the base of the food web has changed dramatically.
Annual spring phytoplankton blooms have largely disappeared in Lakes Michigan
and Huron, while toxic cyanobacterial blooms have increased in Lake Erie. The
microorganisms that make up the base of the food web in the Great Lakes are
poorly understood and play critical roles in regulating water quality and
ecosystem productivity. This project characterizes single-celled cyanobacteria
across the Laurentian Great Lakes to understand their genetic diversity and
ecology. The investigators are working with local high schools on Chicago's
south side to develop teaching modules about the role of microorganisms in the
health of the Great Lakes. Local high school teachers will be engaged to design
lessons about aquatic microbial ecology, with the goal of increasing Great Lakes
literacy and STEM participation in Chicago's impoverished and diverse south side
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Picocyanobacteria contribute up to 50% of
primary production in some portions of the Laurentian Great Lakes. However,
little is known about their population structure and dynamics, or about factors
shaping their abundance and activity. Understanding controls on
picocyanobacterial diversity and function is crucial for developing predictive
biogeochemical models for the Great Lakes in the face of rapid environmental
change. Multiple phylogenetic groups of coexisting picocyanobacteria in the
Great Lakes have recently been identified, and this project characterizes their
genetic, physiological, and ecological diversity. Using a combination of flow
cytometry and molecular sequencing approaches, distinct populations are being
quantified across lakes, depths, and seasons, and comparative genomics is being
used to reveal how pathways and genes are distributed across taxa and habitats.
Quantitative transcriptomics and proteomics are being used to diagnose
environmental controls on gene expression and to assess the relative activity of
distinct populations. Ongoing time series data and archived samples are being
combined with targeted sampling aboard the R/V Blue Heron. This project advances
our knowledge of the Great Lakes microbial food web by generating the first
systematic picture of picocyanobacterial diversity in this
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.