* 1830122
* Spatial Distribution, Longevity, and Evolution of Giant Magma Bodies: Tapping the Record in Crystal-rich Supereruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Guilherme Gualda, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,345.00

Supereruptions eject hundreds to thousands of km3 of magma into the air in a
matter of days to months. They are the ultimate demonstration that the Earth's
crust is capable of storing large quantities of eruptible magma. Not only are
they a potential threat to humankind, but they are also fascinating from a
scientific standpoint. Some of the largest eruptions on record seem to tap
deposits that are crystal-rich, very extensive, and remarkably homogeneous in
composition. In this project, the investigator will explore several important
questions related to crystal-rich magma bodies that feed supereruptions: How is
magma organized in the shallow crust just prior to supereruptions? What are the
conditions that promote accumulation of unusually high amounts of eruptible
magma in the shallow crust? How do magma systems that feed supereruptions evolve
to a state that leads to a supereruption? What are the timescales over which
these magma bodies differentiate, stall, and erupt? It is expected that the
project will lead to new and improved understanding of the evolution of
supereruption-forming magma bodies, including clues to the processes leading to
eruption. It will provide support for graduate students at Vanderbilt
University, whose graduate program has a strong record of training women in
Earth &amp; Environmental Sciences (at least two female PhD students will be
funded by the project). The project will also support participation of
undergraduates in research through participation in Vanderbilt May-term field
courses abroad that the PI has been offering since 2013. The project will
support work that will foster new and existing international and national
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will combine four main
approaches: (1) Study of the spatial distribution of magmas using the geographic
distribution of vents and other surface manifestations of magma localization
(e.g. collapse areas), in combination with information from geobarometry, which
will inform the depth at which magmas are stored; (2) The depths of magma
extraction will be a focus of study using geobarometry to assess to what extent
storage of eruptible magma takes place contiguously with crystal-rich material
from which it is extracted; (3) The crystallization times of eruptible magmas
will be investigated using geospeedometry of major and accessory phases; (4) The
evolution of magmas will be explored combining the record preserved in rock
textures, crystal zoning, and glass compositions with information that can be
extracted from thermodynamic modeling using rhyolite-MELTS, including
investigations of the processes that control magma eruptibility. Two main
localities were selected for the detailed work: (a) Ora Caldera deposits in
northern Italy; and (b) Whakamaru Group in the Taupo Volcanic Zone, New
Zealand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.