* 1830955
* CyberSEES: Type 1: Cyber-Enabled Ensemble Data Assimilation for Drought Monitoring, Forecasting and Recovery
* CSE,CCF
* 01/09/2018,08/31/2018
* Hamid Moradkhani, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Rahul Shah
* 08/31/2018
* USD 132,265.00

There is growing concern with evidence that droughts have been intensified due
to ongoing land development driven by population growth and other factors. This
has correspondingly aggravated water scarcity, which threatens the long-term
sustainability of water resources. Since the US is one of the largest in terms
of water footprint, the country is very vulnerable to moderate and severe
drought. To mitigate the drought vulnerability, an effective drought monitoring
and forecasting system with assessment of drought recovery time is critical for
decision makers. This project will develop a cyber-enabled ensemble data
assimilation and terrestrial modeling system to characterize the land surface
condition for not only assessing the agricultural drought but also providing the
initial condition for probabilistic drought forecasting. These estimates will
provide the basis for drought recovery estimation. The project will serve as a
prototype to build capacity for large-scale drought studies and applications,
and will directly enhance the ability of state water managers to take
appropriate and timely measures during periods of water scarcity as a result of
drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study relies on a variety of massive earth and
environmental observational data in connection with advanced dynamical and
Bayesian modeling, to account for uncertainties and provide reliable drought
estimation with the goal to further freshwater resource sustainability. Ensemble
modeling and probabilistic estimation to quantify the uncertainties in Earth
system science by means of data assimilation has been a salient bottleneck in
operationalization. Due to the multi-scale nature of hydrologic processes and
under-determinedness of most hydrologic systems as well as the presence of
epistemic and random uncertainties, dynamic physical-based and stochastic
modeling to probabilistically characterize drought onset and predict it at
seasonal scale requires proper parameterization of the system. This research
proposes a modern ensemble data assimilation system operating in real time to
characterize land surface conditions for monitoring drought, develops a
computational framework for effective data assimilation, and implements an
approach that targets computational scalability, power, and reliability in the
computational framework.