* 1830950
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Strong Soft Robots--Multiscale Burrowing and Inverse Design
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Sridhar Kota, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,977,501.00

This project directly addresses major challenges facing the emerging field of
soft robotics. Soft robots are made of inherently compliant materials that are
soft, flexible, and move gracefully in three dimensions without requiring
discrete joints. However, these highly compliant soft bodies may prove too weak
to exert sufficiently large forces to accomplish desired tasks. Additionally,
there is a general lack of understanding of how to best navigate the bewildering
spectrum of materials, configurations, and designs available to soft robotics.
This project explores the properties of 3D-printable polyurethane polymers that
can be customized to provide different mechanical properties. This project will
create mathematical models of highly deformable structures, and computational
tools to solve the "inverse problem" of finding the material parameters and 3D
printing pattern that achieve a specified structural behavior. The project will
consider two currently infeasible tasks at greatly different length scales. Task
1 is a millimeter-scale patient-specific soft robot catheter for neurovascular
and cardiovascular applications, where the robots can gently move through blood
vessels without requiring risky surgery, blocking blood flow, or injuring the
patient. Task 2 is a meter-scale robot that intelligently burrows underground,
with force levels much higher than previously attained by soft robots. Soft
robots in the vascular application can inform potential breakthroughs for the
treatment of heart disease and stroke. Large burrowing robots could prove
beneficial for inspecting underground civil infrastructure or laying new fiber
optic cable, irrigation, or power lines. This project is also designed to engage
high school students, and inspire them to pursue STEM careers, including future
roboticists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish and validate a
mathematical framework for the inverse design of universal soft robots that: 1)
provide sophisticated 3-D kinematics by further generalizing fiber-reinforced
elastomeric enclosures with beam elements and arbitrary shapes along with
exceptional force and power densities that match well-known McKibben actuators;
2) achieve arbitrarily-specified tasks and performance requirements including
novel multiscale burrowing behavior; and 3) dictate a new means of robotic,
automated manufacturing via 3D printed materials exploiting highly anisotropic
elastomers, inextensible fibers, and beam elements and their interfacial
chemistries. This mathematical formalism generalizes traditional robot
kinematics via a full body mapping incorporating dynamic, arbitrary shape
sequences specified by an arbitrary desired task. The coupled innovation in
polyurethane chemistry and manufacturing will enable soft robots that exceed the
capabilities of existing soft robots and overcome fundamental limitations in
their capacity to exert useful force, modulate stiffness, and achieve
previously-impossible tasks. This project includes validation experiments on two
specific testbeds: (1) millimeter-scale soft robot catheters that locomote
through vascular networks, and (2) meter-scale burrowing robots in soils,
capable of inferring soil properties to adapt their morphology and motion to
suit conditions in naturally occurring, highly heterogeneous, soil
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.