* 1830613
* NRI: FND: Soft Wearable Robots for Injury Prevention and Performance Augmentation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Hao Su, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 249,978.00

Musculoskeletal disorders are a leading cause of injury among workers who are
exposed to physical workloads, with overexertion in lifting causing over one-
third of these injuries. Every year approximately $56 billion is lost due to
lift related injuries. The emerging technologies of exoskeletons hold promising
potential to reduce biomechanical loads, thereby preventing worker injury. The
obstacles to widespread adoption of this technology, however, arise from
discomfort due to excessive weight, restricted range of motion, and high-
pressure concentration. This project seeks to explore a new design for wearable
robots as ubiquitous co-robots to address these challenges. The proposed bio-
inspired, soft, back-support exoskeletons will provide joint moment assistance,
while being lightweight and unobtrusive. Our soft back-support exoskeleton
consists of 1) a soft exoskeleton that is lightweight as its design architecture
(bio-inspired, cable-driven mechanism) and actuation (high-torque density
actuators) overcome the limitations of rigid exoskeletons (heavy, limit range of
motion) and textile-based soft exosuits (medium weight, exert high pressure
concentration on tissue); and 2) wearable sensors and its on-site estimation
algorithms of biological joint moment to characterize and prevent injuries. The
proposed exoskeleton presents a promising solution in assisting injury
prevention and performance augmentation. In terms of its societal impact, it
will improve the quality of life and work as well as address the social and
economic impact of robots on our workers. Thus, it will have a direct massive
gain to the economy, health, and welfare of our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore new
research and design of soft wearable collaborative robots to minimize injuries
of workers prone to fatigue and musculoskeletal disorders. The project will
focus on 1) designing bio-inspired soft back-support exoskeletons which are
hybrid wearable robots that combine the advantages of rigid exoskeletons and
soft exosuits while minimizing their respective limitations; 2) exploring on-
site estimation algorithms using wearable sensors to characterize the biological
joint moments to detect fatigue onset; and 3) evaluating the performance of the
exoskeletons and its effectiveness for injury prevention. &lt;br/&gt;The
contributions of this research entail both engineering innovations including new
design methodology and enabling technologies for soft robots, as well as
scientific foundation and tools to understand human-robot interaction and
biomechanics. 1) Advances in robotics. Soft exoskeleton design architecture will
enable a new type of wearable robot design that is comfortable, powerful, and
versatile. High torque density actuators will significantly reduce the weight
and increase the transparency of exoskeletons. 2) Understanding of human-robot
interaction. The investigation into lifting biomechanics and assistive control
strategy will shed light on human-robot interactions and improve human and robot
performances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.