* 1830968
* EFRI CEE: Epigenetic Cell Reprogramming In Situ: A Novel Tool for Regenerative Engineering
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Guillermo Ameer, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,583,356.00

It is now possible to reprogram blood cells into cells that can become a variety
of cell types for specific tissues and organs. Cells can open up their genes to
become more adaptable to stresses, a trick that cancer cells often use to evade
the effects of chemotherapy. Developing technologies that can control the
reprogramming can benefit a huge number of people. This project will build the
foundations for a new technology that will power regenerative medicine by
converting knowledge learned during this research into tools that are expected
to improve the survival of cells in low oxygen conditions and promote their
regeneration, for example nerve cells after a stroke and heart cells after a
heart attack. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adaptive potential of
multicellular organisms is critically determined by their capacity to create and
employ new behaviors in response to stress. This process depends on the encoded
information within the cellular population, both at the genetic, epigenetic, and
transcriptional levels. The proposed research will provide new knowledge and
strategies to regulate chromatin structure in order to enhance the adaptive
potential of eukaryotic cells with the ultimate goal of facilitating tissue
regeneration and function. The PI will investigate how to control chromatin
structure via pharmacological agents, morphological cues, and low frequency
electromagnetic radiation. The proposed research will create a paradigm shift
for tissue and regenerative engineering strategies by elucidating factors that
govern the restriction of the adaptive potential of eukaryotic cells. Upon
completion of the proposal it is expected to: 1) develop a new nanoscale imaging
technology to image nanoscale chromatin modifications in vivo; 2) bridge
nanoscale imaging and molecular assays; and 3) reversibly increase adaptability
of otherwise terminally differentiated cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.