* 1830901
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Soft, Strong, and Safe Configurable Robots for Diverse Manipulation Tasks
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Russell Tedrake, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project seeks to extend our understanding of the principles underlying the
design and control of effective soft robots. Soft robots and muscle-like soft
actuators coupled with agile control strategies will enable new manipulation and
locomotion capabilities currently only found in nature, and allow robots and
humans to safely collaborate. Today's industrial manipulators enable rapid and
precise assembly, but these robots are physically isolated, to ensure the safety
of any humans nearby. In contrast, the bodies of soft robots are made of
intrinsically soft and/or extensible materials, such as silicone rubbers or
fabrics, and are therefore safe for interaction with humans and animals. Soft
robots have a continuously deformable structure with muscle-like actuation that
emulates key features of biological systems and provides them with a relatively
large number of degrees of freedom as compared to their hard-bodied
counterparts. Soft robots have capabilities beyond what is possible with today's
rigid-bodied robots. For example, soft-bodied robots can move in more natural
ways that include complex bending and twisting curvatures that are not
restricted to the traditional rigid body kinematics of existing robotic
manipulators. Their bodies can deform in a continuous way, providing
theoretically infinite degrees of freedom and allowing them to adapt their shape
to their task, for example, conforming to natural terrain or forming enveloping
grasps. Soft robots have also been shown to be capable of rapid agile maneuvers
and can change their stiffness to achieve a task- or environment-specific
impedance. Current research on device-level and algorithmic aspects of soft
robots has resulted in a range of novel soft devices. This project will derive a
systematic mathematical framework to model and control soft robots and will use
the resulting algorithms to perform manipulation tasks with a wide variety of
delicacy and strength requirements. The results will have potential uses in
manufacturing, warehouse and supply chain automation, and everyday home
activities such as cooking and cleaning. These soft, strong, and safe robots
will have potential application in assisted care for the elderly or disabled,
and for physical therapy. This project uses the unique features of soft robots
to continue the Principal Investigators' track record of outreach and
educational activities that excite young students about STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the recent past, the soft robotics community
has explored many different component hardware technologies, however fundamental
algorithmic obstacles to their practical use remain challenging. Currently there
is an artificial divide between control strategies for rigid and soft robots;
rigid robots use high-bandwidth control of contact forces and contact geometry,
while soft robots rely almost entirely on open-loop interactions, mediated by
material properties, to govern the resulting forces and configurations. This
project will bridge this gap by developing optimization-based control for soft
robots, via approximate dynamic models of the soft interface, based on
representations with a fidelity customized to the task. The proposed class of
soft, strong, and safe robots will be designed, fabricated, and controlled by
co-developing muscle-like actuation along with internal and contact models and
associated planning and control strategies. An innovative new artificial muscle
design allows customization of actuators to specific tasks, through systematic
modular design. The modeling effort will focus on contact-rich behaviors of the
soft robot with the environment, both for delicate touch and manipulation, and
for high-force power grasps. Such a combination of soft and strong has not been
fully addressed in the soft robotics community and will allow soft robots to
interact safely and effectively with people in unprecedented
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly sponsored by the
National Science Foundation, Office of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary
Activities (EFMA) and the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.