* 1830987
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Purity Extraction of PET from Textile Waste
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Mubasher Ahmed, Ambercycle, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to allow for the recycling of valuable materials from
complex wastes that today cannot be recovered. The commercial impact from this
innovation is to allow for complex waste streams that contain multiple
materials, such as textiles, to serve as the source of raw materials for the
manufacture of new goods in a way that is cost advantaged. This gives those
businesses that use such raw materials a sustainable alternative and
importantly, a lower-cost, efficiently produced material. In this way, there
will be significant incentive for the reuse of thousands of tons of material
that today either goes to landfills, oceans, or is incinerated for energy, a
very low value application. A funded, successful project will yield an entirely
new framework for recycling of complex, multi-component materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop novel
technologies for fractionating complex wastes. Multi-component wastes such as
textiles represent upwards of 4% of total landfill volume. Today, there does not
exist technology for recovering the high-value materials that are in these
wastes. The proposed project intends to develop a new approach using chemical
techniques as opposed to simple melt recycling to enable the value-added
recycling of high value polymers from such wastes. Chemical process development
will take place in order to take the current status of the technology to
implementation in a pilot plant. The main technical objective of the proposal is
to develop the process so as to produce large amounts of consistent, high purity
product. Materials such as polyester and nylon cannot be separated from natural
or cellulosic fibers such as cotton or other textile materials. The goals of the
research are to develop the proposers' current process for fractionating the
synthetic resins with an emphasis on achieving high purity products at larger
volumes. To this end, various chemistry and chemical engineering techniques will
be investigated for exclusion of impurities from end product polymer at the kg
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.