* 1830660
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Shared Autonomy for Unstructured Underwater Environments through Vision and Language
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Matthew Walter, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2021
* USD 313,303.00

Existing underwater robotic systems typically provide one of two operating modes
---full teleoperation or full autonomy. Teleoperation is by far the most common,
particularly for tasks involving interaction with the environment, such as
grasping and manipulation. Autonomy is restricted to non-contact survey missions
and to controlled laboratory settings. The ability to operate between
teleoperation and autonomy will improve the efficiency and effectiveness of
tasks performed in underwater environments. This research will develop and
evaluate a novel shared autonomy framework. The research leverages the different
nature of humans and robots. This work will reduce the need for multiple, highly
trained operators. It has the potential to drastically reduce the cost of
underwater missions. The contributions of this research will impact the way in
which humans work together with robots within a wide variety of applications,
including space exploration, disaster relief, and assistive
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As robotic systems play an ever-larger role as
our surrogates for marine science and exploration, the ability to leverage the
complementary nature of humans and robots becomes critical for scientific
discovery. This research will develop new models and algorithms that exploit
multiple non-commensurate sensing and control modalities to realize intelligent
shared autonomy in complex unstructured environments. Novel to this research is
the use of natural language and vision as complementary forms of weak
supervision to enable robots to learn human-collaborative sensorimotor
manipulation policies opportunistically from narrated human demonstrations.
Fundamental to these methods is their ability to then refine these policies in
situ based upon interaction with a human operator. Together, these models and
algorithms will enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of underwater
scientific exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.