* 1830575
* NRI:FND:COLLAB: M3SoRo - Mobility and Morphing using Modular Soft Robots
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Barry Trimmer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,342.00

The main objective of this National Robotics Initiative (NRI) award is to
develop collaborative Modular Soft Robots (MSoRos) that can move in complex
terrestrial and climbing environments and change size and shape. A swarm of
MSoRos could be used in disaster relief (search and rescue operations), space
exploration and precision agriculture. For example, search and rescue scenarios
require small robots to autonomously navigate holes and to crawl through narrow
cracks/spaces. The collaborative MSoRos will be composed of soft individual
units that can deform to penetrate these spaces without prior programming. In
agriculture, where the environment is complex, unstructured (soil) and adverse
(changes include heat-cold and rain), these robotic modular devices will be
capable of multiple behaviors to match their tasks. For example, individual
modules could crawl around locally to monitor soil-health and then re-configure
as a three-dimensional ball to roll to a centralized station after the task is
complete. The ability to form different structures in this way can minimize
locomotion costs. Furthermore, this research is easy to disseminate among high-
school and undergraduate students as soft robots are cheap, safe to operate and
intriguing. The MSoRos will excite young minds by connecting popular robot icons
such as Transformers or Big Hero 6, with real-life morphing soft robots.
Simultaneously, it will introduce them to futuristic robotics and mechatronics
technologies with applications to wearable robotics, collaborative robotics and
robots-in-homes, and encourage them to pursue career in STEM and
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;This combination of morphing and modularity can dramatically
increase the adaptability of a robot. The proposed research will: a) learn
principles for robot mobility in complex environments. This is analogous to
building reduced-order models (ROMs). Environment-specific ROMs for a highly
deformable, soft, continuum robot will be reverse-engineered by learning factors
that dominate robot-environment interactions; b) design open-source, untethered
MSoRos that will increase the versatility, robustness and cost effectiveness of
traditional modular robots; c) establish that environment awareness is a
powerful strategy for controlling deformable robots. MSoRos will use their
interaction with the environment to learn and deploy appropriate behaviors. This
will lead to the development of hybrid robots that will combine environment-
centric exploratory learning (this research) with existing model-centric
strategies, to carryout complex autonomous tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.