* 1830169
* RAPID: The nature and physics of the Montecito debris flows of January 9, 2018, increasing community resiliency to debris flow hazards
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Thomas Dunne, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Toscano
* 02/28/2019
* USD 20,470.00

Debris flows have caused widespread destruction and loss of human life and
infrastructure, with several major tragedies unfolding just in the past 10 years
along the Pacific coast and Pacific northwest. On January 9, 2018, three large
debris flows in the village of Montecito, Santa Barbara County, California,
killed 21 people, destroyed or damaged over 390 homes and commercial buildings,
and closed all local traffic for several weeks. The flows were caused by intense
precipitation in the days following the Thomas Fire, the largest wildfire in
California history. Research suggests the debris flow hazards posed by the
Thomas fire may continue for 2 or more years in the wider area affected by the
fire. The impact of the debris flows on the Montecito community was increased
because both the public and local hazard management officials lacked a clear
understanding of the physics of debris flows and the conditions that lead to
them. Direct interactions with the public through library Town Hall meetings and
articles in the local newspapers should help to educate residents as to the
regional geologic setting, the use and understanding of specific terminology
("debris flow" instead of the more benign-sounding "flash flood" or "mudslide"),
and to instill a realistic understanding of the danger of these rapidly moving
boulder-laden slurries and the need for self-preservation through immediate
attention to emergency management instructions. It should also refine those
instructions to be unequivocal mandatory evacuation warnings rather than non-
mandatory suggestions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current understanding of the physics
of natural debris flows and flow-surface profiles is largely based on
interpretation of remnant debris flow deposits. However, understanding the
physics of any single debris flow requires the collection of important flow data
that are often erased from the geologic record within months to several years.
Morell, Dunne and Keller will constrain critical aspects of physical debris flow
processes associated with the Jan 9, 2018 Montecito event by collecting time-
sensitive field data as to the height and flow direction of the peak flow, the
volume of eroded and deposited source material, and the sedimentary character of
debris flow deposits, key data needed to understand the source regions, peak
velocity, rheology, and the runout, bulking, and scouring of large debris flows.
By constructing detailed maps and cross-sections of the debris flow deposits
along the three affected drainages, the project will delineate the extent and
nature of the event deposit, the surface flow physics that caused the debris
flow and the widespread destruction, in preparation for potential near-future
events from this same area. It will assess the power of the debris flows to move
boulders and attempt to determine scenarios for future flows and warning
systems. The project leverages bare-earth LiDAR data (supplied by the county of
Santa Barbara) for use as base maps for field work, and aerial photos flown
several days after the debris flows (supplied by the company
Geomni).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.