* 1830383
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Manufacturing USA: Intelligent Human-Robot Collaboration for Smart Factory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Gloria Wiens, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 12/31/2023
* USD 432,930.00

This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) collaborative research project addresses
the NSF Big Idea of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier by targeting human-
robot collaboration in manufacturing. Recent advances in sensing, computational
intelligence, and big data analytics have been rapidly transforming and
revolutionizing the manufacturing industry towards robot-rich and digitally
connected factories. However, effective, efficient and safe coordination between
humans and robots on the factory floor has remained a significant challenge. To
meet the need for safe and effective human-robot collaboration in manufacturing,
the investigators will research an integrated set of algorithms and robotic test
beds to sense, understand, predict and control the interaction of human workers
and robots in collaborative manufacturing cells. It is expected that these
methods will significantly improve the safety and productivity of hybrid human-
robot production systems, thereby promoting their deployment in future "smart
factories". To broaden the impact of this project, a partnership with
Manufacturing USA Institute(s) and professional societies will be established to
provide human-robot collaboration learning modules for inclusion in robotics and
smart manufacturing-related curricula. These learning modules, together with
annual events aimed at community college and pre-college students, and workshops
for the dissemination of research results will raise public awareness and
attract new entrants into the manufacturing and robotics industries, creating
truly synergetic education opportunities in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics, as well as accelerating the adoption of smart factory-enabling
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address fundamental
challenges in human-robot collaboration in the manufacturing environment, such
as the limitation of one-to-one sensing between humans and robots, the lack of
adaptive and stochastic modeling methods for reliable recognition and prediction
of human actions and motions in different manufacturing scenarios, and multi-
scale human-robot coordination. To address these challenges, multi-disciplinary
research involving sensing, machine learning, stochastic modeling, robot path
planning, and advanced manufacturing will be performed. Specific tasks include
algorithm development and deployment on lab-scale and real-world test beds to:
(1) sense and recognize where objects (e.g., robots, humans, parts or tools) are
located and what each worker is doing; (2) predict what the next human action
will be; and (3) plan and control safe and optimal robot trajectories for
individualized on-the-job assistance for humans, proactively avoiding worker
injury. The outcomes from the project will be evaluated on the shop-floor at the
collaborating company COsorizio MAcchine Uensili (COMAU) in Michigan, and the
Institute of Intelligent Industrial Technologies and Systems for Advanced
Manufacturing of the National Research Council of
Italy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.