* 1830210
* ATD: Scanning Dynamic Spatial-Temporal Discrete Events for Threat Detection
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Yao Xie, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 09/30/2022
* USD 290,929.00

The overarching research objective of this project is to develop a statistical
framework for detecting anomalies from spatial-temporal discrete event data.
Nowadays, a large volume of such event data dispersed over space and time are
becoming increasingly available in a wide variety of applications, such as human
activity data, social network data, and crime data. The observations of the
discrete events can occur in continuous time and locations, and there can be a
complex text description of such events. The discrete event data contain rich
correlation and causal information, which can potentially be used to infer the
dynamics of the underlying systems and detect threats. The project aims to
develop statistical methods to harvest this potential in threat detection using
discrete events and address the algorithmic and computational challenges. The
developed methods will go beyond the status-quo model estimation by considering
more general statistical inference problems such as hypothesis tests and
likelihood-based inference. The developed methods are general and can be used
for various discrete event data. The project will specifically demonstrate the
effectiveness of the developed methods on a large-scale crime dataset collected
by the Atlanta Police Department. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, point process
models have been proven an effective model for capturing the correlation
structure in discrete events. While much success has been achieved in estimating
the self-exciting spatial-temporal point process models, it remains unclear how
one can perform anomaly detection leveraging these models, since (1) detection
(which can be cast as hypothesis test) is inherently different from estimation,
which involves different kinds of statistics and performance metrics; (2) in
various situations, there is a large number of discrete events over broad
spatial areas, and the goal is to detect a small cluster of related events,
which amounts to "finding a needle in a haystack", thus there is a need to
develop powerful and computationally efficient statistics; (3) the normal or
reference state can be complex and dynamic and methods need to adapt to the
slowly time-varying normal state. The project will address these challenges and
provide answers to two related fundamental questions: how to detect clusters of
correlated events from a large amount of data using the point process model, and
how to estimate time-varying background normal pattern. The proposed work will
advance the state-of-art for scan statistic research and build a novel
connection between pseudo-likelihood estimation and reinforcement learning. The
developed methods will be tested in a specific application of crime data
analysis. The proposed education activities will involve students at all levels
in rigorous mathematical and statistical training and gain hands-on data
analysis skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.