* 1830172
* Can Electromagnetic Surveys Image Deep Crystalline Basement Flow Systems in Extensional Terrains?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Alan Bowers, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 09/30/2023
* USD 471,816.00

Crystalline basement rocks are rocks composed of crystalized minerals. These
basement rocks formed early in the history of the Earth and are typically buried
under younger rocks and sediment. These rocks are commonly viewed as impermeable
with little or no water flowing through them. However, faults or cracks in
crystalline basement rocks can permit fluid flow. This study uses state-of-the-
art instruments to image the subsurface at depths to nearly 10 km below the
ground surface in New Mexico. The study examines if and when fluid flow occurs
in basement rocks in a tectonically active region. The outcomes and
understanding gained with this investigation can help quantify the age and
amount of brackish water that resides within deep basement rocks in the western
USA. This research is relevant to water resource managers and nuclear waste
management agencies. The project includes training for both graduate and
undergraduate students in the fields of hydrology and geophysics, supports an
early-career faculty member, and supports a research team at a Hispanic-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to develop
a novel framework to explore deep groundwater flow systems in extensional
terrains by integrating fluid flow and transport models, magnetotelluric (MT)
and time domain electromagnetic (TDEM) geophysical surveys, geochemical and
isotopic tracers, temperature profile data, and outcrop-scale measurements of
fracture apertures. Typically, hydrogeologists view the crystalline basement
rocks as impermeable. On the other hand, geothermal explorationists acknowledge
that discrete fault zones within the basement rocks can be permeable but little
attention has been devoted to the source of the fluids feeding the fault zones.
This study offers a compelling paradigm in which the crystalline basement in
tectonically active regions can have a relatively high bulk permeability,
serving as a major conveyor for water, solutes, and energy. Using the Rio Grande
rift as a test bed, this project combines geophysical (electromagnetic),
geochemical, and field observations with advanced numerical models to explore
the flow and transport characteristics of these deep hydrologic systems to
unprecedented depths. The outcomes and understanding gained with this effort
will help quantify the volumes, salinity, residence times, and genesis of
brackish water within deep aquifers in the western USA - an unconventional
resource with the potential to offset the deficit of water and energy in arid
environments. The project leverages infrastructure and equipment acquired as
part of New Mexico EPSCoR Energize New Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.