* 1830146
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: Intuitive, Wearable Haptic Devices for Communication with Ubiquitous Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Marcia O'Malley, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 375,242.00

This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) project will promote the progress of
science and beneficially impact human health and quality of life by developing
wearable soft robotic devices with distributed tactile stimulation that enable
new forms of communication. Human-robot interactions will be commonplace in the
near future. In applications such as self-driving cars and physically assistive
devices, interaction will require effective and intuitive bidirectional
communication. Transferring information through vision and sound can be slow and
inappropriate in many circumstances. This project focuses on haptic (touch-
based) robotics to enable communication in a salient but private manner that
alleviates demands on other sensory channels. This project serves the national
interest by advancing knowledge in the fields of human perception, psychology
and neuroscience, while developing novel, convergent technology that integrates
concepts across the fields of robotics, haptics, and control engineering.
Project results will be disseminated through tactile haptic devices for
education and publicly available software and data. The project aims to broaden
participation of underrepresented groups in engineering through outreach
programs, public lab tours, and the mentoring of female and minority graduate
students, undergraduates, and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wearable haptic systems have the potential to
enable private, salient communication between humans and intelligent systems
through an underutilized sensory channel (somatosensation). In this research,
information will be transmitted through the haptic channel via wearable,
ubiquitous, soft robotic devices that provide both passive and active touch
interactions with the human user. This research is comprised of four main
objectives. First, a characterization of human perception of the forearm will
set the requirements for the frequency, amplitude, directions, spacing, and
temporal actuation patterns for a two-dimensional array of haptic stimulators
that are able to convey a range of haptic cues. Second, the project will develop
a wearable, soft, haptic device able to stimulate the skin of one forearm, while
also providing mechanical stimuli that are intended to be explored by the
fingertips of the other hand. Third, the project will develop rendering
algorithms for the haptic device that take into consideration human perceptual
abilities for passive stimulation of the arm and active exploration by the
fingertips. Fourth, the project team will create application scenarios to
evaluate and refine the system. Wearable haptic systems have potential to
improve human health and well-being through a variety of applications including:
physical cueing for rehabilitation/movement therapy; explosive ordnance
defusing; feedback from assistive devices including mobile robots in the home;
tactile communication to enable design and e-commerce; immersion in virtual
worlds for education; and the facilitation of remote interaction between
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.