* 1830761
* Research Initiation: The Role of Internships in Developing Engineering Professional Identity for First Generation Low-Income Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sheri Sheppard, Elizabethtown College
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 186,204.00

The U.S. has a goal to strengthen and diversify its engineering and technology
workforce. Particularly in engineering, internship experiences are a valuable
way that students explore the field, form an identity as engineers, connect with
various technology industries, and build professional skills. However, first
generation college students are significantly less likely to experience an
undergraduate internship compared to students whose parents attended college.
Understanding how internships impact the engineering professional identity of
first generation and low-income students, and the barriers and supports for
these students to access internship experiences, increases social mobility and
develops the U.S. technology sector by strengthening a pathway into the
engineering workforce for these students. Furthermore, understanding how
internships influence professional engineering identity can increase engagement
between academia and industry, and enable students, career counselors, and human
resources directors to facilitate impactful internship experiences, particularly
for first generation low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study
generates new knowledge pertaining to later-year undergraduate students, how
they form identity as a professional engineer as they prepare to enter the
workforce, and how that is mediated by first generation low-income status.
Grounded in the frameworks of engineering identity and social capital, the
research questions are: What role do internships play in developing engineering
professional identity as students approach entering into the workforce?; How do
engineering professional identity and the role of internships in forming
engineering professional identity differ for first generation low-income
students as they approach entering into the workforce?; and What are the
barriers and supports to internship access for first generation low-income
students? The study uses a sequential mixed-methods approach that will use
existing quantitative survey data to inform qualitative interviews using three
constructs of engineering identity (competence, interest, recognition) and two
constructs from social capital (assets and deficits). The combined data is
triangulated to generate new knowledge and create research products useful for
students, institutions of higher education, and employers in 1) facilitating
internship experiences that help develop engineering professional identity and,
2) increasing access to internships for first generation low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.