* 1830918
* SBIR Phase II:  Locating a breast tumor with sub-millimeter accuracy to improve the precision of surgery
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Rui Li, Vibronix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,102,987.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to serve the breast cancer community. In
2015 there were 231,840 new cases of invasive breast cancer. The surgical
procedure cost ~$6000 with an average $60 per minute cost and 25% re-operation
rate. Owing to its competitive advantages, the AcouStar can effectively reduce
the surgical delay and potentially minimize the re-excision rate. Therefore,
AcouStar can effectively reduce the surgical cost for the hospital, the
reimbursement cost for the insurance company, and physical pain and emotional
distress for the patients. The company's innovation addresses a considerable
market opportunity. According to a market report, the U.S. breast lesion
localization market will reach $878 million by 2020 from USD 445.9 Million in
2015, with a compound annual growth rate of 14.5%. With the value the company
may potentially provide, the total addressable market is estimated to be ~$200
million in 2020. This innovation will not only be applicable for breast cancer
surgery navigation, it may also be used as an internal tracking device for
multiple other applications, such as implantable device tracking, endoscope
tracking, navigation for partial kidney removal etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to solve the problems
of surgical navigation in lumpectomy. Breast conserving therapy, or lumpectomy,
with radiation therapy has become a preferable choice over mastectomy for its
better cosmetic outcome and patient health care. However, it is challenging for
the surgeon to accurately localize the tumor during lumpectomy, especially when
the tumor is non-palpable. Current technologies cannot provide quantitative
location of the implanted device and real-time visual feedback of that location.
Vibronix, Inc proposes to address these unmet needs by developing an acoustic
guide-wire with an augmented reality system that can provide real-time visual
feedback on the location of the tumor with sub-millimeter variance. These
functions are enabled by two of our innovations: 1) Visualization of the
location of an acoustic source in turbid media for tumor localization using
acoustic radar and augmented reality concept; 2) An ultra-low cost,
miniaturized, omni-directional acoustic source. Owing to these advantages, this
device, named the AcouStar system, has the potential to optimize surgical
planning, minimize surgical delays, and reduce the re-excision
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.