* 1830402
* NRI: FND: COLLAB:  Distributed Semantically-Aware Tracking and Planning for Fleets of Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mac Schwager, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 467,989.00

The ability to track, predict and reason about pedestrians and vehicles in a
fast-paced dense urban environment is crucial to ensuring that autonomous
vehicles can operate safely and dependably. This project focuses on providing
that capability to fleets of autonomous cars and delivery drones, allowing these
autonomous systems to realize their promised societal benefits, such as the
potential for greater mobility of people and goods while reducing traffic
congestion and increasing safety. This technology can moreover be customized for
other applications such as large manufacturing operations and even small
household robotic applications. The methods and results from this project will
be included in course curricula and in used outreach programs and
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project approaches this challenge in several
ways: (i) combine classification algorithms from machine vision with the motion
tracking of the objects from multi-target Bayesian filters into a new filtering
architecture; (ii) generate new online, distributed tessellation algorithms,
using tools from Voronoi-based distributed coverage control, to dynamically
partition the surrounding environment in a way that leverages the innate
parallelism of teams of multi-robots; (iii) use this partition to create a
distributed memory architecture that has bandwidth-efficient updates and ensures
data integrity in the face of system errors and malicious agents; (iv) develop
semantically-aware path planning algorithms for fast, online optimization of
robot motion that account for the range of possible reactionary behaviors of
other objects; and (v) design an app-based interface that facilitates two-way
information exchange between a human operator and the multi-robot team. A
prototype system based on these advances will be tested and evaluated in a
highly instrumented laboratory environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.