* 1830793
* Research Initiation: Investigating the Role of Problem Typology in Helping Engineering Undergrads Effectively Communicate Their Experience
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Randy Yerrick, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,642.00

An important challenge in engineering education is to provide students with
real-world experiences that help them to better understand what it means to be
an engineer in practice. For such experiences to be truly meaningful, students
must also be capable of effectively communicating insights from these
experiences. In the short-term, the ability to communicate experience and its
relevance is important to producing students with the kinds of skills that are
desirable to employers. While professional networks and career fairs can
facilitate connections to great opportunities, communication of professional
competency is vital to success. In the long-term, communicating professional
experiences is critical to being an effective lifelong learner, as an ability to
reflect on day-to-day professional situations and recognize opportunities for
self-improvement and adaptation is a first step in pursuing additional
professional training. This award supports fundamental research into developing
tools and techniques that aid students in understanding and communicating the
value of a variety of professionally relevant experiences, like engineering club
projects, internships, co-ops, and capstone design projects. The outcomes of
this research are expected to impact the way in which individual courses and
curriculum are designed in order to improve the professional formation of
engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research to "internalize and
communicate experience" refers to a student's metacognition of their
professional competencies and the level to which they can effectively
communicate those competencies. The primary hypothesis is that providing a
problem typology and reflection framework as context for student experiences
will improve their ability to internalize and communicate the professional
relevance of those experiences. The objective of the project is to investigate
this hypothesis and to develop initial recommendations for effectively
integrating problem typology into engineering curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four research questions will guide the project plan:
&lt;br/&gt;1) To what degree does the introduction of a problem typology impact
students' ability to meaningfully reflect on their experiences? &lt;br/&gt;2) To
what degree does the introduction of professional competencies (i.e. teamwork,
problem-solving skills, communication skills, leadership, initiative) impact
students' ability to meaningfully reflect on their experiences?&lt;br/&gt;3)
What effect, if any, does explication of problem typology as scaffolded
reflection in problem-based learning have on students' ability to meaningfully
deconstruct their experiences?&lt;br/&gt;4) What effect does introduction of a
professional competencies reflection framework have on students? ability to
synthesize and meaningfully communicate their experiences (externalization to
outside parties)? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research questions are
investigated through student reflections and cover letters, as well as
evaluation of mock interviews with engineering professionals. Both qualitative
(discourse analysis) and quantitative methods (scoring rubric with professional
engineers) are used in the analysis. The outcomes of this work are will lead to
development of a methodological framework to support investigation of the
process that engineering students use to internalize, re-synthesize, and
communicate engineering problem/project experiences in terms of professional
competencies. The methodological framework will support development of
engineering-specific theories with respect to identity and characterization of
processes that underlie engineering formation, as well as research into holistic
engineering formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.