* 1830450
* NRI:FND:COLLAB: Girls Immersed in Robotics Learning Simulations (GIRLS)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Florence Sullivan, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2022
* USD 382,303.00

This project aims to promote interest and learning about robotics, computer
science, and other fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) among middle school girls. The project will engage students who are
attending summer camps or out-of-school programs during vacation weeks in
immersive simulations of how ubiquitous, collaborative robots can be used to
provide relief to people impacted by natural disasters, such as hurricanes. A
collaborative robot, or co-robot, is a robot intended to physically interact
with humans in a shared environment or workspace. The students will create and
take part in an immersive simulation of a co-robotics enhanced emergency
response to assist first responders and other recovery workers by using wheeled
robots and flying, programmable drones. Students will also discuss the social,
economic, ethical, and legal implications of using ubiquitous co-robots in these
settings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Girls and students from populations
underrepresented in STEM fields generally have less exposure, access, and
experience with important domains of learning due to social barriers. This
mixed-methods study is guided by the hypothesis that girls will positively
respond to role-playing in immersive simulations of helping residents in a town
recover from a natural disaster, and as a result, will exhibit greater
engagement and interest in robotics as a field and possible career choice.
Students will be separated into two groups: a) An experimental group that will
receive a co-robotics curriculum contextualized by a real-world immersive
simulation narrative of an emergency response to the recent Puerto Rico
hurricane or a similar natural disaster, and b) A comparison group that will
receive just the co-robotics curriculum. The goals of the project are: (1) Test
the effectiveness of an immersive simulation educational strategy as an
introduction to co-robotics; (2) Design, implement, and test the innovative
middle school co-robotics curricula and assessments, including the social,
economic, ethical, and legal implications of co-robotics as they are used in
first responder situations; (3) Broaden participation in robotics, computer
science, and STEM fields by engaging traditionally underrepresented populations,
specifically Latinx girls, through an immersive simulation of disaster recovery
where co-robotics technology is used to help people; and (4) Increase student
self-efficacy, interest, awareness, and participation in co-robotics activities
that could lead to future robotics, computer science and STEM careers. Student
interest, and awareness will be assessed through pre-post self-efficacy,
interest, and career awareness surveys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.