* 1830908
* Support for U.S. Students to Present at the 2018 ACM User Modeling, Adaptation and Personlization (UMAP) Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Yong Zheng, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2020
* USD 13,680.00

This is funding to support travel for about 10 students enrolled in MS or PhD
programs in U.S. educational institutions, to present their accepted papers and
posters and/or to attend the Doctoral Consortium associated with the 26th
International Conference on User Modeling, Adaptation and Personalization (UMAP
2018), to be held July 8-11, 2018 at Nanyang Technological University in
Singapore, and which is sponsored by ACM SIGCHI and SIGWEB. User interfaces that
adapt themselves to available user information (such as special needs or
individual preferences) are becoming increasingly important, so much so that
adaptability has become a selling point for software products. A system with the
ability to construct and consult a user model (an explicit representation of
properties of a particular user or group of users) can adapt diverse aspects of
its performance and enhance its effectiveness, usability and/or acceptance in a
variety of situations (e.g., to reduce information overload, to improve the
quality of information retrieval, filtering and annotation, and to generate
useful information visualizations). Applications for user modeling range from
electronic commerce and intelligent learning environments to health care and
assistive technologies. Relevant platforms for user modeling include mobile and
wearable systems and smart environments, as well as individual desktop systems,
groupware, adaptive hypermedia, and other web-based systems. The annual UMAP
conference is the premier forum at which academic and industrial researchers
from all these fields gather to present their latest research and to exchange
their complementary insights on user modeling issues. Attending and presenting
their work at UMAP will have a significant impact on the careers of the future
generation of user modeling, adaptation, and personalization researchers. More
information about the conference is available online at
http://www.um.org/umap2018/.

Student authors at UMAP and attendees in the Doctoral Consortium will both have
the opportunity to present their work to a knowledgeable audience and through
lively discussions get useful comments at an early stage of their research when
it will be most useful. Just as importantly, they will have a chance to meet
established researchers and other graduate students doing similar work, to
exchange ideas and to make contacts that will be invaluable to them as they
progress in their scientific careers. Interacting with young researchers is also
beneficial to experienced investigators, by providing fresh ideas and new
perspectives. Thus, the Doctoral Consortium is a great confidence builder for
the students involved, and highly stimulating to the senior researchers as well.
Students whose work has been selected for presentation at the Doctoral
Consortium will be invited to write a paper that will be published in the UMAP
2018 conference proceedings, which will be included in the ACM Digital Library.
They will have a 30-minute window in which to present their work (with a short
demonstration where appropriate), including time for questions and discussion.
During the question/discussion period and in subsequent informal interactions,
organizing committee members and other participants will provide constructive
comments on each student's work and attempt to address aspects on which the
student has requested advice. The organizers have reaffirmed the long-standing
and demonstrated UMAP commitment to diversity; to this end, they will make
special efforts to recruit women and members of under-represented groups when
selecting the candidates to receive financial support.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.