* 1830772
* Promoting Equity in State Systems of Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2018,02/29/2020
* William Penuel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Celestine Pea
* 02/29/2020
* USD 99,998.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. This conference will provide a
venue for state science coordinators from all 50 states, the District of
Columbia, and US territories and their teams to learn about tools and practices
that will help them identify, analyze, and adapt resources that shape
educational opportunities in science co-designed through the Advancing Coherent
and Equitable Systems of Science Education project (ACESSE). These resources
will help state science coordinators develop a clearer vision for addressing
equity through the design of formative assessment tasks that elicit
understanding of science as well as students' relevant interest, experiences,
and identities. As such, conference participants will undertake the following.
(1) Engage in rehearsals with resources related to equity in assessment. (2)
Participate in systems mapping activities focused on identifying inequities of
opportunity and leverage points for improving equity. (3) Develop equity-focused
aim statements grounded in analyses of their systems. (4) Adapt practical
measures focused on student perceptions of relevance affective experience, and
identification with classroom activities to gauge progress toward equity goals.
With limited research on state leadership in science education, this effort will
help fill that void as more responsibilities for education shift to states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will allow attendees to draw on data about
how state systems of assessment support classroom learning. It will provide
opportunities for testing organizational strategies for continuous improvement
through state-level teams that involve professional development providers and
representatives from organizations that advocates for underrepresented groups
(e. g., Latinx, African American, and Native American or Native Alaskan
students; migrant students; and students whose first language is not English).
Representatives from intermediary organizations, such as the National Science
Teachers Association and Achieve, Inc, will be invited to join the effort in
support roles to be a voice for teachers and provide independent reviews of
curriculum and assessment resources as well as participate in follow-up
activities that nurture new research-practice partnerships among science
leaders, practitioners, and researchers. Outcomes from the conference include
helping researchers advance understanding about how to support state
coordinators in using proven practices to promote equity through formative
assessment, providing state coordinators with knowledge and skills to build
better networks and benefit from research+practice partnerships efforts, and
providing resources for making progress towards achievement of local equity
goals more likely. Results and co-designed resources will be disseminated
through multiple channels including participating entities, intermediary
organizations, researchers, the STEM Teaching Tools website, and the Council of
State Science Supervisors. Further sharing will be facilitated through a Google-
based ACESSE Dashboard and Twitter (@ACESSE_Project).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.