* 1830814
* Research Initiation: Analyzing inequities in undergraduate workforce opportunities between biomedical and other engineering disciplines
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David A Delaine, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 199,957.00

Biomedical Engineering majors have been shown to exhibit higher rates of
transfer to different engineering majors, lower rates of internship and career
employment offers, and lower average starting salary compared to other
engineering majors. These inequities in undergraduate workforce opportunities
are having adverse effects on the professional formation of Biomedical
Engineers. This study seeks to initiate a characterization of the challenges in
the university-to-industry pipeline through investigating workforce opportunity
between biomedical engineers and three other engineering majors at a large
Midwestern University. Undergraduate biomedical engineering programs commonly
have a high percentage of female students, therefore identifying inequities,
improving retention, and maintaining appropriate pathways into the workforce is
required. This research provides context upon which broadening participation in
biomedical engineering can be furthered, as well as establishes foundations upon
which further work can inform interventions designed to mitigate negative
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a theoretical lens of Social Cognitive
Career Theory a multivariate regression analysis is implemented on existing data
to compare different factors of undergraduate workforce opportunity and student
profiles. Through Social Cognitive Career Theory, student self-efficacy, outcome
expectations, and contextual supports and barriers that influence students'
interests in their chosen engineering majors and post-graduation plans are
investigated. A validated, transferable survey tool is established by adapting
existing Social Cognitive Career Theory measures and adapting the model of
career choice to the problem domain of undergraduate engineering workforce
opportunity. Self-efficacy, outcome expectation, and supports and barriers are
the Social Cognitive Career Theory constructs that will comprise the independent
variables within the developed assessment tool. Existing instruments will be
adapted and validated for each of these constructs to provide insight into
students' interests (dependent variable) in engineering major and post-
graduation plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.