* 1830247
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Statistically Principled Real-Time Detection of Anomalies for Temporal Network Data
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Yuekai Sun, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 75,000.00

The detection of anomalous events in time-evolving networks of interconnected
entities is gaining importance in our increasingly connected world. Example
applications of anomaly detection in this setting include detecting terrorist
cells or hate groups in a social network, identifying over-burdened power plants
in a power grid, and uncovering illegal activity in financial markets. A major
benefit of casting these problems as anomaly detection in networks is the
ability to leverage the underlying network structure to significantly improve
detection power. This research aims to develop a framework for anomaly detection
in networks that guarantees good detection
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop a two-stage
pipeline for statistically-principled detection of anomalous events in static
and dynamic networks. The first stage uses the structure and temporal evolution
of the network to generate continually evolving time-series data for each node
on the network. These multivariate time-series will be built out of a range of
features, potentially including global information such as that from the
spectral embedding and local information such as a nodes participation in
subgraph patterns, or so-called "motifs". Part of this research is therefore
necessarily developing efficient means to compute and update these features as
the network evolves. The second stage leverages recent developments in robust
statistics, especially multivariate quantile regression, to integrate side
information and flag potential anomalies for further
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.