* 1830729
* Collaborative Research: Climate Feedbacks in Radiative-Convective Equilibrium--The Role of Self-Aggregation of Convection in A Multi-Model Ensemble of Idealized Simulations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kevin Reed, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2022
* USD 386,723.00

The interplay between longwave radiation and the vertical transport of sensible
and latent heat by convection is a key ingredient of the weather and climate of
the earth. In the absence of convection the cooling effect of longwave radiation
produces a vertical temperature profile which is unstable. The instability leads
to convection, which transports sensible and latent heat upward and counteracts
the longwave cooling, restabilizing the atmosphere. This cooperative interaction
between radiative cooling and convective heat transport leads to a state known
as radiative-convective equilibrium (RCE), which provides a basic explanation
for the dependence of air temperature on altitude. RCE is also fundamental to
our understanding of the sensitivity of global temperature to changes in
greenhouse gas concentration (referred to as climate sensitivity), the response
of the hydrological cycle to changes in global temperature, and the development
of large-scale atmospheric circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Early simulations
of RCE used highly simplified approximations which only captured the bulk
effects of convection, but RCE simulations are now performed with more
sophisticated models that represent individual convective clouds and their
interactions with the surrounding air. Results of such simulations by the PIs
and others suggest that the tendency of convective clouds to aggregate into
clusters increases with increasing temperature. The temperature dependence of
convective aggregation could matter for climate sensitivity, as aggregated
clouds are concentrated in relatively small regions, leaving clear skies over a
larger portion of the earth than disaggregated convection. Cooling to space is
more effective under clear skies, thus an increase in clear sky area due to
enhanced aggregation constitutes a negative feedback, counteracting some of the
warming that produced increased aggregation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
possibility of a negative feedback due to convective aggregation has clear
implications for understanding climate change and its potential societal
impacts. But the mechanisms of convective aggregation and its temperature
dependence, and the extent to which aggregation affects climate sensitivity are
not clear. A further consideration is that the extent of aggregation and its
temperature dependence may not be consistent from one model to another, and the
PIs have worked to organize an international RCE model intercomparison project
(RCEMIP) to address the issue of model dependence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here the
PIs use simulations from RCEMIP to explore the physics and dynamics of
aggregation and its temperature dependence using a variety of diagnostics to
test hypotheses taken from their own prior work and from their collaborators.
Additional simulations are performed using the System for Atmospheric Modeling
(SAM), a global cloud resolving model, in specialized configurations designed to
promote or suppress aggregation, thereby providing an assessment of its effect
on climate sensitivity. The project also includes observational comparisons and
the design of a simplified physics package suitable for RCE
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the
societal impacts of climate change and the desirability of better estimates of
the likely consequences of greenhouse warming. The interaction of clouds,
circulation, and climate sensitivity has been identified as a grand challenge by
the World Climate Research Program. The project builds international scientific
collaboration through the PIs' participation in RCEMIP, as well as the related
Cloud Feedback Model Intercomparison Project and the Global Atmospheric System
Studies effort. In particular the lead PI has established a data portal for
RCEMIP on her campus to provide model output, diagnostic analysis software, and
documentation, thereby facilitating community engagement in the project. The
project also provides support and training for a student and a postdoc, thereby
providing workforce development in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.