* 1830269
* Research Initiation: Understanding the Impact of Institutional Supports on the Motivation, Belonging, Identity Development, and Persistence of Engineering Students
* ENG,EEC
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2022
* Stephen Walton, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 12/31/2022
* USD 220,000.00

Educating a diverse, creative, engaged, and skilled cohort of engineering
students is the central mission of undergraduate engineering programs. Achieving
this mission is essential to providing the engineering workforce of the future.
Unfortunately, persistence of engineering students to graduation remains
undesirably low, despite the programs and resources that universities and
colleges of engineering put in place to support students' success. This project
examines whether and how students' use of these institutional resources enhances
their persistence and success as engineering students. Knowledge and insights
gained from this research will improve the ability of institutions to design
their programs to maximize the benefits to their student population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates academic and co-curricular
factors associated with students' engineering identity, their sense of belonging
in college, and their engineering-related motivation. Drawing from a
longitudinal dataset tracking undergraduates from the start of college through
graduation, the project considers: i) how the use of institutional supports
predicts students' engineering-related motivation, belonging, and identity
development over time, ii) how the use of institutional supports predicts
persistence, and iii) whether the effects on persistence are mediated through
changes in students' psychological processes. The results of this work will
inform the field about the underlying mechanisms associated with persistence,
providing much needed insights into the reasons why these institutional supports
may (or may not) be effective, with direct application to the future development
of institutional supports that more effectively support persistence. An
examination of whether certain institutional support structures are particularly
helpful to specific groups (e.g., by gender, race/ethnicity, first-generation
college student) will provide valuable, generalizable insights for targeted
retention efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.