* 1830129
* Towards Modeling & Simulation-Enabled Design of Intelligent Robots  A Meeting Dedicated to Identifying Opportunities, Summarizing Challenges, and Brainstorming for Impactful Di
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Dan Negrut, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 03/31/2020
* USD 29,917.00

Robots are becoming increasingly expected to operate in complex, unstructured
environments. To successfully achieve their tasks, they must use models to plan
and control their actions. For reliable performance, these models should
adequately capture the types of interactions the robot has with the world. This
workshop brings together researchers in the areas of robotics, modeling and
simulation (M&S), and machine learning (ML), to examine the roles that M&S and
ML play in robotic planning and control, and how these two different approaches
can be combined to produce robust robot behavior. Approximately 35 researchers
from academia and industry, from various backgrounds, are invited to participate
in open discussion and brainstorming sessions. The one-day format, held at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), includes overview talks
and breakout sessions. The outcome will be a report summarizing the main ideas
and themes that emerge from the discussions, with the aim of publishing the
results in a robotics journal.



This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.