* 1830133
* Student Travel Support for the 2018 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems (SIGMETRICS 2018)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Carlee Joe-Wong, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 04/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

The 2018 Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Special Interest Group on
Measurement and Evaluation (SIGMETRICS) conference will be held at Beckman
Center, Irvine, California on June 18-22, 2018. SIGMETRICS brings together
professionals from academic and industrial backgrounds in what has become a
premier forum for discussing the development and application of state-of-the-
art, broadly applicable analytic, simulation, and measurement-based performance
evaluation techniques. The SIGMETRICS conference presents innovative, exciting
work related to all aspects of performance for all types of computer systems.
Highly original ideas, new approaches, and/or ground breaking results are
expected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel support will make possible the
participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend. Particular
attention is paid to directing support towards under-represented groups, e.g.,
gender or ethnic minorities and students from smaller or less well-known
institutions. The support will provide students who attend with the opportunity
to interact with a diverse group of mentors and peers, furthering their
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.