* 1830273
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documenting Tense, Aspect, Mood and Polarity in a Language with a Complex Verbal System
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Jeffrey Good, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 05/31/2021
* USD 18,472.00

Time is an important notion that pervades many aspects of daily life. Time is of
such importance that all attested human languages have at least one grammatical
strategy to encode temporal relationships. Most languages, however, have
relatively complex systems of encoding time (which are generally referred to as
tense/aspect systems) that interact with several features of the grammar.
Individual tense/aspect systems, in addition to their internal complexity, also
vary significantly from language to language. Because of the cross-linguistic
variation that has been observed, any given language has the potential to offer
new insights into the extent of possible temporal encoding strategies, as well
as the extent of possible meanings that tense and aspect can carry. The language
of study for this project, Iyasa (yko), is a Bantu language spoken in the
Littoral Region of southwestern Cameroon by approximately 2,000 people.
Tense/aspect studies in Bantu are especially critical as the systems in these
languages are noted as being among the most complex in the world. This project
will, thus, provide a thorough documentary and descriptive record of Iyasa's
system of tense and aspect, utilizing methods in both linguistic fieldwork and
linguistic analysis in order to uncover the nuances of the system. Broader
impacts include the professional development of a doctoral student, the publicly
accessible data, and the presence of an American linguist in Cameroon to help
maintain and improve the academic relationship between the two nations.
Additionally, the research project and its products can bring linguistic
awareness and attention to a language, region, and community of speakers
currently under-represented in scientific literature.

Records of tense/aspect systems of endangered language vary greatly in quality
from mere labels of each tense and aspect (leaving it to the reader to assume
what precise meanings should be associated with each label) to descriptions
where nearly every detail related to tense and aspect is included. In order to
achieve an adequately detailed description of the Iyasa tense/aspect system,
researchers will make use of a wide variety of methodologies. These
methodologies include (but are not limited to) administering tense/aspect
questionnaires both already developed and newly developed by researchers on this
project, analyzing of tense/aspect in natural narrative and conversational
discourse, directed semantic elicitation (where a series of contexts that differ
only slightly in meaningful ways are provided by the researcher), and directed
narratives that are elicited by means of video clips or storyboards. Another
important aspect of this project is that it will incorporate insights from a
wide range of theories including cognitive theories of tense and aspect that
move away from the notion of time as a single linear timeline. This project, in
addition to providing important documentary materials and linguistic training
opportunities to the Iyasa community, will provide important insights on how to
improve computational models of tense and aspect for natural language processing
and help strengthen our general understanding of how humans can and do encode
time in language.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.