* 1830941
* EFRI CEE: Human cardiac opto-epigenetics with HDAC inhibitors
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Alejandro Villagra, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

Predisposition to disease and reaction to drugs only partially depend on our
genetic code. The organization, packing and subtle dynamic interactions of the
DNA in the cell nucleus can profoundly modify gene expression and affect human
health. The DNA packing and dynamics can be altered by factors and molecules
known as epigenetic modifiers of gene expression and are of great interest in
oncology and cardiology. The overall goal in this EFRI project is to obtain
better understanding of the action of the dynamic chromatin modifiers in heart
cells to inspire new therapies at the intersection of oncology and cardiology
and help develop safer and more effective drugs. The team will deploy new
optical techniques and light-sensitive tools to address this challenge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) represent a class
of powerful chromatin modifiers. Active development of HDACi as therapeutic
agents has yielded over 500 small molecules, currently at different stages of
clinical trials. The team will leverage a key feature of HDAC-mediated control
of the chromatin structure, namely its fast dynamics and reversibility compared
to other repressive chromatin regulators. They will develop a new framework and
technology for linking epigenetic modulation to phenotype, and apply it to human
stem-cell-derived cardiomyocytes subjected to environmental stressors.
Photoswitchable small molecules (HDACi) and patterned light are used to imprint
a dynamic epigenetic modification in time-space. Optically-gated high-pressure
freezing will temporally-resolved precise registration of the immediate HDACi-
mediated chromatin modulation, imaged by electron microscopy. Documenting the
sequence of events, triggered by the epigenetic master-regulators of cell
function, will have a broad impact for fundamental understanding of biological
function, namely how does the genome re-arrangement link to phenotype under
different stressors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.