* 1830811
* Research Initiation: Understanding the Impact of Engineering Faculty's Mindset on Instructional Practice, Learning Environment, and Teacher Authenticity
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Fredericka Brown, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 192,183.00

Recently, researchers in the field of engineering have begun to turn toward
understanding how an inclusive education model can help engineering programs
increase the number of students that are retained and graduated from their
undergraduate engineering programs. Previous research studies have demonstrated
that educators' beliefs about student abilities matter for student success.
Research has also shown that effective teaching methods and learning
environments can facilitate authentic learning experiences in which students are
actively engage, seek deeper meaning, understanding, and real-life applications
of the course material. This has been linked to higher student test scores,
retention, and graduation rates. What has been investigated to a lesser extent
is how the beliefs of faculty members influence teaching methods, learning
environments, and teacher genuineness. Some recent studies consider how faculty
instructional choices and interactions transform engineering education
environments into one that is more inclusive. Characterizing the correlation
between faculty members' belief regarding academic abilities and teaching
methods, learning environment, and teacher genuineness can broaden our
understanding of inclusive teaching practices within undergraduate engineering
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study is grounded in the construct of fixed
verse growth mindset as defined by Carol S. Dweck. Individuals with a fixed
mindset attribute intelligence to fixed traits and those with a growth mindset
attribute intelligence to learning, effort, training, and practice.
Specifically, our research will explore the overall research question: How does
the faculty mindset impact instructional practice, learning environments, and
teacher authenticity? In this study, faculty mindset is defined as faculty views
of student intelligence. The study investigated how the way faculty views of
student intelligence can foster a climate and culture of inclusivity and
diversity. Understanding these relationships can have implications in terms of
identifying potential barriers to success of students from a variety of
backgrounds, learning styles, and abilities. This study will lay the foundation
to inform improvements in engineering teaching and learning by broadening the
engineering education research agenda to include growth mindsets that translate
from engineering faculty to students. This research will illuminate strategies
to foster a climate and culture of inclusivity and diversity that will improve
teaching and learning in engineering to positively impact all student
populations, including those traditionally underrepresented in engineering. The
results of the study will produce recommendations for faculty, student support
programs, and administrators who can directly implement new approaches to
engineering pedagogy and learning strategies that improve academic achievement,
engagement, and broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.