* 1830121
* Connections between Advanced and Secondary Mathematics: Exploring the Impact of Abstract Algebra on the Teaching and Learning of Secondary Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Erin Baldinger, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Karen Keene
* 12/31/2019
* USD 94,952.00

This conference project will bring together a diverse group of scholars and
practitioners interested in studying the connections between abstract algebra as
studied at the university level and the abstract algebra used by teachers in
K-12 mathematics. Recent policy documents advocate for including advanced topics
such as abstract algebra as a fundamental part of secondary teacher preparation,
and a large majority of schools require students to take abstract algebra.
Understanding the implications of such a requirement is imperative to improving
secondary mathematics education. This conference will gather together people
interested in this topic by providing a common space that cuts across
communities (e.g., teaching institutions, research institutions, teacher
educators), an opportunity not typically offered by established conferences and
meetings. Through the dedicated working groups at the conference, all attendees
will make progress on research and professional development that will directly
contribute to advancing knowledge around the role of connections between
advanced and secondary mathematics (particularly abstract algebra) in the
preparation of teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will meet three
objectives. The first objective will be to share current research on
mathematical connections between advanced and secondary mathematics, focusing
specifically on abstract algebra. The second objective will be to develop plans
for research and/or professional development to expand current knowledge on
connections between advanced and school mathematics, so that attendees can take
concrete steps to move research forward. The third objective will be to provide
a space for mathematicians, mathematics educators, and other stakeholders to
discuss their work and develop a common vision for future directions. In
particular, opportunities will be provided to look across research and practice,
name common goals, and elaborate a trajectory for researching and supporting the
needs of secondary school teachers to understand and use abstract algebra in
their teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.