* 1830168
* U.S. GEOTRACES Pacific Meridional Transect: Measurements of Actinium-227 to Trace Solute Transport
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Douglas Hammond, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2022
* USD 138,829.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and their isotopes in the oceans. This
project will support the measurement of the naturally occurring radioisotope
actinium-227 (Ac-227) in water samples from the 2018 U.S. GEOTRACES expedition
in the Pacific Ocean, running south from Alaska to Tahiti. In addition, the
investigators plan to analyze lead-210 and actinium-227 in sediment cores
collected by the project, in order to constrain the source of Ac-227 to the
water from bottom sediments. The value of measuring Ac-227 in the water column,
particularly if the bottom source function is known, lies in the potential to
use it to measure rates of mixing and transport of the water. These transport
estimates can then be applied to understand the distributions of other trace
elements measured on the expedition. The project would support a graduate
student, several undergraduates, and a high school student, as well as outreach
to local veterans groups encouraging their participation in STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite having a half-life (22 years) that is
well suited for the study of both vertical and lateral transport in the deep
ocean, few Ac-227 measurements have been made in the deep sea. Recent advances
in instrumentation facilitate this analysis, and the synergy provided by the
GEOTRACES program will provide an ideal opportunity to obtain additional data.
In addition, Ac-227 will be of value in defining the spatial variability of
mixing rates across a broad reach of the central Pacific, particularly when
combined with estimates based on Ra-228 (6 year half-life) distribution, a
tracer field that a collaborating GEOTRACES program will determine. By using
multiple tracers with different half-lives, influences of mixing and advection
may be distinguished, allowing a more complete understanding of the deep Pacific
dynamics. These transport estimates can then be applied to concentration fields
of other solutes, including metals and nutrients, but will be of particular
importance for alkalinity and silicic acid, which should have strong benthic
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.