* 1830705
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Behavioral and Environmental Adaptation in Alaska and the Yukon
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Brian Stewart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 24,605.00

Homo sapiens have successfully colonized the world's most inhospitable regions
due in large part to the species' capacity to rapidly adjust behavior in
response to changing circumstances. This project aims determine how specific
conditions ultimately contributed to past shifts in technology, trade, and diet
to build on previous research documenting the extent of human flexibility and
resilience. What factors propel important changes to hunter-gatherer subsistence
in particularly marginal environments? An archaeological perspective provides a
singular opportunity to track the complex relationship between human behavior
and shifting external social or climatic conditions by integrating data that
spans centuries, hundreds of square miles, and multiple disciplines. Where
previous scholarship has focused on the human-environment relationship at
distant periods in prehistory or in large-scale societies, few researchers have
investigated the causes of recent, well-documented behavioral changes in hunter-
gatherers. Incorporating Athabaskan perspectives and engaging Alaskan high-
schoolers, this research aims to isolate the driving factors behind a clear and
dramatic behavioral shift and concomitant migratory event in the recent pre-
Columbian history of Subarctic North America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University
of Michigan doctoral student Briana Doering will study human-environment
relationships by evaluating how hunter-gatherers navigate risk in marginal
environments. The work will be conducted in association with researchers from
the University of Alaska Fairbanks, Colorado State University, and the
University of Arizona. Specifically, this collaborative project will evaluate
whether a massive volcanic eruption or population growth resulted in wide-scale
shifts in Subarctic hunter-gatherer technology, diet, and trade, and an ultimate
southward migration. To explain these behavioral changes, the research team will
conduct excavations at four archaeological sites in central Alaska in
consultation and collaboration with the descendant Athabaskan community, and
study the recovered artifacts using standard statistical analyses and novel
geochemical techniques. These material results will then be related to extensive
archaeological, climatic, and ecological data from previous investigations in
Alaska and Canada with a regional geospatial analysis. This comparative
perspective combines uniquely fine-grained social and environmental data from
late prehistoric Subarctic archaeological sites to demonstrate the enduring
relationship between humans, their environment, and the material traces of human
existence at both local and regional scales. Therefore, the results of this
broadly applicable research can promote an understanding of hunter-gatherer
behavior at other periods and in other regions where only coarse-grained,
regional datasets are available. This concerted research will increase our
understanding of human resilience generally and Athabaskan subsistence
traditions specifically by comparing the knowledge of the descendant community,
archaeological materials, and a wealth of fine-grained environmental data to
elucidate human behavior in the past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.