* 1830120
* Collaborative Research: Development and Evaluation of a Service-Learning Focused Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Christopher Bauer, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2022
* USD 117,405.00

This project will examine the value of a fully integrated service-learning-
oriented chemistry curriculum. Specifically, this project will focus on
students' gains as they engage in service-learning throughout their
undergraduate chemistry curriculum. Service-learning provides students with
opportunities for authentic engagement with their communities, and there is
evidence that it can lead to increased student confidence and competence in the
sciences. Project objectives include: 1) developing and implementing a fully
integrated, service-learning-oriented chemistry curriculum at Saint Joseph's
College; 2) evaluating the specific benefits of this curriculum as students
build on their evolving roles as community-engaged scientists; and 3) creating
and disseminating a new service-learning-oriented chemistry instructional model
called "Chemistry for the Community." The project not only has the potential to
enhance the chemistry curriculum at Saint Joseph's College, but could also
provide benefits to community partners involved in the project. These partners
include younger students in K-12 classes who will have increased opportunities
to actively engage in STEM activities that may foster interest and self-
confidence in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and
disseminate the Chemistry for the Community model based on information gained
through the implementation of the multi-year curriculum at Saint Joseph's
College. Toward this end, the project will generate new knowledge about service
learning and its advantages using the following methodologies. First, the
implementation will include a control vs. treatment group assessment in the
first year. Second, multi-year implementation will enable rigorous
quantification of the accrued benefits across multiple semesters. Third, the use
of SPIRES (Self-determination, Purpose, Identity, and Engagement in Science) as
an assessment tool will provide new knowledge regarding scientific identity and
professional disposition in the service learning modality. Finally, a focused,
sequential series of dissemination platforms (online social networks, symposium,
and workshop) will help other institutions implement Chemistry for the
Community, while materials developed through this project will be made available
via a dedicated project website to reach institutions beyond those directly
participating in the dissemination activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.