* 1830728
* Scattered Light imaging of YSOs: Probing the Fundamental Stages of Planet Formation
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* John Monnier, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2022
* USD 616,283.00

Planets and stars form at the same time in warm, dusty disks surrounding the
stars. Using 80 hours of observing time on the 8-meter telescope Gemini South in
Chile with the Gemini Planet Imager instrument, these investigators will image
the structure in a dust disk with very high resolution. As planets form and
grow, disks develop spiral arms, gaps, and eventually hollow cavities --
signposts of planet formation. The investigators will study a sample of 30 dust
disks covering all stages of the formation of planets. They will follow-up with
telescopic instruments covering other observable traits of the stars and disks.
The basic stages of planet formation can be determined structurally within the
dust disks around the sample stars. This project supports the mission of the NSF
by promoting our understanding of the stages of planet formation within dust
disks around other stars. The lead investigator will continue his partnership
with the Ann Arbor Hands-on Museum to reach out to the often-overlooked rural
population of Michigan through traveling astronomical science
exhibits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gemini Planet Imager (GPI) instrument can
image dust structure with spatial resolution as small as 6 AU by exploiting
extreme adaptive optics, coronagraphy, and a differential polarization mode. The
proposed observational survey of 30 disks draws evenly from a sample of
intermediate-mass young stellar objects spanning all the known stages of planet
formation. Follow-up using the mm-wave and other visible/IR high-contrast
instruments will be pursued as part of the proposed research plan. By linking
newly discovered disk structures with stellar ages, spectral types, and the disk
spectral energy distributions for a statistically-significant number of objects,
the fundamental stages of planet formation can be determined both
morphologically and then quantitatively through the proposed radiative transfer
and hydrodynamical modeling to estimate disk masses, disk scale heights, dust
sizes, and the radii of gaps and other structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.