* 1830686
* NRI: FND: Life-Long Learning for Motion Planning by Robots in Human Populated Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Christoffer Heckman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 12/31/2022
* USD 773,094.00

Long-term, safe interaction in human-populated environments is essential to the
widespread adoption and continued deployment of robotics. Accordingly, an
important aspect of behaving safely is the ability to use one's observations and
past experiences to set realistic expectations about others' behaviors,
operating in such a way that minimizes the risk of failure or causing harm. Just
as humans are capable of adapting their behavior to changing circumstances and
understanding possible failures, robots must similarly understand risks and
adapt their behaviors to safely complete tasks in densely populated or dynamic
environments. To enable these capabilities, this project will develop methods to
provide mobile robots with the ability to build their own models of activity-
based risk and human behaviors, using them to mitigate dangerous or risk-prone
scenarios in the presence of uncertainty. These methods are broadly applicable
across service robots, manufacturing robots, and close-quarters collaborative
robots, enabling the effective and safe integration of such systems into human
environments that have otherwise been inaccessible for enhancement or
improvement through robotic automation. By contributing toward making such
applications possible, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy
and society at large, while simultaneously contributing to the competitiveness
of U.S. manufacturing on grounds of safety and efficiency through advanced and
flexible automation. This work involves contributions from many complementary
areas of research, including robotics, human factors, manufacturing, and
computer science through both academic and industry collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address challenges in safe, life-long learning as
applied to long-term robot operation, this research focuses on the development
of novel algorithms for self-supervised human-aware motion planning and context-
aware trajectory optimization. Advancing the state-of-the-art in self-supervised
learning through self-determined curriculum development and learning through
experiences collected during live deployments, the work will additionally
develop new transfer learning techniques to generalize experiences and
behavioral models across contexts. Robots incorporating these research products
will be able to learn to anticipate and mitigate risks and potential failure
modes during task execution in uncertain environments by leveraging their own
self-collected knowledge. This award targets fundamental advances in social
navigation and task execution by integrating human motion modeling and robot
motion planning with contextual understanding, achieving applicable and real-
world grounded results through long-term mobile robot deployments in public
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.