* 1830138
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Symposium at the Tenth International Conference on the Theory and Application of Diagrams
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Richard Burns, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2019
* USD 12,550.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) for approximately 5
graduate students from the United States, along with a panel of distinguished
research faculty mentors. The event will take place in conjunction with (and on
the first day of) the Tenth International Conference on the Theory and
Application of Diagrams (DIAGRAMS 2018), to be held June 18-22, 2018, at
Edinburgh Napier University, UK, and which will be co-located with the 23rd
International&lt;br/&gt;Conference on Conceptual Structures. Diagrams are wide-
ranging and open-ended representations that include sketches, drawings, charts,
pictures, 2D and 3D geometric models, and maps. They are a vital tool in human
communication in areas such as art and science, as well as commerce and
industry. A better understanding of how effective diagrams can be generated and
used has the potential to produce transformative advances in these areas.
DIAGRAMS is the only conference series that provides a forum for all aspects of
research on the theory and application of diagrams. It is a bi-annual,
international and interdisciplinary event whose goals are to present and discuss
(a) state-of-the-art research on computational, cognitive and socio-cultural
theories, models and techniques of reasoning with diagrammatic representations,
and (b) cutting-edge intelligent and interactive information technologies for
using diagrammatic representations in supporting human reasoning. Research
topics include understanding diagrammatic reasoning in humans, understanding the
use of diagrammatic representation for communication, developing techniques for
automated diagrammatic reasoning, and designing tools for use of diagrammatic
representations. The conference series is overseen by the DIAGRAMS Steering
Committee with a rotating membership; more information is available at the
conference website http://www.diagrams-conference.org/2018/. DIAGRAMS 2018 will
significantly increase our understanding of diagrammatic reasoning in humans and
machines, and will add momentum to the development of new information
technologies for the use of diagrammatic representations in support of human
reasoning. The conference will help develop human research capital by enabling
interactions between senior and junior researchers and by catalyzing new
collaborations. The Doctoral Consortium will increase the exposure and
visibility of young graduate student researchers in these areas, and help train
them by providing early input from senior researchers in the field in an
interactive and constructive environment. The social network among this next
generation of researchers, and the relationships with senior researchers,
created by the workshop will play a critical role in their enculturation into
the profession. Diversity of the selected students is a goal of the organizers,
who will be proactive in an effort to ensure that both students and faculty are
a diverse group across multiple dimensions including nationality, scientific
discipline and gender. To further assure diversity, only one student will be
selected from each educational institution, with preference given to students
from underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of the
DIAGRAMS 2018 Doctoral Consortium is to increase the exposure and visibility of
young graduate student researchers in these areas. The workshop will be a
research-focused day-long meeting that affords participants an opportunity to
present their work and get feedback from established researchers in the field,
who will be present to comment on the young researchers' presentations in an
informal and constructive environment. Each invited participant will have
approximately half an hour for presentation of their research, that may include
a short demonstration if appropriate, and which will be followed by discussion
and critiquing. For some students, this may be their first opportunity to give a
research talk outside their home institutions. Therefore, each student will be
assigned a mentor (selected from the Program Committee), who will preview the
student's presentation and offer suggestions for improvement as well as provide
sample questions that may arise during the discussion. The Doctoral Consortium
is open for attendance to all conference registrants, and summaries of the
student presentations will be available on the conference
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.