* 1830498
* NRI: FND: Rapid Operator Awareness via Mobile Robotics (ROAMR), Customizable Human Safety using Mobile and Wearable Co-Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Aaron Young, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 497,946.00

Human operators in construction sites, disaster zones, and other rapidly
changing environments risk injury from collisions with moving machinery and
falling components. The risk of collisions can reduce human performance by
forcing them to work very slowly and keep track of multiple situations
simultaneously. This project aims to explore how teams of co-robots can improve
human safety by detecting potential collisions that the humans may not be aware
of, alerting them to the danger, and helping them move away from the danger. The
project will develop methods for communicating potential threats to human
operators via a human-worn exoskeleton, which can also assist the people in
moving to safety as rapidly as possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will
augment human awareness, performance, and safety in unstructured, outdoor, and
varying environments, where dynamic objects pose threats of imminent, unnoticed
collision. Specifically, the project will develop a new safety architecture
where mobile systems rapidly detect collisions and plan a safe response, a
wearable exoskeleton communicates the situation to the human, and the
exoskeleton helps to achieve a safe response. The project will focus on 1)
developing and characterizing a physical "language" for wearable co-robots to
provide situational awareness based on visual displays, audio guidance, vibro-
tactile sensations, and physical signals from the exoskeleton actuators; 2)
investigating how wearable sensing can infer human motions using machine
learning to predict human behavior by accounting for automated obstacle
avoidance plans, human motion strategies, and measurements of joint kinematics,
ground contact forces, and muscle activation; and 3) researching how a wearable
exoskeleton can accelerate safe responses in real-time by using targeted
exoskeleton torques to enhance propulsive forces and increase speed of response
by reducing the apparent inertia of the limbs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.