* 1830718
* Belmont Forum Food-Water-Energy Nexus: Integrated analysis and modeling for the management of sustainable urban Food Water Energy Resources
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Nada Assaf-Anid, New York Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 12/31/2022
* USD 374,507.00

Many cities across the globe are facing difficult challenges managing their
food, water and energy systems. The challenges stem from the fact that the
issues of food, water and energy are often tightly connected with each other,
not only locally but also globally. This is known as the Food-Water-Energy (FWE)
nexus. An effective solution to a local water problem may cause new local
problems with food or energy, or cause new water problems at the global level.
On a local scale, it is difficult to anticipate whether solutions to one issue
in the nexus are sustainable across food, water and energy systems, both at the
local and the global scale. Innovative solutions that encompass the nexus are
particularly important to enable cities to better manage their food, water and
energy systems and understand the benefits and tradeoffs for different
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a 29-country initiative
through the joint Belmont Forum- Joint Programming Initiative (JPI) Urban
Europe. The Sustainable Urbanization Global Initiative (SUGI)/Food-Water-Energy
Nexus is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that
bring together the fragmented research and expertise across the globe to find
innovative solutions to the Food-Water-Energy Nexus challenge. The call seeks to
develop more resilient, applied urban solutions to benefit a much wider range of
stakeholders. The rapid urbanization of the world's population underscores the
importance of this focus. International partners were invited to develop
solutions for this challenge. The funds requested will be used to support U.S.
participants to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries and that bring together natural scientists,
social scientists and research users (e.g., civil society, NGOs, and industry).
Participants from other countries are funded through their national funding
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop a shared
urban data and modeling framework to help cities analyze and characterize FWE
systems and nexus interrelationships. The framework will utilize a common urban
3D data model that will be shaped by urban stakeholder requirements and be
applicable to regions and cities in Europe and the United States. This framework
will help stakeholders identify, quantify and visualize cross-sectoral and
cross-media impacts to FWE systems from various decisions -- from urban
development strategies to FEW infrastructure investments. The results will
provide data that can help cities across the globe sustainably provide energy,
water and food supplies under healthy and economically productive
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.