* 1830390
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Interactive and collaborative robot-assisted emergency evacuations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Minghui Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 990,462.00

Many emergencies require people to evacuate a building quickly. During an
emergency, evacuees must make quick decisions, so they tend to rely on default
decision making that may put them at risk, such as exiting the way they entered,
following a crowd, or sheltering in place. When a crowd attempts to exit through
a single exit, choke points and crowd congestion may impede the safe flow of
evacuees, potentially resulting in a stampede of people and the loss of human
lives. Mobile robots are increasingly being deployed as assistants on city
streets and in hotels, shopping centers and hospitals. The future ubiquity of
these systems offers an opportunity to change how people are evacuated from
dangerous situations. In particular, when compared with traditional emergency
infrastructure, such as fire alarms and smoke detectors, mobile robots can
achieve better situation awareness and use this information to expedite
evacuation and enhance safety. Additionally, mobile robots can be used in risky
and life-threatening situations, such as chemical spills or active shooter
scenarios, which present dangers to human first responders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to derive a scalable design framework
and develop an embodied multi-robot evacuation system where multiple mobile
robots, originally tasked for different purposes, serve as emergency evacuation
first responders leading people to safety. In particular, multiple mobile robots
efficiently coordinate with each other and actively interact with evacuees to
maximize their egress. The project significantly contributes to the
understanding of how people respond to a robots' directions and authoritative
commands. Furthermore, the project implements these findings and demonstrates
their effectiveness using real-world experiments with human subjects. Beyond
emergency evacuation, the research findings can be extended to many other
related areas, especially those involving cooperative robot teams that are
embodied in an uncertain and dynamic physical world with the need to actively
interact with humans; e.g., battlefield, law enforcement, urban transportation
systems, manufacturing systems, rehabilitation and health
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.