* 1830511
* LEAP-HI: Embedding Regional Hurricane Risk Management in the Life of a Community: A Computational Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jamie Kruse, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,015,619.00

The effort in this Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and
Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) award provides a scientific framework for evaluating
the risks of hurricanes to residential communities and public policies to manage
them. Disaster losses in the United States continue to grow despite a wealth of
interdisciplinary knowledge and many interventions intended to minimize their
effects. A breakthrough in disaster risk reduction requires an approach that
views disasters not as abnormal events, but as a regular part of a community's
evolution and that recognizes that disaster risk management is inextricably
interwoven with the normal activities of everyday life. A novel computational
modeling framework will implement this approach to understand escalating
regional natural disaster risks and support the design of public policy
interventions to address them. The system-wide analysis framework will consider
the perspectives of and interactions among multiple key stakeholders
(government, primary insurers, and homeowners), multiple interventions (home
strengthening, insurance, land use planning), and secondary factors that affect
risk. The framework will directly support management of the country's natural
disaster risk and promise long-term societal benefits through improved quality
of life and economic competitiveness. Collaboration with representatives of the
home building and insurance industries and relevant government agencies will
help ensure practical results and wide dissemination. Summer internships for
William A. Anderson Fund Graduate Student Fellows, all scholars from
underrepresented groups, will help broaden participation in disaster research
and practice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Multistakeholder Disaster Risk
Management (MDRM) computational framework will include seven interacting
mathematical models representing physically-based simulations of damage, losses,
and ways to strengthen homes; decision-making by each main stakeholder type
(government, primary insurers, and homeowners) including oligopolistic
competition among insurers; and the changing building inventory and regional
economy that provide the context. It will build on an existing framework that
the investigators have developed, expanding it through the integration of six
tasks: (1) Identify a broad range of government interventions, including both
risk-focused and risk-influential actions; (2) Develop a new empirically-based
homeowner decision model that considers the process by which homeowners initiate
risk-focused and risk-influential decisions; (3) Develop a dynamic model of the
insurance market; (4) Develop a dynamic building inventory model; (5) Develop a
dynamic regional economic model that interacts with the building inventory; and
(6) Conduct a full-scale case study for hurricanes in North Carolina. This
project promises improved understanding of the creation and management of
regional natural disaster risk by, for the first time, uniting the
conceptualization of disasters as part of the normal life of a community with
the power of quantitative, dynamic engineering modeling of risk, decision-
making, and economics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.