* 1830008
* PARTIAL SUPPORT OF THE CONDENSED MATTER AND MATERIAL RESEARCH COMMITTEE
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 08/31/2019
* USD 70,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project provides one-year partial
support for the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine's
("National Academies") Condensed Matter and Materials Research Committee
(CMMRC). CMMRC's impact goes beyond the confines of the condensed matter and
materials research communities. First, these activities engage a group of
leading scientists from across the subfields of condensed matter and materials
science in joint deliberations and provide a learning environment for that body
regarding the public-policy process for science and the position of those fields
in the broader context of the physical sciences. Second, CMMRC activities lead
to an improved understanding of condensed matter and materials science by the
broader scientific and policy-making communities. By holding focused sessions
and initiating studies, CMMRC will continue to educate researchers, policy
makers, and the general public about advances in condensed matter and materials
science and their beneficial impact in other fields of science and technology
and for society, in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project provides one-year partial support for the
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine"s ("National
Academies") Condensed Matter and Materials Research Committee (CMMRC). The CMMRC
consists of members drawn from universities, industry, and government
laboratories, with expertise intended to cover the breadth of the condensed
matter and materials research fields. The overarching guidelines of CMMRC
include the following objectives: (1) to respond to requests for technical
information and assistance, both from within the National Academies and from
outside federal research agencies; (2) to initiate and oversee ad hoc studies in
these fields and their multidisciplinary connections to other fields of science
and technology; (3) to serve as long-term stewards for studies initiated under
CMMRC's direction; (4) to act as an educational resource for the condensed
matter and materials research communities and the agencies that support them;
and (5) to provide a forum for discussion among condensed matter and materials
scientists and Washington D.C. policymakers. To carry out those objectives,
CMMRC meets on a semi-annual basis and between those meetings, conducts its
business through telephone conferences. During the one-year period covered by
this proposal, CMMRC will devote time to working with sponsors in developing a
set of appropriate activities for proposal for the next 3-year
renewal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.