* 1830764
* EAGER: Tuning the collective phenomena in atomically thin metals by electrostatic doping
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Kin Fai Mak, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Germano Iannacchione
* 11/30/2018
* USD 48,071.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Two dimensional materials are composed of
layers of atoms that are only a few atoms thick. These materials, known as van
der Waals (vdW) materials, have strong interactions between the atoms in the
layer and weak interactions to neighboring layers. This leads to unique
electrical and optical properties which can be exploited for the next generation
of electronic devices. This project will develop new sample preparation and
device fabrication techniques that will allow us to probe the unique electronic
and optical properties of these materials. This program will also provide
exceptional opportunities for training of graduate students, who will gain
first-hand knowledge of forefront research on 2D materials and research in a
national lab through visits to the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory in
Tallahassee, FL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in the development of atomically
thin layers of van der Waals (vdW) materials have opened up many new research
opportunities. Examples include the unique electrical and optical properties of
massless electrons in graphene and Berry curvature effects in monolayer
semiconductor transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). These properties are,
however, mostly associated with independent particle phenomena. This project
will focus on collective quantum phenomena in atomically thin TMDs and will
explore the possibility of tuning the charge-density-wave (CDW) order and
superconductivity in a model two-dimensional (2D) TMD metal NbSe2 by carrier
density modulation through ionic liquid gating. The study will be enabled by
development of new sample preparation and device fabrication methods and will be
supported by combined optical and transport probes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.