* 1830957
* EFRI CEE : Engineering Technologies to Determine Causal Relationships Between Chromatin Structure and Gene Regulation
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Brenton Hoffman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,999,969.00

The structure of the human genome inside of a living cell is precisely and
dynamically controlled to determine the level of each gene in different cell
types, in response to environmental stimuli, and in various disease conditions.
The chemical modification and three-dimensional folding of our DNA plays an even
greater role than our inherited genetics in human development, disease
progression, and drug response. There have been tremendous advances in mapping
genome sequence and structure but our understanding of the relationship between
genome structure and function is relatively poor. The objective of this proposal
is to cross interdisciplinary boundaries to develop the necessary technologies
to accurately predict, quantitatively monitor, and deterministically program
genome structure to generate improved disease models that will catalyze
transformative drug development. The team will also develop educational programs
to inspire the next generation of scientists in this emerging
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Innovative new technologies, including
reporters of dynamic molecular structure and CRISPR/Cas9-based epigenome
editing, provide a unique opportunity to monitor and perturb epigenetic states
that govern chromatin structure. The team will generate new molecular tools for
monitoring changes to epigenetic states in live cells using FRET-based
nanosensors that report on structural changes to chromatin structure and
mechanics in response to targeted perturbations by CRISPR/Cas9-based epigenome
editing. This data will inform molecular models that predict the effect of
epigenetic changes on chromatin structure and consequent changes in gene
expression. These technologies and models will be validated in the context of
human tumor models to illuminate the relationship between chromatin structure
and cancer progression. Collectively, this will enable the development of new
technologies and models that are broadly useful for disease modeling and drug
screening.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.