* 1830812
* Research Initiation: Collaborative Research: Understanding pedagogically motivating factors for under-represented and non-traditional students in an engineering classroom
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kimberly Cook-Chennault, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2022
* USD 182,185.00

With the increased use of online educational lessons to complement face-to-face
instruction in universities and colleges nationwide, it will be important to
understand how these forms of instructional aids help students to engage, garner
interest in, and excel in their courses. In the areas of science, technology,
engineering, and math, little is known about how these electronic instructional
tools can be designed to motivate students to engage with concepts that are
fundamental, yet difficult to master. In particular, we aim to explore how these
types of instructional aids influence the engagement and interest of students
from underrepresented groups and women in the field of engineering. Special
focus will be given to courses and online instructional aids for topics within
engineering where drop-out rates are known to be high among students (e.g.,
engineering statics). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One unique element of this work is
that research methods in fields like neuromarketing will be incorporated into
this study where biometric responses will be observed as students engage with
online engineering instructional aids. Biometric responses are physiological
characteristics of the human body such as eye tracking and skin conductance. The
study will explore what motivated or demotivated underrepresented populations to
persist in using the instructional aid and how their experience with these
educational electronic tools influence the motivations towards continuing in the
field of engineering. A broader impact of this work is that by understanding how
online instructional aids engage and motivate students, we can understand how to
better design electronic tools and apps that will enable a wider range of
students to pursue and succeed in engineering. The intellectual merit of this
exploratory, mixed-method multi-modal research study is to understand the
intertwined mechanisms (i.e. the motivational, affective, attentive, and
physiological influences) of underrepresented and non-traditional women in
engineering as they engage in online instructional aids and tools. In addition,
this work will inform the Technological Acceptance Model to better understand
and measure the associations between these constructs. While the model aims to
understand the influence of extrinsic motivators such perceived usefulness and
ease of use of specific technologies that determine an individual's behavior or
choice to use/benefit from a specific technology; it does not meaningfully allow
for contextual analysis of subgroups within engineering such as gender,
race/ethnicity and age, as well as and their intersectionality within
engineering. This exploratory work will help advance the knowledge-base in
engineering education around the development of engineering-specific theories
and pedagogy for educational electronic learning tools with emphasis on
understanding the mechanisms that intersectionality plays in their acceptance,
learning and engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.