* 1830836
* Research Initiation: Reimagining Engineering Societies and Organizations to Support Participation of Women and Underrepresented Minority Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Harriet Nembhard, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Student participation in disciplinary Engineering Societies and Organizations
have long been a significant facet of co-curricular activities. The co-
curricular experiences are often a gateway to much good such as career
placement, international travel, and the general accrual of social and cultural
capital in engineering contexts. Successful students seem to "find their way"
and come to belong as members of the organization and ultimately members of a
discipline. But these opportunities are not always available in an equitable
manner. And although roughly one third of all engineering students participate
in these organizations, women and underrepresented minority students face a
number of unique challenges regarding their involvement in them. Put
differently, it may be fair to say that the same students who stand to gain the
most from participating in these Engineering Societies and Organizations are the
very students who participate in them at the lowest levels. Therefore, it is
critical that stakeholders in student success are equipped with the knowledge
and skills needed to enact and sustain positive change and inclusive excellence
in these Engineering Societies and Organizations. This project therefore
addresses two key aims. First, this work explores issues surrounding
participation of women and underrepresented minority students in Engineering
Societies and Organizations. Gaining a deeper understanding of the way
individuals interact with and come to belong within an organization can mitigate
barriers to participation and engagement with the profession. Second, this
project introduces the Principal Investigator into the field of engineering
education research, catalyzing a new and innovative research enterprise at the
intersection of student retention, professional development, and organizational
change. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project offers a holistic view of the
landscape of Engineering Societies and Organizations as well as an in-depth
understanding of the learning that takes place within these organizations and
how that supports or hinders student participation and belonging. To meet the
research aim, an embedded case study design is used to investigate the
interactions between student perceptions of engineering societies and
organizations, the practices and policies of those organizations, and the
broader institutional context of the school of Mechanical, Industrial, and
Manufacturing Engineering at Oregon State University. The research takes places
over two years, with Year 1 designed to explore student perspectives through
interviews and surveys while honing the in-depth data collection approach
employed in Year 2. Data collection in Year 2 represents a "deep dive" approach,
which entails conducting qualitative interviews with faculty advisors and
student members; collecting documents and artifacts relevant to given
organizational practices and culture (i.e., ways of thinking, knowing, and
doing); and conducting ethnographically-informed observations of meetings and
events. While the case study methodology offers a rich, nuanced understanding of
ecosystem at the research site, the mentoring aim runs parallel to the research,
with co-PIs providing scaffolded learning opportunities with a range of
qualitative methods. To then meet the mentoring aim, this project leverages a
theoretical model of mentoring in which professional development is considered
along both Career and Psychosocial dimensions. The project team leverages this
model to introduce the Principal Investigator to the field of engineering
education, provide support in the conduct of innovative research, and create a
network of educators invested in cultivating inclusive climates in co-curricular
spaces in engineering. Throughout the project, the Principal Investigator gains
exposure to and experience with rigorous engineering education methodologies
while also receiving guidance and mentoring regarding ways to apply findings in
practice. Taken together, this project enhances understanding of institutional
and organizational approaches to broadening participation in ESOs, and empowers
a new research enterprise to drive positive educational change through the
sustained practice of engineering education research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.