* 1830895
* Student Travel Support for the International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security and Trust (HOST)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Ryan Kastner, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 04/30/2019
* USD 18,000.00

Many computing infrastructures on which we depend rely on the hardware being
secure and trustworthy. Hardware is at the most fundamental abstraction level on
which software runs. Trusted hardware platforms comprise the backbone for
successful deployment and operation of these infrastructures. Research in recent
years shows that as tampering and reverse engineering mature in their
sophistication, the challenges in guaranteeing the trust and security of these
components also grow. The International Symposium on Hardware-Oriented Security
and Trust (HOST) aims to continue its role as a premiere forum that invites
novel solutions to address these challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this proposed activity includes professional development
for undergraduate and graduate students as well as continued growth of the
symposium. Preparation has begun for HOST 2018 to be held in the Washington, DC
Metro Area. This project provides opportunities for 36 students to receive
travel support (i.e., registration, transportation, and lodging) to attend HOST
2018. Their attendance enables them to learn about the latest tools, design
methods, architectures, circuits, and novel applications of secure hardware.
&lt;br/&gt;Technical contributions from previous symposia have covered topics
such as: (1) counterfeit detection and avoidance, (2) side channel analysis and
fault analysis, (3) hardware architectures for cryptography, and (4) physically
unclonable functions (PUFs). The travel grants would encourage more students to
consider a technical submission, participation in hardware demonstration to a
large diverse audience, or even to attend as a means to prepare for a technical
submission in future years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.