* 1830438
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Isotopic Assessment of Late Prehistoric Interregional Warfare in the Southcentral US
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* George Sabo, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 14,750.00

There is a great need to develop better methods to identify and quantify warfare
when it occurs without accompanying written documentation, and to consider
alternative explanations of data. The study of isotopes preserved in human
skeletal remains provide a valuable means to identify the geographic origins of
individuals or groups buried in archeological contexts suggesting warfare,
offering evidence that can corroborate other archaeological and biological
indicators (fortifications, village destruction, traumatic skeletal injury,
etc.). Even so, refinement of isotopic methods is required to improve the
confidence of results. Lead (Pb) is a toxic trace metal that affects the health
of biological organisms, but its composition can also indicate from where an
individual originates. Pb isotopes preserved in human tooth enamel provide a
signature, via food chain pathways, of the geographic area in which that
individual was born and grew up. This study will establish and demonstrate a new
method for biological sourcing, the biological available Pb method, which
compares the Pb isotopes of prehistoric human and non-migratory animal
populations to determine if humans found in the archaeological record of one
area are local or actually came from another region. This will aid researchers
who commonly question whether particular burials or mortuary treatments, such as
isolated skulls and mandibles, reflect special burial treatment of honored
ancestors or the disposal of dismembered enemies from other regions. This study
will test if late prehistoric Caddo communities in southwest Arkansas were
committing large-scale acts of violence against neighboring regions. Concurrent
archeological evidence of increased violence in the Southern Plains and the
Eastern Woodlands may reflect increasing tensions between regions.
Alternatively, unusual burial treatments often attributed to warfare might
indicate alternative practices involving transport of partial skeletal remains
for special burial at important regional centers. This study also serves the
practical purpose of determining cultural affiliation for the purposes of Native
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act compliance and to inform and
encourage feedback from descendant communities including the Caddo Nation of
Oklahoma. The study also has practical forensic applications for determining
points of geographic origin for human skeletal material recovered from multiple
present day/recent contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Samuelsen, under the
supervision of Dr. George Sabo III, will employ Pb and strontium (Sr) isotope
analysis to evaluate early lifetime locations for the remains of 352 individuals
represented in a skull-and-mandible cemetery (A.D. 1253-1399) at the Crenshaw
site in southwest Arkansas, as part of his dissertation research. This will be
accomplished through the creation of a comparative multi-state map of
biologically available Pb/Sr isotopic ratios from states surrounding Arkansas.
This map will be compared to Pb/Sr isotopic ratios from the human and animal
remains from Crenshaw and other southwest Arkansas sites. High resolution Pb and
Sr isotopes will be obtained using a multi-collector inductively coupled plasma
mass spectrometer (MC-ICP-MS) at the University of Arkansas. The resulting data,
whether indicating local or foreign origin, will illustrate how biological Pb
isotopes can be analyzed, how they can reveal the purpose behind specialized
burial treatments, and demonstrate how isotopes like Pb and Sr can help evaluate
the prevalence and extent of many ancient cultural practices including
interregional warfare and specialized mortuary
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.