* 1830392
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Predicting the Threat of Vector-Borne Illnesses Using Spatiotemporal Weather Patterns
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Xianyang Zhang, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 37,241.00

Vector-borne diseases affect virtually everyone on earth. Mosquitoes are the
most widely distributed disease vectors and are a serious threat to human life
and health. West Nile virus (WNV) is one of the mosquito-borne diseases for
which there is still no effective treatment; to date, the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention has reported over 40,000 cases across the United States.
Temperature and precipitation are the two most important weather variables that
affect mosquito populations and thus affect the WNV transmission cycle. The
mosquito infection rate (MIR) is considered an important mediator to study WNV
risk. Based on surveillance data for WNV in Illinois, this project aims to
develop new methodologies and algorithms to study WNV and MIR using weather and
environmental variables. Specifically, the investigators plan first to make
predictions of MIR and then characterize the spatial pattern of temperature and
precipitation to identify the risk level of WNV human illness and MIR. They will
also establish a WNV Index to provide a reliable and interpretable warning for
vector-borne disease risk. Finally, since mosquito-borne diseases are
particularly affected by rising temperatures, changing precipitation patterns,
and a higher frequency of extreme weather events, the project aims to both
quantitatively and qualitatively project the current risk to the future under
climate change. The research will foster fundamental statistical methodology
development as well as collaborations between statistics and public health.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be engaged in aspects of the scientific
research. The project will provide new results on the impact of climate change
on national security, of general interest and importance to the wider public and
policymakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods of this project include a
spatially-varying-coefficient model with functional weather covariates to make
predictions of MIR, as well as a multiple-testing approach to characterize the
spatial pattern of temperature and precipitation for ultimately classifying the
weather pattern into different risk levels with respect to WNV. The statistical
models and algorithms learned from the historical data will be applied to
downscaled future weather data to study the impact of climate change on WNV
human illness and MIR. The analyses will be based on massive data including WNV
human cases, MIR, current and future spatio-temporal stochastic weather
processes, land cover, and the length of daylight. The statistical methods used
in the project are not only effective for this WNV study but can be a general
methodology for a wide range of vector-borne diseases. The spatially-varying-
coefficient model with functional covariates takes the continuous and dynamic
influence of the retrospective weather on MIR into account while allowing the
relationship between MIR and weather and other environmental variables to vary
over a spatial domain. The characterization of the spatial weather pattern and
the establishment of WNV Index provide a new perspective to study and prevent
WNV risk. Compared to previous methods that evaluate the difference between two
spatio-temporal random fields as a whole, the multiple-testing approach in this
project can detect exactly where the differences occur. This feature is crucial
for regional risk detection. Quantifying the impact of climate change on vector-
borne diseases is essential to policymakers; the results of the project are
expected to provide a reliable resource for such
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.