* 1830893
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Programming Thermobiochemomechanical (TBCM) Multiplex Robot Gels
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Noah Cowan, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,016,000.00

This project aims to integrate sensing, computation, and actuation directly into
the body structure of a micrometer- to millimeter-scale soft robot, by creating
a new class of soft hydrogels that can be thermally and biochemically
programmed. This integration is critical for constructing autonomous robots that
can function in complex, real-world environments. This project seeks to develop
a comprehensive framework for the design, programming, validation, and
fabrication of these gel robots. The robots will respond to temperature and
biochemical cues from the environment, make decisions, and execute multistep
motion programs that will allow them to move in a desired direction. The project
will address fundamental scientific and engineering challenges in hydrogel
mechanics, biochemical sensing, path planning, and controls for continuum soft
robots, making it possible to efficiently design and manufacture the hardware
for gel robots and to program them with biochemical software. These robots will
have potential applications in marine, biological and medical environments,
including in vivo targeting and diagnostics in medical settings. The project
will also provide research opportunities to undergraduate and K-12 students,
including those from underrepresented groups, via new and established outreach
programs at Johns Hopkins University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to develop a framework for building a broad class of submillimeter-
scale thermobiochemomechanical (TBCM) C3 robots in the form of architected
hydrogels in which systems of chemical sensors, actuators, and computing devices
replace the electronic sensors, actuators, and controllers in traditional
robots. The research objectives of the project are to develop thermal and DNA
responsive hydrogels and utilize these materials with advanced patterning and
printing techniques to assemble robots that can respond to TBCM cues which are
of relevance to human environmental and physiological conditions. Hardware
design will be guided by a biomolecular software framework, mechanics based
computational and reduced-order control models to enable planning and sensory
feedback control. The broader impacts of this work include K-12 outreach
programs to foster participation in STEM, dissemination of the research in peer-
reviewed journals, dissemination of code and data and the development of new
educational materials for undergraduate and graduate
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.