* 1830123
* CAREER: Silicon-Based Electronic Arrays for Coherent Generation and Detection of Picosecond Pulses
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/31/2017,12/31/2020
* Aydin Babakhani, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Mohammod Ali
* 12/31/2020
* USD 252,446.00

The PI will build a research program to develop novel integrated circuits and
antennas that can generate high-power pulses with frequencies up to one
terahertz (THz), several hundred times higher than the frequency of today's
cellular networks. By exploiting the advantages of THz radiation, the proposed
research program can transform wireless communications, imaging, and
spectroscopic systems. THz communications systems will offer greater bandwidth
and will also track mobile receivers with better fault tolerance than competing
technologies with similar range and bandwidth, such as free space optical
communication. THz imaging systems can not only bolster homeland's security by
accurate detection of hidden objects and explosives, but also can prevent tens
of thousands of lives lost in car accidents every year by increasing the
accuracy of collision avoidance automotive radars. THz spectroscopy systems can
identify the species of gas molecules with high specificity and detect trace
quantities of those molecules with high sensitivity. The PI's long-term
educational goal is to inspire students at all levels to pursue careers in STEM
disciplines. Working with the Rice University Office of STEM Engagement to
provide research experience and internship opportunities for high-school
teachers from Houston Independent School District, the PI will assist teachers
with the development of their physics curriculum. The PI will work with the Rice
Center for Excellence & Equity to engage underrepresented minority students in
research and to provide summer internship opportunities for them.

The objective of the proposed research program is to develop novel integrated
circuits and antennas that can generate, radiate, detect, and steer coherent
high-power pulses with frequencies up to 1THz. With today's silicon processes,
it is possible to build a complex integrated circuit with on-chip antennas
operating in frequencies up to 500GHz. However, most of the existing solutions
are narrow-band and based on continuous-wave signal generation. To push the
performance limits of high-speed wireless communications, three-dimensional
radar imaging, and THz spectroscopy, broadband sources and detectors are
required. The basic research carried out under this program is expected to
advance the state-of-the-art in broadband time-domain signal generation and
detection. The PI will demonstrate the intellectual merit of the proposed
program through the following contributions: (1) demonstrating picosecond
impulse radiating arrays, (2) demonstrating picosecond impulse sampling arrays,
(3) developing accurate and reliable measurement systems to characterize
picosecond sources and detectors, (4) producing high-resolution three-
dimensional radar images

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.