* 1830478
* LEAP-HI/GOALI: Engineering Crops for Genetic Adaptation to Changing Enviroments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* William Beavis, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,165,142.00

This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure
(LEAP-HI) Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project
addresses the NSF Big Ideas of Understanding the Rules of Life and Harnessing
the Data Revolution in targeting the need to provide food, fiber and fuel for a
growing population using fewer resources (land, water, pesticides and
fertilizers) in uncertain and rapidly changing environments. It is widely
recognized that current agricultural technologies, from crop genetic improvement
to field crop production, will not meet future agricultural demands, due to
their heavy reliance on expensive, time-consuming, trail and error field trials
to develop improved plant breeds. Emerging mathematical optimization and machine
learning methods for analyzing high-dimensional data provide opportunities to
speed up plant breeding to achieve rapid and efficient adaptation of crops to
changing environments. The approaches in this project will take advantage of
engineering techniques that have been used to remarkably improve the efficiency
and resiliency of communication, manufacturing, transportation and energy
systems. The research requires the synthesis of multiple disciplines, including
agronomy, crop modeling, machine learning, operations research, optimization and
plant breeding and aims to demonstrate the leadership role of engineering in
addressing agricultural challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three technical issues,
which represent a small but highly visible subset of agronomic systems, will be
addressed: (1) accurately predicting plant phenotypes based on genetic,
agronomic management and environmental data and their interactions; (2) design
of genetic improvement systems to efficiently develop cultivars with superior
phenotypes; and (3) design of crop management strategies to assure that crops
achieve superior phenotypes under changing environments, while balancing reward,
time, and risk in the decision-making process. The research team will first
translate the technical issues into engineering objectives and then identify
existing methods and design new ones to achieve the objectives. The
corresponding engineering objectives are: (1) identify a small subset of
variables associated with synergistic effects in addition to their additive
effects; (2) design a set of algorithms for genomic selection, which is a
special type of nonlinear, non-convex, high-dimensional, and dynamic
optimization problem constrained by resource availability and laws of
reproductive biology; and (3) create a set of multi-objective and multi-level
optimization models and algorithms for balancing reward, time, and risk, subject
to genetic, environmental, and logistical constraints. Achieving these
objectives will demonstrate the power of engineering approaches in improving the
efficiency and resiliency of agronomic systems, with the aim of establishing
plant breeding as an engineering discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.