* 1830896
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Textile Robotics: Integrative Design, Modeling, Manufacture, and Control of Soft Human-Interactive Apparel
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Conor Walsh, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,240,479.00

This project seeks to leverage textile materials to create soft and compliant
wearable robots that are lightweight and nonrestrictive, and can deliver
valuable levels of assistance. This will be achieved by studying how to model,
manufacture and control textile-based robotic systems. The outcomes from this
project will highlight the benefits of textiles as a materials platform for new
components that enable wearable robot systems that can be worn like clothing.
When people suffer neurologic and musculoskeletal injuries, they often cannot
perform even the simplest activities of daily life. The innovative new devices
and systems that result from this project will offer the potential to provide
additional strength by applying forces to a wearer's limb to mitigate disability
and augment the natural abilities of the human body. This will simultaneously
open avenues for independence, societal participation, and return-to-work, while
reducing healthcare costs. This project will also promote interdisciplinary
research and teaching, and facilitate interactions between roboticists, applied
mathematicians, computer scientists, biomedical engineers, material scientists,
and functional apparel designers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
create, analyze, and evaluate a new class of textile-based, conformal, and
compliant wearable robots in the form of garments. Embedded textile strain and
pressure sensors will monitor the state of the actuators and the underlying
limb, while integrated air-impermeable and conductive pathways for fluid power
and data transfer will enable manipulation of the limb through simultaneous
online estimation and control. This transformative, interdisciplinary research
program will address fundamental questions aimed at increasing our understanding
of how to leverage the mechanical and electrical properties of advanced textile
materials to achieve flexible and distributed actuation, sensing, and
information/power transfer for textile-based robots. The project will develop
new computational and analytical modeling tools that account for the inherent
material and geometric nonlinearities to guide the parametric design of both
individual actuators, sensors and their distributions on a limb; model-based and
data-driven control and estimation algorithms that account for the nonlinear
actuator properties and inherent uncertainty in positioning a textile-based
robot on a limb and finally novel material constructions and their manufacturing
processes spanning the nanoscale to wearable garments. This project will
integrate the activities at all stages of the research through highly
collaborative interactions and demonstrate and validate the benefits of this
approach through multiple experimental testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.