* 1830178
* EAGER:  Discovering how geologic and fossil methane sources support a contemporary river ecosystem
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Jack Stanford, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2019
* USD 296,472.00

Carbon is a fundamental building block of life. For most animals (insects, fish,
plankton) in streams and lakes the carbon starts out as carbon dioxide and then
is captured by algae and plants. This carbon then passes on to plankton,
insects, and fish. Recent studies suggest there might be other sources of carbon
in rivers such as methane that are supporting aquatic plants and algae. However,
little is known about the sources of this methane and how it gets incorporated
into the life in rivers, streams, and lakes. Methane may be released to
groundwater and streams in areas with high geologic or geothermal activity. This
EAGER award will conduct the first study to explore the role of geologic and
fossil methane as an alternative carbon source in supporting life in river
floodplains. The award will also support research training of students and
doctoral scholars, engage fish hatchery managers in citizen science research,
and provide knowledge of how river systems function to the public.

The underlying assumption for most ecosystems on Earth is that the fixation of
modern carbon dioxide drives productivity and biodiversity, with little
recognition or study of other potential carbon pathways (e.g., methane) as
drivers of productivity and biodiversity. Despite the likely contribution of
fossil and geologic methane to freshwater systems and the potential for methane
to be transformed ecologically into less harmful forms, the freshwater biotic
processes affecting this greenhouse gas source are poorly known. This EAGER
award will investigate the role of abiotic, thermogenic, and fossil methanogenic
methane subsidies in supporting freshwater floodplain ecosystems by providing a
carbon source to the carbon-limited shallow aquifer food web (deep hyporheic
zone). The objective of this award is to quantify contributions of carbon from
various methane sources to the aquifer food web. Innovative stable isotope
methods will be used to assess the carbon sources and trace them through the
floodplain foodweb, then develop new approaches for discovering methane source
contributions to freshwater ecosystems. This research could potentially shift
the current carbon dioxide-based paradigm of driving productivity and
biodiversity by demonstrating that shallow aquifer food webs below river
floodplains are driven by geologic and fossil methane-derived carbon. Therefore,
these floodplain aquifers would be the first to demonstrate a conceptually and
ecologically analogous paradigm to oceanic hydrothermal vent ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.