* 1830735
* Research Initiation: Systematic Use of Simulation in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Classroom to Drive Reflection and Metacognition
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Renee Clark, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 238,751.00

In the context of education, reflection entails thinking about what one is
doing, which is necessary for learning from experience. Reflection is closely
linked to metacognitive skill, or the ability to think about one's thinking
processes and independently guide one's own learning during new tasks. It is
widely accepted by the education community that students who reflect and develop
strong metacognitive skills often become better students, learners, and
professionals, since they obtain the ability to identify what they don't know
(but need to learn) and how they can acquire knowledge for improvement. These
are lifelong learning skills that enable self-management of necessary learning
during one's career. Despite being closely linked to lifelong learning outcomes,
reflection and metacognition are not skills that are regularly cultivated or
practiced in the engineering education curriculum. Thus, prominent education
scholars have called for more reflection and metacognition within the curriculum
as well as publication of classroom studies involving their use. The problem to
be addressed by this research is the development and propagation of a new method
for cultivating metacognitive skills in engineering students by combining
questions that promote reflective thought with computer-aided simulation tools
for electronic-circuit building that can be used for problem exploration. During
homework and after quizzes and exams, students will use the simulator to
discover gaps in their learning and understanding of electronic circuits. Beyond
the electrical and computer engineering classroom, the techniques are broadly
applicable to other engineering disciplines since each has complex problems for
which simulation tools are used. The impact of incorporating simulation tools
within the reflective process will be studied, and the findings will contribute
to the promotion of needed reflective and metacognitive practices in science,
engineering, technology, and math (STEM), which will prepare students for the
challenges of professional practice, for which lifelong learning skills are
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to determine the impact of
systematic, frequent reflection - using SPICE simulation with homework or after
exams - on the professional formation of engineers with respect to
metacognitive, reflective, and technical performance outcomes. SPICE is the de
facto standard simulation environment used by professionals to predict
electronic circuit behavior. This work is informed by Kolb's Experiential
Learning Theory and Schons Theory of the Reflective Practitioner, which rely on
"doing" as well as "reflecting on the doing" for one's learning. The key
research questions are: 1) To what extent does systematic, frequent reflection,
particularly involving the use of simulation, enhance students' reflective
practices and technical course performance? 2) Why and how does this occur?
Outcomes will be investigated for all students as well as specific demographics,
including females and under-represented minorities. The research questions will
be investigated by comparing the depth and content of students' reflections as
well as course performance metrics under different amounts of reflective
activity within the course. Thus, both qualitative and quantitative research
methods will be used, in particular double-coded content analysis of reflections
and analysis-of-variance statistical techniques using baseline course
performance data. Student perspectives on the impact of reflection will be
assessed through interviews, focus groups, and surveys. This research aims to
respond to recent calls from the literature and prominent educators for: 1)
formal inclusion of metacognitive skill development within the curriculum, and
2) additional scholarly publications on reflection in engineering education to
propagate these skills, which support lifelong, self-regulated learning for
demanding professional practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.