* 1830425
* NRI: FND: Controllable Compliance: A New Robotic Arm for Contact-Rich Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Robert Platt, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 09/30/2023
* USD 749,967.00

People with disabilities, the infirm, and the elderly would benefit from capable
service robots in the home that could assist with daily living tasks. Robots
with arms and hands that have human-like abilities could help retrieve dropped
or distant objects, and help with cooking, cleaning, and grooming. This would
increase people's quality of life and independence, and greatly reduce the
burden on their caregivers. While robots are found in almost every factory
today, they live behind safety barriers, out of reach of people. Traditional
robots are good at controlling their motion, but bad at controlling the forces
they apply when touching objects; essentially, they are precise but not gentle.
This research introduces a new way to design robots that allows them to easily
feel when they are in contact with people and objects. A new design allows all
of the motors that move the arms to be located in the robot's base. A
traditional robot has a motor mounted at each joint in the arm, making the robot
very heavy. When robots are lighter and move more gently, it does not just make
them safer, but it also makes it easier to program them to learn how to pick up
and manipulate objects. Traditionally, robots depend only on cameras to detect
objects and plan how to grab them, but in this research, robots will also adapt
and learn to interact with objects through their sense of
touch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reliable and safe manipulation is a prerequisite for
the vision of autonomous and semi-autonomous assistive robots, particularly
towards the goal of increasing the length and quality of time that people can
live independently. The key challenge is developing manipulator hardware that
can move accurately but gently and supports safe contact-rich physical
interaction with people and delicate objects. In this work a remote-direct-drive
(RDD) configuration is used: all motors are mounted in the base, remotely
connected to joints in the arm and hand via rolling-diaphragm sealed hydrostatic
transmissions, which keeps the arm moving mass very small. Large radius direct-
drive motors are used to achieve minimal joint static friction and allow joint
compliance to be modulated over a wide range. Thus, the arm exhibits smooth
second order joint dynamics, making it easier to plan contact-rich trajectories
using optimization methods or learn contact-rich policies using off-line deep
reinforcement learning. Moreover, the controllable compliance will enable our
manipulation policies to use compliance when needed to accommodate environmental
uncertainty but high stiffness when high precision is required. This type of
manipulator has the potential to be lighter, lower friction, and more inherently
backdrivable than traditional robotic arms, providing increased safety for
human-robot interaction, and increasing the range of physical human assistance
tasks that can be undertaken by autonomous systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.