* 1830276
* Workshop: Taking Data Science to America's Emerging Workforce
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Alan Blatecky, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 48,742.00

This workshop will explore innovative approaches for contributing to the
development of a data science workforce across the country by leveraging the
network of Land-grant Institutions and their Cooperative Extension System. The
rapid growth and importance of data science in all sectors of society--across
business, government, education, and research--is poised to transform the future
of jobs. This transformation will create a changing mix of jobs, requiring job
seekers at every level to acquire new skills that will be essential for
participating in this new world of jobs. The skills gap will be most pronounced
in those segments of society that do not already have ready access to
educational and other associated community resources--especially in rural areas
and small towns across America. The workshop will examine whether the existing
land grant institution structure can be leveraged, augmented, and/or enhanced to
provide, especially those in rural areas and small towns, access to data science
education and training and, consequently, access to the well-paying jobs that
could follow, which may be locally-based or remotely accessible. While data
science is a field that can potentially deliver many new job opportunities, it
requires that the workforce to be well-trained in the appropriate areas to make
best use of such opportunities. The Taking Data Science to America's Emerging
Workforce workshop will bring together individuals from a broad range of
backgrounds and a broad range of organizations--across academia, industry,
government, and the land-grant system. It will address challenges, explore
opportunities, develop recommendations, and propose concrete next steps for
establishing data science communities of practice across the nation. The
workshop is supported by the Computer and Information Science and Engineering
Directorate (CISE); the Division of Undergraduate Education of the Education and
Human Resources Directorate (EHR/DUE); and, the Division of Mathematical Science
of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate (MPS/DMS) of the National
Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop addresses two pressing
issues, (1) increasing the ranks of data science professionals in the US, and
(2) taking the newly emerged field of data science, and the career opportunities
that it represents, to the rural sector. The workshop will address a number of
issues including:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;--Broadening the mandate and reach of the
Cooperative Extension System of land-grant institutions to include data science
education, research, and applications; utilizing this system to distribute the
benefits of the data science revolution across the full reach of our society;
addressing any academic and campus coordination challenges, and issues at the
federal, state, county levels in doing so. &lt;br/&gt;--Evolution of the
Cooperative Extension System to accommodate data science education, training,
research, and applications. What would be involved in funding new efforts; what
governance concerns would need to be addressed and what are ideas or models for
the future, including linking data science education efforts to campus research
in related areas;&lt;br/&gt;--The types of broad-based education programs that
could be deployed for data science and data analytics. Are there combinations of
Bachelor's, 2-year degree (Community Colleges), and Cooperative Extension
certification approaches that should be explored? &lt;br/&gt;--Educating a new
generation of data scientists entering the workforce versus retraining workers
who are being displaced by modern technologies?&lt;br/&gt;--Establishing local
communities of interest with linkages across wide geographic
areas;&lt;br/&gt;--Encouraging and facilitating self-employment approaches to
consulting and contracting in local communities;&lt;br/&gt;--Leveraging national
efforts in data science education, data science research, and distance
education, including efforts at federal agencies, state-level programs, non-
governmental organizations, and private foundations, the NSF Big Data Hubs, and
other NSF workforce development programs;&lt;br/&gt;--Developing next steps in a
national strategy and plan to broaden the mandate and reach of the Cooperative
Extension system to include data science and its applications. Who needs to be
involved? How should these efforts be coordinated and
leveraged?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.