* 1830910
* EFRI CEE: Ascribing function to chromatin with coordinated live-cell epigenomic sensors and scalpels
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Balaji Rao, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,099,728.00

This project will engineer new molecular tools to control how, when, and how
strongly genes are expressed in cells, with direct impacts on our ability to
understand and improve human and livestock health, crops, and bioproduction
using microorganisms. Furthermore, the molecular tools developed will be broadly
disseminated and applied to tackle the National Academy of Engineering's Grand
Challenges of Reverse Engineering the Brain, Engineering Better Medicines, and
Engineering Tools of Scientific Discovery as well as the National Science
Foundation's goal of Understanding the Rules of Life. In addition,
underrepresented student groups from local high school and undergraduate
institutions will be directly integrated into research activities supporting the
scientific aims of the project, with the ultimate goal of informing, inspiring,
and mentoring students to pursue a sustained and successful career in
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The epigenome is the complex collection of
proteins and RNAs layered on top of genomic DNA in eukaryotic cells. The
epigenome, through its so-called chromatin organization, plays diverse integral
roles in controlling gene expression; yet, currently our abilities to track and
control changes in the epigenome are largely static, require large numbers of
cells, and lack biochemical and spatial specificity. This limits the ability to
directly demonstrate and harness the regulatory functions of the epigenome. To
circumvent these barriers and enable direct, functional probes of epigenomic
mechanisms, this project will engineer molecular and genetically-encoded tools
that can track and perturb epigenome properties in living cells. This project
will combine methods from epigenome editing, protein engineering, stem cell
engineering, and live-cell super-resolution microscopy to address open questions
regarding the structure function relationships of the three-dimensional shape of
the epigenome and the biochemical specificity and biological relevance of
histone modifications. The results are expected to provide new insights into key
functional aspects of the epigenome, such as the heritability of topologically
associating chromatin domains through DNA replication and cell division and the
prevalence and roles of bivalent histone modifications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological Sciences
Directorate, by the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics
in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and by the Emerging
Frontiers in Research and Innovation Program in the Division of Emerging
Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities in the Engineering
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.