* 1830087
* Collaborative Research: Development and fabrication of a high-temperature borehole fluid sampler to characterize seawater-basalt reactions and the thermal limits of life on Earth
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Charles Wheat, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 139,535.00

Five decades of scientific ocean drilling have created more than 113-cased
boreholes in the ocean. Such legacy boreholes have been drilled into a range of
seafloor geologic settings and many of these boreholes are deep enough that
natural geothermal gradients have warmed the boreholes to temperatures in the
range (60-200 degrees C). Within this temperature range reactions pathways
between seawater and basalt change, affecting how the basaltic crust ages
through the dissolution of primary minerals and the precipitation of different
minerals as veins, for example. This combination of dissolution and
precipitation changes the characteristics of the ocean crust that ultimately
affects how the crust is subducted and the potential for large destructive
earthquakes. This temperature range also spans the thermal limits of microbial
life, based on experiments (122 degrees C), theoretical calculations (150
degrees C), and anecdotal evidence (180 degrees C). However the scientific
drilling community currently lacks the ability to collect such warm pristine
borehole fluids because electronics fail at such temperatures. This project will
solve this sampling problem by first testing shape memory alloys, which are
metal alloys that can change their shape and length at a specific temperature
that is a function of the alloy composition and fabrication process. Then a
water sampling system will be developed that utilizes the properties of shape
memory alloys to trigger the collection of boreholes fluids. The first
deployment of the newly fabricated system will occur in July 2019 when the
scientific drilling program re-enters a legacy borehole that is ~200 degrees C
at the base of the hole. The broader impacts of this project will provide the
scientific community with a new sampling system for collecting borehole fluids
at elevated temperatures. Such a sampling system is not limited to oceanic
boreholes, but could be used within the thousands of existing continental
boreholes. This new high temperature fluid sampling system will allow the
community to explore new directions in understanding hydrothermal processes.
Hydrothermal processes and the thermal limits of life are exciting topics that
engage the public. More specifically the proposed work will include the
development of a hands-on module for a week-long summer day camp (ssrovcamp.org)
for rising 3-5th and 6-9th grade students and students involved in the
undergraduate marine education program at Santa Clara University. Combined, over
300 students were engaged in one of these two programs in
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The crux of this project is to design and fabricate a
fluid sampling system for high temperature 60-200 degrees C borehole
applications in oceanic and continental settings. The project will build on a
Provisional Patent to design and fabricate standard titanium syringe-like fluid
capture systems that are triggered by a novel mechanism. This mechanism will use
shape memory alloys, given that such alloys change shape at a particular
temperature. The sampling system will be modular in design to allow a suite of
samples to be collected on a single lowering, each sampler collecting fluid at a
specific temperature depending on the particular shape memory alloy that is used
in that sampler. This system will be designed to be deployable from oceanic
drilling vessels, continental drilling rigs, and submersibles/remotely operated
vehicles (ROVs).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.