* 1830768
* ISS: Liver Tissue Engineering in Space
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Tammy Chang, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,847.00

End-stage organ failure is the irreversible and fatal impairment of a vital
organ, such as the heart, lung, kidney, or liver. End-stage organ failure
affects millions of people. The current treatment is organ transplantation,
which is severely limited by a shortage of donor organs. Scientists have been
trying to tissue-engineer organs outside of the body that can be used as
replacements for failing organs, but these efforts have been challenged by the
difficulty of creating networks of small blood vessels that can perfuse large
pieces of tissue. Studies have shown that when cells are given the freedom to
organize and assemble themselves in low-gravity conditions called microgravity,
they establish important cell-cell relationships and can form tissue structures
such as capillary tubes. In this research, using the liver as a model organ, the
research team will investigate how microgravity conditions onboard the
International Space Station may be used to facilitate development of a large,
vascularized tissue graft. The researchers hypothesize that a combination of
factors, including the microgravity environment unique to the International
Space Station, will produce a functional and vascularized liver tissue. The
research results will include a time-lapse video of how the different cell types
organize themselves in response to a growth factor gradient in microgravity.
This will allow investigators to better understand how microgravity regulates
tissue formation. In addition to the scientific objectives, the research team
will raise public awareness of the potential benefits of biomedical research in
space through efforts in K-12 education, mentoring groups underrepresented in
S.T.E.M., public outreach, and industry partnership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project centers around two research goals. First, the microgravity environment
of the ISS will be used to cerate a macroscopic, vascularized liver tissue. The
researchers hypothesize that the combination of an environment of 3D spatial
freedom, a perfusion force within a central conduit that does not have to
compete with the gravitational force, and sustained, directional angiogenic
gradient will support the development of a functional, vascularized liver graft.
The liver organoids will be developed by co-culturing induced pluripotent stem
cell (iPSC)-derived hepatocytes with human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs) and human mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). The organoids will then be
loaded into tissue culture vessels with a hollow fiber conduit to support the
flow of blood and bile. The physiological response of the tissue graft will be
assessed to validate the model through both laboratory assays and
xenotransplantation. The second goal is to characterize the effect of
microgravity and directional angiogenic gradients on 3D intercellular
interactions and microvascular organization. By using live-cell, time-lapse
confocal microscopy, the effect of these environmental factors on the co-
cultured cells of the organoids will be examined. This portion of the project
will advance fundamental understanding of how cells respond to a microgravity
environment with respect to tissue self-assembly, which will support future work
to advance the engineering of 3-dimensional tissue
constructs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.