* 1830177
* Design and Development: Workshop Proposal for Emerging Engineering Educators Making Academic Change Happen (E3 MACH)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Eva Andrijcic, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,657.00

Emerging engineering educators, including graduate students close to completion
of their doctoral work, and assistant professors who are just entering their
fields, face specific challenges as they begin their careers. As recent
advertisements for engineering positions suggest, engineering departments seek
out new engineering educators who can bring innovation to their campuses, from
designing new programs to introducing and assessing new pedagogies. In many
cases, emerging engineering educators are not ready to enact change at higher,
institutional levels. A typical graduate education focuses on acquiring
competence in disciplinary research and it does not prepare emerging engineering
educators to comprehend the academic environments and resulting cultures, value
systems and constraints. As a result, many emerging engineering educators do not
feel empowered or capable of implementing academic change. Furthermore,
successful change agents require skills, such as, for example, strategic
thinking, obtaining buy-in, and creating strategic partnerships, that are not a
part of conventional emerging educator experiences. Change strategies have been
well documented in the literature of other disciplines, such as organizational
psychology and behavior, but have not been brought into the conversation within
STEM education in a rigorous, accessible way. The "Emerging Engineering
Educators Making Academic Change Happen" workshop fills the need of emerging
engineering educators for research-based skills development and assistance in
creating a plan for change. Through targeted working sessions on specific topics
(e.g. partnership development, generating buy-in, institutional context, and
identity discovery), participants learn about different types of academic
institutional contexts and value systems, the interplay of their professional
identity with cultural contexts and the change-making process, and research-
proven strategies for making large scale change happen at different types of
academic institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emerging engineering educators who
envision themselves as change agents should work to adopt the disposition and
skills of a change agent. This workshop will help these educators start on their
path as engineering education innovators who are more likely to positively
impact their departments and programs. The workshop covers a number of themes,
such as: Cultivating an Allied Community of Colleagues and Making Change Happen
on Campus. Diverse hands-on activities are structured to enable participants to
better understand the development of personal and professional identities with
the established academic value systems and institutional contexts, and identify
the unique opportunities and constraints of their individual academic
environments to develop strategies for expanding and implementing visions of
academic change. By fostering the development of these skills and mindsets in
the very people who must lead change efforts, this workshop promotes meaningful
change in STEM higher education. Engaging emerging engineering educators in the
workshop highlights the importance of developing change skills early in their
careers. As part of this research, emerging engineering educators will be
interviewed about their current or future change projects and will be provided
with mentors and support for their change activities. Mentorship will continue
after the workshop is over and the participants' progress on their projects will
be tracked as they implement the MACH change strategies they learned during the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.