* 1830961
* EFRI CEE: Macrogenomic engineering via modulation of chromatin nanoenvironment
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Michael Kennedy, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Carol Lucas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,661,852.00

The function of organisms is determined not only by their genes but also by
their capacity to express these genes. The adaptive potential of organisms is
determined by their capacity to explore their landscape of thousands of genes
and create new functional states. Currently no platform allows for the
predictable modulation of this many genes simultaneously. The goal of this
project is to build the foundations of such a technology, termed macrogenomic
engineering. The principles of macrogenomic engineering can be applied to attack
the key reason why most currently available anti-cancer treatments fail. In
addition to addressing tumor drug resistance this program will impact some of
the most significant diseases of the 21st century involving changes in gene
expression in Alzheimer's disease and
atherosclerosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transcriptional interactions depend on the
local physical nanoenvironment, which in turn depends on the three-dimensional
structure of the genome. This project will develop physico-chemical
methodologies to reversibly manipulate the chromatin nanoenvironment thus
affecting transcriptional processes in a predictable manner. This will enable
the modulation of the adaptive potential of cells by regulating the degree of
freedom within the transcriptome. The first two objectives of the project are to
elucidate physico-chemical factors that determine the properties of chromatin
packing and the role of the resulting chromatin nanoenvironment in modulating
gene networks, intercellular, and temporal transcriptional heterogeneity. The
third objective is to apply the principles of macrogenomic engineering to a
testbed. The testbed explored in this project is carcinogenesis. Transcriptional
diversity is a major reason why tumors eventually develop resistance to most
therapies. The project will develop physico-chemical strategies to constrain
transcriptional diversity and the adaptive potential of cancer cells in order to
prevent the progression of pancreatic and ovarian tumors in animal models and to
prevent the emergence of resistance to anti-cancer
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.