* 1830644
* Investigating the Pervasiveness of Complex Seismic Anisotropy and Its Origin Beneath Continents
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Stephen Gao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2021
* USD 228,446.00

Numerous geoscientific investigations over the past 50 years have convincingly
demonstrated that the Earth's surface is divided into seven large and many small
blocks known as tectonic plates. The relative movement of the plates against
each other produces earthquakes, volcanoes, majestic mountains, and deep ocean
basins. The physical and chemical processes that drive plate motion, however,
are still poorly understood. Improving our understanding of such processes is
essential not only for understanding how the Earth works, but also for achieving
the ultimate goal of reliably predicting and mitigating natural hazard such as
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. One of the effective tools to investigate
plate motion is shear wave splitting analysis, which is based on the observation
that when a shear wave originated from an earthquake travels through an
anisotropic area formed by plate motion, it will split into two waves. Previous
shear wave splitting studies were mostly conducted under the assumption that
there is only one layer of anisotropy. The recent dramatic increase in the
number of seismic stations and recorded earthquakes suggests that the actual
situation is more complicated than this single layer assumption. This project
will develop and test a set of sophisticated tools to systematically investigate
complex anisotropy on a global scale, for the purpose of providing constraints
on a number of hypotheses related to plate dynamics and plate motion. This
project will also support training of a graduate student, two undergraduate
students, and a summer intern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shear wave splitting (SWS)
has been increasingly used to quantify seismic azimuthal anisotropy and to
understand the geodynamic processes responsible for its formation. Mostly due to
the limited amount of data available at most of the stations on Earth and the
resulting poor azimuthal coverage of the incoming XKS (including SKS, SKKS, and
PKS) rays, the vast majority of existing SWS studies, including most of the
studies conducted by the PIs, assumed the simplest form of anisotropy, i.e., a
single layer with a horizontal axis of symmetry. On the other hand, some SWS
studies have identified systematic variations of the observed splitting
parameters as a function of the azimuth of the incoming XKS rays. This
dependence is the most important diagnostic of complex anisotropy (e.g.,
anisotropy with a dipping axis of symmetry and/or with two or more layers with a
horizontal axis). By taking advantage of the recent dramatic increase in the
quantity and quality of broadband seismic data, this project will address the
important question of the pervasiveness of complex anisotropy using long-running
seismic stations on the continents. The project also intends to characterize the
complex anisotropy by determining the splitting parameters associated with the
layers. The resulting spatial distribution of complex anisotropy will be a
valuable constraint and input parameter for various geoscientific studies in the
areas of geodynamic modeling, seismic tomography, and mineral
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.