* 1830939
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Design Principles for Soft Robots Based on Boundary Constrained Granular Swarms
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Heinrich Jaeger, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will develop the framework to understand the modeling, sensing,
control, design, and fabrication of a new class of soft robots. Most soft robots
eschew the rigid links of traditional robots in favor of compliant structures.
In contrast, the robot designed in this work has its "softness" emerge from the
interactions among granular material encased in a flexible membrane. The concept
is best visualized by considering an amoeba, in which an outer membrane loosely
encapsulates a set of internal components. By allowing components on the
periphery of the membrane to be active "sub-robots," much like the cilia on the
periphery of a paramecium, the overall structure can move and deform like a
boundary-constrained robotic swarm. Moreover, to manipulate objects and exert
large forces on the environment, the robot will also have the unique ability to
jam. Jamming occurs when particles become packed so closely that instead of
flowing past each other (like coffee grounds in a can) they form a solid (like
coffee grounds in a vacuum-packed bag). The results of this work may offer
several advantages over traditional robots, including the ability to better
conform to objects, physically interact with other soft structures such as
animal tissue, and locomote in unstructured environments. This could impact
several national needs, including providing inherently safe robots that work
with or alongside humans to greatly improve US manufacturing competitiveness.
The research also includes a comprehensive broadening participation plan with an
emphasis on hiring underrepresented minorities as graduate research assistants
and outreach to underrepresented minorities through a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates program. This is coupled with societal outreach that builds upon
the PI's previous involvement with the Chicago Museum of Science and
Industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The robot developed here will be the first to
expand upon the concept of granular soft robots by imagining the granules
themselves as active robots. While similar to robotic swarms, this new class of
robots differs significantly in that this project will be the first to examine
how the aggregate of sub-robots physically interacts with its environment. To
make this possible, novel modeling techniques will be created as well as sensing
and actuation algorithms. Modeling will take into account both multi-body rigid
dynamics for modeling the dynamics of sub-robot granules, large deformation
continuum mechanics for modeling sub-robot connections, constraints to ensure
the model predictions are physically viable, and Lagrangian mechanics to bring
all the elements together. The sensing and actuation algorithms will exploit
emergent intelligence of the boundary swarm to sense the external environment
and robustly actuate distinct global behaviors in response to such distributed
sensing without any centralized planning. The project enhances infrastructure
through melding concepts and researchers from multiple disparate disciplines. In
engineering, this includes dynamics and control, mechanics of materials and
structures, materials engineering, and formal design theory. In physics, it
encompasses areas of soft condensed matter, in particular the concepts of the
jamming phase transition and the dynamics of "active
matter."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.