* 1830529
* Conference: The 15th U.S.-Korea Forum on Nanotechnology: Nanomedicine focusing on Single Cell level and Internet of Things including Nanosensors, July 12-13 2018, Ilsan, Korea
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Myung Jhon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2019
* USD 49,604.00

The proposed project for a Forum seeks financial to support scientist and
engineer participation in the The 15th U.S.-Korea Forum on Nanotechnology:
Nanomedicine focusing on Single Cell level and Internet of Things including
Nanosensors to be held July 12-13, 2018 in Ilsan, Korea. The Forum will host 8
senior presenters and 7 additional early-career presenters and an approximately
equal number of Korean presenters. It will actively encourage partnerships in
nanotechnology for breakthroughs in various topics in nanomedicine focusing on
single cell level as well as IoT including nanosensors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants will address issues related to the
understanding of toxicity and environmental impact of nanomaterials. The meeting
will encourage research collaboration and exchange on various aspects of
nanomedicine including integration of nanomaterials with biology, development of
diagnostic devices, contrast agents, analytical tools, physical therapy
applications, and drug delivery vehicles. It will also address cutting-edge IoT
devices with nanosensors and nanoactuators and massively-distributed networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Post-doctoral researchers will be considered as qualified
early-career researchers to present posters and promote in this way further
research collaboration among young scientists in both countries. Collaboration
possibilities will be intensively pursued by active participation in discussions
throughout the Workshop. The forum proceedings and findings will be published on
Carnegie Mellon's website and will be available to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.