* 1830215
* NRI: FND: Robotic Human Enhancement Enabled through Wearable Hip Exoskeletons Capable of Community Ambulation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Aaron Young, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 702,440.00

The increased metabolic and biomechanical demands of ambulation limit community
mobility in persons with lower limb disability due to neurological damage or
advanced age. Robotic exoskeletons have the potential to assist these
individuals to increase community mobility to improve quality of life. Current
technology does not support dynamic movements, such as transitioning between
different gaits and supporting a wide variety of walking speeds. This project
proposes to meet this challenge by exploring an innovative myoelectric
controller that brings together information across multiple muscles to assist
the exoskeleton in a range of tasks for mobility. Of interest is how to extract
information about the human user's intent, such as what speed the user wants to
walk at or if they want to take a step up a stair. Recognizing intent will allow
the device to give appropriate assistance over a wide range of activities. For
this research project, the investigators will use a new type of robotic hip
exoskeleton to augment the human hip during tasks such as walking at different
speed, ramps and stairs. This project seeks to advance the state of the science
in man-machine exoskeleton interfaces through new types of control techniques.
This will help the team's long-term research goal of creating robotic assistive
devices that benefit individuals with serious lower limb disabilities by
improving mobility and, thus, overall independence. This NSF project will also
include a significant outreach to the local Atlanta community. Local project
partners will bring underserved minority students in the Atlanta area to Georgia
Tech to participate in this educational program. These high school students will
interact with the human assistive robotics in the lab and design, build, and
program their own assistive robots through hands on education. This project will
facilitate the training of an interdisciplinary group of students including
graduate and undergraduate biomedical, electrical, and mechanical engineers, GT
graduate students training to be clinical practitioners in prosthetics and
orthotics, and physical therapists in training in Emory's DPT program. This
interdisciplinary group of students will work together to fully integrate all
aspects of the project and facilitate learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will advance the knowledge of myoelectric (EMG) control for
enabling humans to have dynamic movement assistance using lower limb robotic
exoskeletons. Existing technologies of exoskeleton systems have limited high-
level understanding of user intent, thus precluding adaptation to a proper range
of daily tasks of living. Sensing modalities used in such systems do not provide
sufficient information regarding key physiological parameters such as muscle
activity. Conventional control algorithms relate a single modality of sensors to
exoskeleton assistance and are thus incapable of fusing broader sets of varying
sensor information. These technological gaps have impeded the translation of
such systems beyond lab settings to clinical use where they can impact important
health needs such as assistive rehabilitation. This proposal will address these
gaps in assistive robotic technology by pursuing research organized in three key
objectives: Objective 1) Determine the most effective strategy of providing
exoskeleton hip assistance for reducing metabolic cost using a novel myoelectric
controller. Objective 2) Compare the metabolic and biomechanical effects of a
novel controller driven by myoelectric inputs vs a standard controller driven by
kinematic inputs. Objective 3) Determine the contributions of high-level intent
recognition using myoelectric information to improve control of a powered hip
exoskeleton over simulated community terrain. Relatively simple mobility tasks
like standing from a seated position or walking represent the primary outcome
measures that determine independence in rehabilitation. Thus, the wearable
exoskeleton system described in this grant proposal has the potential to make a
measurable impact on enhancing the functional performance capabilities of
individuals with lower limb deficits by increasing their quality of life,
independence and well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.