* 1830414
* NRI: INT: Balancing Collaboration and Autonomy for Multi-Robot Multi-Human Search and Rescue
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Nathan Lau, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,474,719.00

Each year, thousands of people go missing in the United States. Coordinated
search and rescue (SAR) operations provide the best chance to locate a missing
individual alive. However, challenging terrain and other search constraints
represent a barrier to human searchers. This project therefore seeks to enable
collaboration between human searchers and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) to
improve searches while reducing human effort. Specifically, this project asks:
How do we select and assign search tasks that ensure long-term human-robot
collaboration, while deploying robots to complement human searchers in real-
time? This project aims to answer this question through optimization, behavioral
modeling, human-robot interaction, and computation, with evaluation in large-
scale prototypes supported by the SAR community. Finally, impacts beyond SAR
include: (1) education focused on co-robots; (2) theory for human-robot
interaction in collaborative settings; (3) portable, low-cost, low-power
computational infrastructure suitable for a wide range of applications; (4)
technologies that foster economic opportunity around co-robots; and (5) field
experiences for students from groups underrepresented in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on new theory and
technologies for: (1) a minimally invasive, adaptive, multi-UAV control system
leveraging risk-aware multi-robot planning for human-in-the-loop (HITL) control;
(2) distributed computing that opportunistically exploits and balances multi-
robot interaction, communication, computation, and decision-making; and (3) an
interface between human searchers and UAVs that allows control from complete
autonomy to manual operation, including testable interfaces for exploration vs.
exploitation strategies. This project addresses fundamental challenges critical
to the scalability of multi-robot multi-human teams: (1) planning and control
systems for UAVs that can autonomously gather information in a cooperative and
distributed way while adapting to uncertain human plans; (2) interfaces for
human-robot interactions that allows collaboration that appropriately balances
exploration with exploitation; and (3) real-time support to analyze, store, and
share data subject to the power and connectivity constraints typical of real-
world deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.