* 1830886
* Excellence in Research: Control of electric and magnetic light with plasmonic nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mikhail Noginov, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Light is an electromagnetic wave that has both electric and magnetic components.
However, when light interacts with matter typically only its electric component
is able to interact. This project is focused on the study of light emitted by
so-called rare earth ions, which are unique in their ability to interact with
both the electric and magnetic components of the light. Such "double
interaction" enables additional controls over light in these materials. In
particular, the investigators study interaction of both the electric and
magnetic components of light with a variety of nanopatterned optical materials.
This helps one to obtain knowledge leading to the development of microscopes
with higher resolution, advanced biological and chemical sensors, and ultrafast
electronic chips and circuits. The Broader Impacts of the project include
strengthening of the graduate program in Materials Science and Engineering in
one of the nation's largest historically black university. The project enriches
education and training of graduate and undergraduate students from
underrepresented minority groups by involving them in cutting-edge research
activities. Outreach visits to local high schools with high minority enrollment
are designed to promote the value of education in the science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong
modification of optical electric and magnetic fields in close vicinity of
plasmonic nanostructures provides multiple opportunities for fundamental studies
and applications. While the effects associated with electric field enhancement
are the subject of numerous studies, the effects and opportunities related to
modifications in optical magnetic fields remain largely unexplored. The main
goals of the project are (i) better understanding of the fundamental properties
of optical magnetic dipoles in nanostructured engineered environments, and (ii)
development of approaches for control and enhancement of magnetic dipole
emission with modified optical environments. In the course of the project, the
investigators synthesize organic systems with rare earth ions having magnetic
dipole transitions in the optical range, and explore their optical behavior in
various local optical environments, including resonant nanostructures. The
project is also aimed at new characterization methods allowing one to probe and
map optical electric and magnetic fields at the nanoscale, which is important
for further development of optical nano sources and metamaterials. In addition,
luminescent organic systems with rare earth metal ions developed in the course
of the project are of interest for various fundamental and applied studies in
nanophotonics and optoelectronics. On the other hand, the project expands the
research capabilities and enhances the Materials Science and Engineering
graduate program at Norfolk State University, one of the largest HBCUs in the
nation. This research enriches education and training of graduate and
undergraduate students from underrepresented minority groups and promotes STEM
education in local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.