* 1830766
* SBIR Phase II:  Spectroscopy and imaging of irregular surfaces using confocal microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Richard Lytel, KLAR SCIENTIFIC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2021
* USD 904,550.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project?is?the development of a portable, cost-
effective confocal microscope that profiles surfaces, obtains spectra, and
enables immediate identification of composition, impurities, and morphology for
users throughout the research and industrial markets.??The system will make a
major impact in the $6.2B microscope market, with a near-term commercial
potential of over 5% of the market and significant growth potential. This
technology will address the needs of materials science and other research
laboratories, quality control in manufacturing, and supply chain monitoring,
thereby providing a positive economic impact. Integration of topographic mapping
with a diverse set of spectroscopic tools enables comprehensive materials
analysis at very small scales. Users will be able to identify features and
defects in electronic, optoelectronic, and structural devices, as well as
coatings, tubing, devices, disks, and specialty mirrors. Societal impacts
include improvements in the design and manufacture of components and
systems.?Because of its compact size and low cost, the microscope can be used in
educational institutions, providing students with experience in measuring
properties of complex objects and helping prepare them for careers in various
research, development, and production settings.?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will translate spectroscopic confocal optical profile
microscopy from the lab bench to prototypes with market-ready features and
performance. The developed microscopes will enable spectroscopic and surface
analysis of topographically complex structures.?The key innovation is the
integration of precision surface profiling with multiple spectroscopic
interrogation methods.??Users will capture accurate topographic maps of
irregular surfaces and use them to extract spatially accurate spectroscopic and
imaging information.??This approach will enable in-focus, diffraction-limited
photoluminescence and Raman maps for a broad range of materials.??Research
objectives include (1) integration of optical profiling with spectroscopic
scanning, (2) optimization of hardware based on customer feedback, and (3)
development of acquisition and analysis software.??Successful completion of
these objectives will result in a portable instrument that can capture the
surface topography and spectral information of a sample with tens of thousands
of sample points in a few minutes, with 10-50 nanometer vertical precision and
diffraction-limited spatial resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.