* 1830139
* Using structural fabrics and thermochronology to document extensional footwall rotation--Insights from the tilted Miocene Searchlight pluton, NV
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Wenrong Cao, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2022
* USD 186,406.00

The Basin and Range landscape of Nevada has been shaped by crustal extension
over the past tens of millions of years. This extension is accommodated by
widespread faulting and synchronous magmatism, which has generated hazardous
earthquakes, resulted in many plutons (i.e., crystalized magma bodies)
associated with valuable ore deposits, and contributed to the high crustal
temperatures that provide geothermal energy potential across the state. In this
study, the principal investigators are investigating the styles and magnitudes
of the crustal stretching and the relationship between faulting and pluton
emplacement. In particular, different styles of crustal deformation affect the
cooling of initially hot plutons and the regional geothermal gradient. The rate
of crustal cooling directly impacts the extensional style, the overall strength
of the crust, and the potential distribution of future earthquakes. The goal of
this work is to reconstruct the tectonic and thermal histories of this part of
the Basin and Range crust by investigating a tilted pluton that provides a
unique exposure of the vertical compositional and paleo-thermal profile of the
crust. This work has implications for understanding the tectonic and magmatic
evolution of the Basin and Range, the crustal strength and depth of local
earthquakes, and the linkage between tectonic and magmatic activities to high
crustal temperatures and geothermal energy. In addition to the research goals of
the project, important societal outcomes of the award including supporting the
training of a graduate student in an important science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) discipline. It is also advancing the research efforts of
two early-career investigators. Participants of this project are also involved
in public outreach programs at the University of Nevada, Reno thereby
contributing to increased public science literacy and public engagement with
STEM. These efforts include dissemination of cutting-edge research results with
the public via outreach events including the annual Earth Science Week event at
the Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology. The development of digital mapping
techniques, and the implementation of adaptive education via virtual reality
mapping for students who may have physical disabilities that impair traditional
field techniques and education, thereby contributing to the full participation
of persons with disabilities in STEM education. Finally, this research echoes
the recent community vision on the future challenges and opportunities in
tectonics research and promotes the community effort to advance the knowledge of
structural geology and tectonics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project quantifies
tectonic and thermal histories during the emplacement and subsequent cooling of
the Miocene Searchlight pluton in the Colorado extensional corridor near Las
Vegas to better understand the extensional faulting process. The PIs
characterize structures and fabrics within the pluton to test the hypothesis
that "the pluton experienced flow-like footwall rotation during simple-shear
extension." This extensional mechanism makes specific predictions to be tested
by constraining the nature of the observed fabrics, deformation kinematics
within the pluton and wallrock, and cooling history through an integrated
structural, numerical modeling, and thermochronology study. The working
hypothesis is that the footwall rotation during simple-shear extension is a more
effective crustal cooling mechanism than pure-shear modes of extension because
rotation advects the hotter parts of the pluton toward the Earth's surface to
cool. Rapid cooling increases the rheological strength of the upper crust and
can act as a negative feedback to cease further rapid extension via brittle
faulting. Various complementary methods are used in this study including (1)
digital field mapping to characterize the fabric patterns, local shear sense,
and contacts within the Searchlight pluton, (2) advanced microscopic study by
electron backscatter diffraction to determine the nature, temperature, style,
and kinematics of fabrics, (3) state-in-art computational simulations to
construct and refine analytical/numerical thermo-kinematic models of footwall
tilting and associated crustal cooling that will predict cooling histories to be
tested via thermochronology, and (4) apatite and zircon (U-Th)/He
thermochronometry to constrain the cooling history. This project sheds light on
structural/tectonic processes linking transient thermal and rheological
evolution of the crust with deformation mechanisms from grain to outcrop to
regional scales. Thermochronology and modeling explore the thermal evolution
during the extensional process and impacts on crustal rheology. The derived
cooling rates, together with detailed structural analysis, constrain the
geologic strain rates in the Basin and Range and new robust estimates for the
timing and rates of Miocene extension in the Colorado extensional corridor. This
study also sheds light on linkages between surface heat flux, ore formation, and
hydrothermal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.