* 1830878
* EFRI CEE: Optically Controlled Localized Epigenetic Chromatin Remodeling with Photoactivatable CRISPR-dCas9
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Lev Perelman, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

There are many cancers which come back after apparent recovery and there are
others which initially respond to chemotherapy but eventually become treatment-
resistant. Along with genetic mutations, this often happens due to epigenetic
alterations that do not involve the DNA coding sequence but instead result in a
change in gene activity deactivating cellular antitumor systems and activating
oncogenes. A recently developed modified form of the gene editing technology
called epigenetic CRISPR has the potential to influence those alterations
providing effective treatment for recurrent and treatment-resistant
cancers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently, one of the biggest challenges to using
CRISPR that prevents it from being implemented on a systemic level is the
concern for off-target effects in normal cells that do not need to be modified.
Thus, developing a CRISPR system capable of dynamic control of gene activation
in space and time would be a critically important step. To address that, light
activated CRISPR was introduced recently. Unfortunately, its major limitation is
the need to use blue or UV light, severely reducing the activation penetration
depth and, in the case of UV, raising safety concerns. This team address this
problem by developing CRISPR-dCas9 which is compatible with NIR light
activation, an option not currently available. The proposed light activated
chromatin remodeling approach is transformative since it could lead to the
development of highly effective targeted epigenetic cancer therapies not prone
to off-target activity. In addition, it could also serve as a non-invasive
optogenetic tool which does not require a fiber optic implantation and could
have various applications in oncology, neurology, ophthalmology, and
cardiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.