* 1830890
* Data Science Innovation Lab Travel Stipend Support
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2020
* John Van Horn, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2020
* USD 40,000.00

This award provides funding for the "2018 Data Science Innovation Lab:
Mathematical Challenges of Single Cell Dynamics" held June 25-29, 2018 in Bend,
Oregon. The goal of the Data Science Innovation Lab is to foster new
interdisciplinary collaborations among quantitative and biomedical researchers
to address data science challenges arising from the use of data from single
cells. Mathematical modeling of single cell dynamics aims to facilitate
understanding of biological complexity in the context of the modular
organization of the living cell. The three-dimensional structure of the cell
gives biological systems the ability to sequester, tightly regulate, and
increase the efficiency of many cellular systems. However, this structure is not
static. The organelles, specialized domains, and macromolecular machines inside
the cell are extremely dynamic, responding both to the internal state of the
cell and to external stimuli. Systems and cell biology can study the origins and
dynamics of organelles to elucidate the networks that underlie cellular function
and dysfunction over time and space. This Innovation Lab entails participation
in an intensive five-day residential workshop. Through a real-time and iterative
mentoring process, the workshop aims to facilitate the development of new teams
of early-career biomedical and quantitative investigators who generate
multidisciplinary cooperative projects in this important research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational complexity of models of single-cell
dynamics is significant; the analysis requires modern mathematical, computer
science, statistical, and data visualization methods. Bringing mathematicians,
statisticians, and computer scientists together with biologists, physicians, and
other data-aware scientists to develop joint research projects via this Data
Science Innovation Lab is expected to have impact beyond the workshop itself. It
will introduce mathematical, statistical, and quantitative researchers to the
challenges in addressing biomedical "big data" and applying them to large-scale
bioscience research. The Data Science Innovation Lab is expected to cultivate a
new multi-disciplinary community built around rich biomedical data sets. Further
information about the 2018 Data Science Innovation Lab may be found at
https://bigdatau.ini.usc.edu/innovationlab2018&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.