* 1830372
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Adaptive and Rapid Spatial-Temporal Threat Detection over Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Sarah Holte, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 62,450.00

This project aims to develop innovative machine learning and statistical
algorithms for detecting, preventing, and responding to threats over networks.
Two concrete applications are monitoring the threat of multi-antibiotic-
resistant (MDR) gonorrhea from a network of clinics across the United States and
monitoring HIV transmission in clusters of patients. The research has impact in
many other practical applications, including biosurveillance, engineering,
homeland security, finance, and public health, where large-scale spatial-
temporal data streams are collected with the aim of rapid detection and
prevention of threats. The research aims to develop crucial scalable algorithms
and methods to effectively and efficiently monitor, analyze, and optimize
responses in these situations. In addition, the project will integrate research
and education by infusing the research findings into the curriculum and by
involving Ph.D. students in research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop innovative algorithms for rapid threat detection by combining spatial-
temporal models, ordinary differential equation (ODE) models with change-point
detection, and multi-armed bandit and ensemble methods when monitoring large-
scale spatial-temporal data over networks. In particular, efficient scalable
algorithms are developed in three interrelated research tasks, including (1)
rapid detection of threats by combining a "background + anomaly + noise"
decomposition framework with sequential change-point detection; (2) predictive
analytics of threats by applying multi-armed bandit algorithms and adaptive
sampling in the changing environments to assess increasing risks at the
population level; and (3) prescriptive analytics of threats by developing nested
ensemble models based on calibrated ODE and data-driven spatial-temporal models
so as to better assess the effects of prevention/intervention actions. Results
of the project are expected to significantly advance the state of the art in
spatial-temporal models, online learning, streaming data analysis, and large-
scale inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.