* 1830132
* WORKSHOP: Human-Computer Interaction Doctoral Research Consortium at ACM CHI 2018
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Yunan Chen, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2019
* USD 17,360.00

This is funding to partially support a Doctoral Research Consortium (DC)
workshop of about 20 promising graduate students along with a panel of 6
distinguished researchers from academia and industry. This award will support
just the 8 students from U.S.-based educational institutions in addition to the
panelists. The event will take place on April 21-22 in conjunction with the ACM
2018 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2018) sponsored by
the Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Human-
Computer Interaction (SIGCHI), which will be held April 21-26 in Montreal,
Canada. The annual CHI conferences are the leading international forum for the
presentation and discussion of human-computer interaction (HCI) research and
practice, and they are attended by approximately 3,000 HCI professionals from
around the world. Research reports published in the CHI Conference Proceedings
and the CHI Extended Abstracts are heavily-refereed and widely cited; they are
among the most scientifically respected and impactful research publications in
the field of HCI. More information about this year's conference, whose theme is
"Engage with CHI", is available online at https://chi2018.acm.org/. The annual
CHI doctoral consortia traditionally bring together the best of the next
generation of HCI researchers, allowing them to create a social network both
among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their
professional development. Applications are encouraged from all doctoral students
whose research is HCI-related, regardless of the fields in which they are
earning their degrees. To increase the broad impact of the event, the organizers
are committed to diversity. Due to timing issues, the student participants for
2018 have already been selected; there are a total of 20 students (9 females and
11 males) from 10 different countries around the world, who represent a wide
range of topic areas and backgrounds; in addition, no more than one student was
accepted from any given institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Doctoral
Consortium is a research-focused meeting that has taken place annually at the
CHI conference since 1986, and has helped to launch the careers of many
outstanding HCI researchers. The 2018 Consortium will be a 2-day long event on
April 21-22. Goals of the workshop include building a cohort group of new
researchers who will have a network of colleagues spread out across the world,
guiding the work of new researchers by having experts in the field give them
advice, and making it possible for promising new entrants to the field to attend
their research conference. This year's DC will adopt the successful schedule
implemented in 2017, where the group breaks into clusters of 3-4 students paired
with one faculty panelist. Each student participant will have a time slot of
approximately 20 minutes in which to make a formal presentation about his or her
doctoral research and to receive feedback both from the faculty panelist and the
other student participants. The feedback will be constructive and geared to help
the students understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to
other HCI research, whether their topics are adequately focused for thesis
research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and applied, and
whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. Follow up
activities, including two poster sessions, are planned during the technical
program of the conference on April 23-26. Extended abstracts of the students'
work will be published in the CHI 2018 Extended Abstracts. SIGCHI's conference
management committee will evaluate the doctoral research consortium, and the
results will be made available to the organizers of future
consortia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.