* 1830242
* NRI: FND: Communicating Physical Interactions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Gleicher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 08/31/2023
* USD 797,986.00

For robots to become ubiquitous collaborators, they must interact physically
with objects in unstructured human environments. Robots must adeptly grasp,
push, squeeze, snap, balance, stabilize and hand-off objects, and must
effectively communicate about these actions with their human collaborators.
People must not only be able to specify to a robot what to do and how to do it,
they must also be able to interpret what a robot intends to do (and how).
Effective communication about physical interactions will be essential if robots
are going to perform such tasks as delivering care to older adults, responsively
helping technicians in performing repairs, or being trained by non-experts to
perform repetitive assembly tasks. This project will enable a new generation of
robot applications, and advance the vision of ubiquitous, collaborative robots
by developing better methods for robots to more effectively communicate with
people. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address key challenges in
communication about physical interactions: conveying invisible and unfamiliar
quantities (e.g., forces and compliances), communicating plans and
contingencies, and communicating about what did not (or should not) happen. The
project will involve three key challenges: specification, interpretation, and
monitoring. To address these challenges, the project will 1) perform formative
studies to gain insight into how people communicate about physical interactions
and interpret displays; 2) develop methods for specifying physical actions based
on the idea of augmented demonstrations, methods for interpreting physical
actions based on the idea of interpretable representations, and methods for
monitoring physical actions based on multimodal communication; and 3) deploy
these ideas in prototype systems for contextualized scenarios for
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.