* 1830866
* Excellence in Research in Spectroelectrochemical Measurements in Intact Microorganisms
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Blake, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 497,600.00

Common means of interrogating chemical reactions that occur between solid
surfaces and intact microorganisms typically use light in some manner to monitor
either color or fluorescence changes that accompany such reactions. The surfaces
of both the solids and the intact microorganisms deflect light and thereby
interfere with any optical measurements. This project will provide and validate
a new means to conduct light measurements on reactions between solids and live
microorganisms. A new instrument with an observation chamber that permits all
the light measurements to be harvested and measured will be used, rather than
simply losing or ignoring the light that is deflected by the solids or particles
in the reaction. This project will focus on 5 to 10 microorganisms that
naturally exchange electrons with exterior solid surfaces as part of their
lifestyle. It is anticipated that microorganisms with different types of
exterior architectures will exchange electrons with exterior solid surfaces
using different strategies and colored biomolecules. This project will provide a
new means to study biological energy transduction under noninvasive
physiological conditions without disrupting the complexity of the live cellular
environment. One immediate outcome will be that this project will provide the
basic information required to optimize the performance characteristics of
microbial fuel cells (novel batteries) at both the anode and the cathode.
Undergraduate minority students will be employed in each of 2 laboratories for
this project. Overall, a minimum of 8 or more minority students will be trained.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to define the
electron transport biomolecules and respiratory pathways in those bacteria that
obtain energy for growth from aerobic and anaerobic respiration on soluble and
insoluble iron under strongly acidic conditions. Simultaneous
spectroelectrochemical measurements and kinetic studies will be conducted to
determine the rates of oxygen consumption as selected microorganisms respire in
a combination electrolytic/observation cell. To accomplish these goals, this
project will implement a new methodology that makes it possible, for the first
time, to conduct direct spectrophotometric measurements of in situ electron
transfer reactions in living cells under physiological conditions as they accept
and donate electrons either directly or indirectly via soluble iron to
electrodes immersed in the observation cell. These studies will utilize a novel
integrating cavity absorption meter that has an innovative spherical reflecting
cavity as its sample observation chamber. Due to multiple reflections at the
cavity wall, scattering losses due to sample turbidity are eliminated or
minimized because scattered light is prevented from escaping the detector. These
combined spectral and oxygen measurements will be conducted while the intact
microorganisms are oxidizing and reducing during reversible cyclic voltammetry
potentiometric scans. The genera of microorganisms to be studied include, but
are not limited to, Acidithiobacillus, Leptospirillum, Acidihalobacter,
Sulfobacillus, Ferroplasma, and Metallosphaera, representing 5 of the 6 phyla
that contain members that respire on iron. Prior in situ absorbance measurements
demonstrated that each of these five microorganisms appeared to express a
different set of colored electron transfer biomolecules to respire aerobically
on iron. Thus, these studies provide the opportunity to compare and contrast 5
different mechanisms/pathways to accomplish the same metabolic goal of respiring
on soluble iron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.