* 1830897
* Collaborative Research: Working meetings to break down theoretical and disciplinary silos in research on change in undergraduate STEM education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Daniel Reinholz, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 09/30/2021
* USD 45,740.00

To enhance undergraduate Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
education for all students, instructional practices and curricula with robust
evidence of their effectiveness need to be more widely implemented in our
colleges and universities. Accomplishing this goal will require institutions of
higher education, their departments, and faculty members to change current
policies and practices. Theories about making such changes come from diverse
disciplines. The resulting complexity and breadth of the literature makes it
challenging to identify, understand, and apply relevant theories. Additionally,
most investigations of change in undergraduate STEM education focus on a single
initiative, so the results of many studies are needed to refine theories of
change and to identify approaches for meaningful change. Thus, there is a need
for a rigorous, analytical synthesis of these theories and how they might be
used to promote meaningful change in undergraduate STEM education. The goals of
this project are to break down theoretical and disciplinary silos, and to build
capacity to more effectively investigate, understand, and facilitate changes
that enhance undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education project will convene a series of in-person and
virtual meetings in which researchers who investigate systemic change in
undergraduate education will synthesize and organize theories of change. In the
process, these meetings will build community and enhanced capacity for research
on systemic change in undergraduate STEM education. Meetings will include about
20 discipline-based education researchers from different STEM disciplines who
are emerging scholars studying change, as well as national leaders in systemic
change in undergraduate STEM. The work accomplished in these meetings will help
investigators make better use of relevant theories of change in their STEM
education research. The products of this work will be shared via journal
articles as well as Wikipedia pages and the Accelerating Systemic Change Network
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.