* 1830226
* An integrated study of the driving forces and deposits of shallow water eruptions of volatile-rich basalt: Socorro 1993 revisited
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Steven Carey, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 196,487.00

Shallow water submarine volcanism plays a critical role in the formation of
oceanic islands and is associated with hazards to both human populations and
marine biological communities. One of the most rarely observed styles of these
eruptions is the production of giant floating lava blocks that are filled with
gas. When they rise to the sea surface these "lava balloons" often explode and
then settle back down to the seafloor. Little is known about this unusual style
of submarine volcanism due to the lack of direct observation as only five such
eruptions have been documented, all of which occurred at oceanic islands
associated with volcanic hotspots such as Hawaii, the Canary Islands, the
Azores, and the Revillagigedo archipelago in Mexico. This research develops a
better understanding of how these floating gas filled lava blocks are formed
during relatively shallow water volcanic eruptions. The project focus on "lava
balloon" samples and other associated explosive volcanic products, like ash and
other pyroclastic material, erupted from vents off the shores of Mexico's
Socorro Island in the eastern Pacific in 1993. During a 2017 oceanographic
exploration by the ship, E/V Nautilus, high-resolution video was collected by a
submersible, remotely-operated vehicle called Hercules in the area of the
eruption at a location where floating gas filled lava blocks were observed while
the volcano was active. Other samples of the volcanic material and deposits were
also collected and their trace element geochemistry, volatile content, melt
inclusions, and the depositional characteristics of the resulting volcanic ash
and ejecta layers were targeted for analysis. Objectives of the research include
(1) defining the morphology, structure, and nature of the 1993 Socorro vent site
based on ultrahigh-resolution bathymetric surveys from the Hercules; (2)
carrying out geochemical analyses on the samples to characterize their magmatic
composition, volatile content and degassing history, their magma viscosity, and
source characteristics; and (3) developing an eruption model for the 1993 event
using degassing simulations with inputs from geochemical and textural analyses.
Broader impacts of the work include student training at the graduate and
undergraduate levels, leveraging unique samples collected at great cost,
characterization of a newly designated UNESCO World Heritage Site, and
interaction with the Ocean Exploration Trust which is has a major public and
K-12 outreach program showcasing the cruise and science coming from the
associated research. A video that will have wide dissemination, documenting
seagoing research exposing the public to the life of a marine geologist at sea
and the wonders of exploring submarine volcanic environments, will be created
and there is international collaboration with scientists from Mexico. The work
will also contribute to hazard evaluations around the coasts of volcanically-
active oceanic islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volcanic ejecta of sizes from
microns to meters and deposits of these that resulted from the 1993 explosive
submarine eruption of Socorro Volcano off the western coast of Mexico will be
characterized geochemically and texturally to determine the conditions of
eruption and deposition of explosive debris around the vent site. Geochemical
analyses will include mineral and glass analyses via electron microprobe, a New
Wave 213 nanometer laser ablation system coupled to a Thermo X-Series II
inductively coupled mass spectrometer, and a Thermo Nicolet iS50 Fourier
Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectrometer. Resulting trace element data will be
modeled and new FTIR data will provide minimum values of pre-eruption gas
contents for the Socorro magma. CO2/H2O degassing paths, determined from melt
inclusion volatile analyses, will provide specific information about whether
degassing occurred under closed- or open-system conditions and allow predictions
of vesicularities under different degassing scenarios to be made. Magma ascent
rates will be modeled using volatile diffusion profiles in glass embayments and
phenocrysts in the volcanic ejecta. For very small volcanic particles, a
scanning electron microscope (SEM) will be used to examine surface features to
evaluate the role of explosive magma/seawater interactions in the eruption
process. Another important goal of the research will be development of a well-
constrained facies model (scale, morphology, deposit types) for shallow water
eruptions of this style, with these samples and this site providing a modern
analogue for the paleo-environmental interpretation of ancient, highly vesicular
submarine basaltic sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.