* 1830958
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Magneto-electroactive Soft, Continuum, Compliant, Configurable (MESo-C3) Robots for Medical Applications Across Scales
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Rajesh Rajamani, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,015,910.00

The vision of this collaborative project between the University of Utah, the
University of Minnesota, and Santa Clara University is to extend the
capabilities of clinicians by enabling minimally invasive access to locations in
the human body that are currently difficult or impossible to reach, using a new
class of 3D printed magneto-electroactive soft, continuum, compliant, and
configurable (MESo-C3) mesoscale robotic devices that will travel along the
natural pathways of the human body for a wide range of diagnostic and
therapeutic applications. This includes a new breed of tethered and untethered
soft endoscopes, catheters, and minirobots with diameters of &amp;#8764;0.1-10mm
that will address limitations of current clinical and benchtop devices. MESo-C3
will fundamentally change medical devices that currently involve pushing,
pulling, or screwing through the lumens of the human body to devices that
actively wiggle and assist in their own propulsion and maneuvering. The
knowledge and technology created in this project have the potential to
significantly impact healthcare across the globe. Cancers of the
gastrointestinal (GI) tract are some of the most common and most deadly, and the
likelihood of survival is significantly increased with early detection, yet our
population is still woefully underscreened. MESo-C3 could make GI-tract
screening safer, less expensive, more effective, and less intimidating to
patients. Many disorders of the brain are difficult or impossible to treat due
to the brain's fragility and complex structure. MESo-C3 could enable safe access
to currently unreachable areas of the brain, which could fundamentally change
our treatment and understanding of what is arguably our most important organ. In
addition, the knowledge generated in the area of additive manufacturing will
have impact far beyond MESo-C3. The project also provides research opportunities
for undergraduate students, involves presentations to large numbers of high-
school students, supports a new summer-camp outreach activity to the
underrepresented Pacific Islander community, and involves industry and medical
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MESo-C3 is a unique synergistic integration of
three complementary technologies: compliant cylindrical structures with wireless
high-bandwidth magnetic propulsion; low-bandwidth large-deformation
electroactive polymer (EAP) actuators; and ultra-sensitive soft
supercapacitance-based strain, force, and moduli-of-elasticity sensors via
multi-scale additive manufacturing technology. The goal is to understand the
kinematics, dynamics, sensing, and control of 3D-printed MESo-C3 robots, with a
simplicity that enables application across scales. This project comprises of the
co-development of four integrated research aims: (1) Magnetic propulsion that is
simple in terms of fabrication and control compared to previous mechanisms for
crawling in tubes, which easily lends itself to being incorporated into small,
functional capsule- and catheter-shaped medical devices. A variety of modeling
tools with varying levels of fidelity and computational costs will be devised to
elucidate the propulsion dynamics and support the design and optimization of the
MESo-C3 robots at different stages of the project. (2) Innovative approaches for
EAP-based morphology control to enable intelligent reconfiguration,
manipulation, and steering of MESo-C3 robots. (3) Supercapacitive sensors
designed for use in body-fluid environments, and capable of measuring shear and
normal forces on the robot, strains at critical locations, and elasticity moduli
of grasped objects. (4) The advancement of multiscale, multimaterial 3D printing
via fundamental studies of soft-matter physics and materials development to
enable the creation of mesoscale hybrid devices, which seamlessly integrates
with the development of the key technologies in aims 1 through
3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.