* 1830114
* WORKSHOP: The Doctoral Colloquium at the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing (CSCW 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Aleksandra Sarcevic, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2019
* USD 19,982.00

This is funding to support participation by about 10 U.S. graduate students and
5 senior mentors in the Doctoral Colloquium workshop held in conjunction with
the 2018 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social
Computing (CSCW 2018), which will be held in Jersey City, New Jersey, USA on
November 3-7, 2018. The annual CSCW conference is a leading international forum
for the presentation and discussion of research, design and practice of
collaboration, collaborative systems and social computing. The goals of the
workshop are to provide feedback and advice on current research and future
careers to students who are nearing graduation; to foster creativity,
communication, and collaboration across diverse topics of interest in CSCW; and
to build a cohort of leading student social computing researchers. The
organizers will make a particular effort to reach students from groups
traditionally underrepresented in CSCW (and more broadly computer and
information science and engineering) in order to broaden the impact of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The workshop will take place November 3-4, 2018
with follow-up events during the conference's main technical program.
Participants will be recruited with a wide net, with an emphasis on broadening
participation and diversity of institutions, topics, and fields (including but
not limited to from a variety of fields such as computer science/engineering,
information science, psychology, cognitive science, and social psychology). The
format includes oral and poster presentations by student attendees, a hands-on
breakout session, a panel discussion, and an informal dinner and one-on-one
conversations with mentors. This format enables students to share and receive
feedback on their research while learning from senior and junior researchers in
the field. Workshop participants will also gain knowledge of current research
conducted by their colleagues, awareness of diverse interdisciplinary
methodologies, and an understanding of emerging themes in
CSCW.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.