* 1830723
* EAGER: Development of the cyanotoxins, cylindrospermopsin and microcystin, as paleolimnological tools
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Matthew Waters, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 03/31/2020
* USD 149,422.00

The quality of water in lakes changes with increasing temperature and nutrient
enrichment that leads to algal blooms. Increases in algal blooms typically
include cyanobacteria, which are capable of producing toxins called cyanotoxins.
These cyanotoxins are harmful to human health and to other animals that live in
or drink water from the lakes. There is little, historical data on algal blooms
and cyanotoxins, which makes it difficult to understand how long they have been
occurring and what makes them happen. This project will advance our
understanding of algal blooms and cyanotoxin occurrence by focusing on the
historical record of cyanotoxins that are preserved in the sediments of lakes.
There are significant challenges in relating the cyanotoxin in lake sediments to
their historic production in the water column of lakes. This EAGER project will
develop innovative methods to extract and measure cyanotoxins in lake sediment,
and conduct experiments to quantify how the toxins degrade under various
environmental conditions. Researchers will then make critical determinations of
historic production of these toxins for Lake Harris in Florida. Results from
this project will be broadly useful in developing standard methods for the study
of cyanotoxins in all lakes and reservoirs, and will provide lake and municipal
water managers a new tool to acquire cyanotoxin data on a longer time scale.
This project will also provide research training for graduate, undergraduate and
high school students, including members of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While these paleolimnological investigations are providing
much needed records of historic cyanotoxin production, it is unknown if changes
in paleo-cyanotoxin stratigraphies result from alterations in toxin production,
degradation or deposition. As a result, sediment studies incorporating
cyanotoxins as a proxy are at risk to incorrectly infer historic toxin
production. This research will establish cyanotoxin water-sediment connections,
develop innovative analytical protocols, and cutting-edge degradation indices
for determining cyanotoxin sediment studies on cylindrospermopsin and
microcystin. In addition, results from these experiments will used to verify
cyanotoxin deposition with known periods of historic eutrophication and
limnological change throughout the Holocene. The objectives of the study are: 1)
develop sediment-water column connections for cyanotoxins by matching surface
sediment cyanotoxin concentrations with known water column cyanotoxin values and
improving extraction methods, 2) determine degradation coefficients for CYN and
MC in a variety of sediment types under a range of environmental variables
(temperature, oxygen, organic matter content) experienced in lake sediment
environments, and 3) identify stratigraphic changes of cyanotoxins and
cyanobacteria pigments from sediment cores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.