* 1830876
* Student/Scientist Workshop: A Satellite Session for Progress in Clinical Motor Control I: Neurorehabilitation (PCMC1) Conference; University Park, Pennsylvania; July 23-25, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Eugene Tunik, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scheidt
* 04/30/2019
* USD 19,770.00

The 2018 "Progress in Clinical Motor Control I: Neurorehabilitation" (PCMC1)
Conference will be held from July 23-25, 2018, on the Pennsylvania State
University, University Park campus. This conference will provide a premier
interdisciplinary platform for researchers, practitioners and educators to hear
from top scholars on recent research and technological innovations, as well as
practical challenges in integrating these advances into the field of
neurorehabiliation. One focus of the conference - Human / Machine Interactions
within the field of neurorehabilitation - is well-aligned with the objectives of
the National Science Foundation's "Mind, Machine and Motor Nexus" (M3X) program.
This project will support a workshop to be held on day 1 of the PCMC1
conference. This multidisciplinary workshop will provide educational/mentorship
activities introducing graduate students in the field of Motor Control to
scientific leaders spanning the engineering, basic science, and clinical
domains. This workshop will enable student/faculty discussion on career
development, grantsmanship, and scientific planning in a personalized format. By
cultivating professional relationships between graduate students and senior
scientists with whom they might not otherwise engage, this project will serve
the national interest and advance the NSF mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance the national health. As such, the intellectual merit and
broader impacts of this workshop are well aligned with the mission of the NSF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to support eighteen graduate students
and six faculty in a workshop designed to foster career development for the next
generation of engineers and scientists advancing understanding of human/machine
interactions within the field of Neurorehabilitation. Students will be selected
from among those who submit abstracts. Selection will be based both on
scientific merit and an attempt to obtain broad diversity of participation.
Mentors will be selected from conference speakers to have diversity of
representation in terms of content expertise, gender, and racial/ethnic
background. Participation in conferences is a valuable and important part of the
graduate school experience; the proposed workshop will augment that experience
by exposing students to senior researchers and leading-edge work in their
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.