* 1830874
* EXCELLENCE IN RESEARCH: QUANTUM NANOPHOTONICS WITH PERIODIC CARBON NANOTUBE ARRAYS
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Igor Bondarev, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 486,157.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to advance understanding of how the spectrum of light
from atoms, molecules, quantum dots, and other nanostructures is affected by
interaction with a substrate. The PI will focus on a substrate that is made of
an array of closely packed nanoscale cylinders of carbon with diameters on the
scale of nanometers and up to about a centimeter in length. These carbon
nanotubes resemble rolled "chicken wire" on the nanoscale with carbon atoms at
the vertices. By adjusting the carbon nanotube structure, the electronic
properties of the substrate can be controlled and so the properties, including
the optical properties, of the nearby molecule or quantum dot, including how
they emit light, can also be controlled. The PI will use a theoretical approach
based on quantum mechanics, solid state physics, and optics combined with
computer simulations to understand qualitatively and quantitatively how this
system may be used for molecular sensing, controlling chemical reactions, as a
sensitive probe of the electromagnetic and optical properties of molecules and
nanostructures, tunable light sources, and other possible applications.
&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed to provide theoretical understanding of
capabilities and practical guidance for the experimental development of these
closely packed periodically aligned carbon nanotube arrays - ultrathin
multifunctional metasurfaces - a new flexible advanced photonic metamaterial
platform with the near-field characteristics adjustable on demand by means of
the nanotube diameter, chirality and periodicity variation. &lt;br/&gt;This
award supports training a new generation of scientists and engineers capable of
harnessing the opportunities presented by nanomaterials for new technologies and
to better understand the world around us. This theory and simulation project
will help to shape the graduate curriculum of the Department of Mathematics and
Physics at North Carolina Central University, the nation's first state-supported
public liberal arts college for African Americans. Relevant graduate courses
offered by the Department will be revised and enhanced to include aspects of
low-dimensional carbon nanomaterials inspired in part by the research. Advanced
graduate students will have opportunities to participate in cutting-edge
research, attend research symposia, present seminars, and develop Master's
theses. Increased exposure of students to this exciting and rapidly expanding
field of nanotechnology will lead to increased participation of underrepresented
minority students in scientific careers and in graduate studies in scientific
fields. This project will thus contribute to broadening the diversity of the
next generation of scientists, researchers and engineers and to directly address
national needs in the areas of Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical and computational research and education to advance the
fundamental theoretical understanding of near-field interactions and quantum
processes in planar closely packed periodically aligned carbon nanotube arrays.
Intrinsic mechanisms of plasmon enhanced spectroscopic detection, molecular
sensing, and control will be studied using rigorous methods of theoretical
solid-state physics, quantum electrodynamics and quantum optics, combined with
computer modeling and simulations. Carbon nanotubes have been successfully
integrated into miniaturized electronic, electromechanical, and chemical
devices, scanning probes, and into nanocomposite materials, offering
extraordinary stability, flexibility, and precise tunability of their physical
properties. Recent progress in the fabrication of closely packed periodically
aligned carbon nanotube arrays opens new opportunities and challenges to develop
new material functionalities with these highly anisotropic ultrathin
metamaterial structures. Plasmonic bands form because of the nanotube array
periodicity, and so the planar closely packed periodic carbon nanotube arrays
should behave as epsilon-near-zero plasmonic metasurfaces in the near field
while remaining strong light absorbers and polarizers in the far field. The
spatial anisotropy and the periodic in-plane transverse inhomogeneity of the
array make the electromagnetic field in its vicinity anisotropic and nonlocal,
adding both extra flexibility in designing the arrays with desired
electromagnetic properties and extra challenges in developing the problem
theoretically. Plasmon generated near fields can strengthen weak electronic
and/or vibrational molecular transitions to enhance low-energy absorption,
scattering and chemical reactivity features for molecules near the planar
nanotube array. This project will be focusing on the quantum theory development
for near-field electromagnetic absorption and far-field reflection/scattering by
extrinsic emitters coupled to spatially anisotropic, periodically inhomogeneous,
dissipative magneto-dielectric environment in close proximity to the periodic
carbon nanotube array. Process cross-sections will be derived in universal forms
suitable both for the experimental interpretation and for the practical guidance
of the experimental development to uncover novel functionalities of the planar
periodic carbon nanotube arrays as a new flexible advanced photonic metamaterial
platform with near-field characteristics adjustable on demand by means of the
nanotube diameter, chirality, and array periodicity. Particular practical
applications of this theoretical effort include: (a) efficient Surface Enhanced
Raman Scattering substrate development for single atom/ ion/molecule detection,
trapping and manipulation; (b) precision control of spontaneous emission,
absorption and scattering by atomic type emitters trapped near the planar
nanotube array metasurfaces; (c) near-field control of molecular chemical
reactivity and peculiar Casimir-Polder forces in close proximity to the periodic
carbon nanotube arrays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports training a new
generation of scientists and engineers capable of harnessing the opportunities
presented by nanomaterials for new technologies and to better understand the
world around us. This theory and simulation project will help to shape the
graduate curriculum of the Department of Mathematics and Physics at North
Carolina Central University, the nation's first state-supported public liberal
arts college for African Americans. Relevant graduate courses offered by the
Department will be revised and enhanced to include aspects of low-dimensional
carbon nanomaterials inspired in part by the research. Advanced graduate
students will have opportunities to participate in the cutting-edge research,
attend research symposia, present seminars, and develop Master's theses.
Increased exposure of students to this exciting and rapidly expanding field of
nanotechnology will lead to increased participation of underrepresented minority
students in scientific careers and in graduate studies in scientific fields.
This project will thus contribute to broadening the diversity of the next
generation of scientists, researchers and engineers and to directly address
national needs in the areas of Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is made on a proposal to the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
under the HBCU Excellence in Research track. Funds from the HBCU-UP program in
the Division of Human Resource Development in the Human Resource Development
Directorate and from the Division Materials Research in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.