* 1830225
* ATD: Algorithm, Analysis, and Prediction for Nonlinear and Non-Stationary Signals via Data-Driven Iterative Filtering Methods
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hao-Min Zhou, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Have you ever wondered how to separate two conversations recorded at the same
time in one room or how to identify irregular patterns in a electrocardiogram
reading? In signal processing, those tasks are called de-mixing, which is very
challenging, especially when the signals are mixed in a time-varying manner
(non-stationary), or when they are not simply added together (nonlinear). The
standard methods, such as the algorithms based on classical Fourier analysis or
wavelets, can work effectively for linear and stationary signals, but are not as
satisfactory for nonlinear or non-stationary signals. Developing algorithms that
can handle such signals becomes a timely task that inspires a wave of research
in recent years. A new method, named adaptive local iterative filtering (ALIF)
is proposed in this project. ALIF can decompose a non-stationary and nonlinear
signal into finitely many components, each of which is called an intrinsic mode
function (IMF) that reflects the local property at a certain frequency. ALIF is
a nonlinear process that can be adaptive according to the input signals, and can
separate different local features (frequencies) automatically. ALIF will also be
used together with a machine learning method called factorization machine (FM)
to develop a novel signal prediction strategy. It is expected that the ALIF and
its prediction algorithms can be used in various applications such as chemical
and biological threat detections, ionospheric radio power scintillation in
geophysics, data classification and prediction in social media, and financial
data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nonlinear and non-stationary signals are
ubiquitous in real world applications, and they often cannot be handled
effectively by the standard algorithms based on Fourier/wavelet transforms, due
to the non-linearity and/or their time-varying nature. To capture features,
especially the hidden ones, in these signals, it is necessary for the analysis
methods to be local, adaptive and stable. The focus of this project has two
parts: 1) designing data adaptive algorithms that involve techniques such as
iterative filtering for the time frequency analysis; and 2) developing
prediction strategies using adaptive iterative filtering techniques in
conjunction with the neural networks on nonlinear and non-stationary signals. In
the first part, an adaptive local iterative filtering (ALIF) is designed to
decompose nonlinear and non-stationary signals, without knowing its
instantaneous frequency information in advance. Accompanied with ALIF is a new
way, based on dynamical system concepts, to calculate the instantaneous
frequencies for decomposed signals. The second part of the project is on a
feature prediction strategy, using ALIF together with the factorization machine
from neural networks, to learn and predict useful features from noisy signals.
In both parts, the mathematical properties, such as convergence and stability of
the proposed algorithms, are at the center of studies along with various
applications including chemical and biological threat detection, ionospheric
radio power scintillation in geophysics, and financial data analysis. The
research topic contains a wide range of problems that can be used as projects
suitable for undergraduate and graduate education, and postdoctoral scholar
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.