* 1830577
* LEAP-HI: Investigation of coupled skull-brain vibroacoustics and ultrasound toward enhanced therapy and diagnosis
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Levent Degertekin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure
(LEAP-HI) project promises important improvements in the diagnosis and treatment
of brain cancer, brain trauma and cranial defects, the mapping of brain
function, and neurostimulation. The award supports fundamental research to
overcome current difficulties in guiding acoustical energy through the skull and
into the brain in a controlled way. It will investigate vibration and wave
propagation characteristics of the skull-brain system over a broad frequency
range, from low frequencies to the ultrasound regime, by using synergistic
analytical, computational and experimental methods to thoroughly and
systematically investigate the vibration, vibroacoustics, and wave propagation
properties of the skull-brain system and explore their relevance to medical
diagnosis and therapy. The investigation of the skull and brain as a combined
dynamical system will not only advance understanding of ultrasound-based
treatments, but also open new possibilities for diagnosis and therapy. Overall,
the outcomes of this research project are expected to have broad societal
impacts in areas related to the public health, especially for disorders and
diseases related to the brain and central nervous system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this interdisciplinary research project
is to explore the vibration and ultrasonic wave propagation characteristics of
the skull-brain system to improve therapeutics and diagnosis. The specific
research questions are: (1) can an in-depth understanding of the coupled
vibroacoustics of the skull-brain system be leveraged to more effectively
overcome the skull barrier; (2) can the use of Lamb waves and longitudinal bulk
waves enable the targeting of currently inaccessible brain regions for therapy;
(3) can parametric array effects coupled with modal vibrations of the skull-
brain system lead to improved targeting over the therapeutic and imaging
frequency ranges? Research activities will be concentrated on the following two
major components: (1) feasibility demonstration of spatially phase- and
amplitude-modulated Lamb waves for targeting of currently inaccessible brain
regions for ultrasound-based treatments, and (2) investigation of parametric
ultrasound and acoustic radiation force effects coupled with modal vibrations of
the skull-brain system for improved targeting over the therapeutic and imaging
frequency ranges. The interdisciplinary research team will be focused on tasks
pertaining to Lamb wave-based trans-skull ultrasound transmission and focusing,
ultrasound excitation of skull-brain system vibration modes, and finite-
amplitude sound propagation effects in the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.