* 1830873
* RCN: Community Network for Volcanic Eruption Response (CONVERSE)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Tobias Fischer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 09/30/2023
* USD 310,154.00

Volcanic eruptions pose significant hazards to human life and can be extremely
disruptive to the economy of regions and entire countries. The potential success
of forecasting and prediction of volcanic eruptions strongly hinges on adequate
monitoring of the volcano prior to and during the initial unrest, as well as
detailed knowledge of the geologic history of the volcano. Significant advances
have been made in the past decade with regards to geophysical and geochemical
volcano monitoring techniques that have improved our understanding of what
processes may lead up to an eruption. A recent report from the National
Academies of Sciences identified that multi-disciplinary and near real-time
instrumental observations are critical to make progress in the development of
physics-based volcano models that allow for more accurate volcanic activity
forecasting. This Research Coordination Network (RCN) has the goal to prepare
the US Volcano research community for coordinated and interdisciplinary
collaborations to improve the detection of volcanic unrest and when eruptions
occur enable the effective responses to these eruptions in order to collect key
data and samples. The RCN focuses on science community building and coordination
between academic institutions and federal agencies, in particular the USGS but
also NASA, NOAA, and other entities like NCAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RCN also
has the goal to help address fundamental science questions through multi-
disciplinary investigations of processes during volcanic activity such as: 1)
Can we adequately forecast the size, duration, and hazards of eruptions by
integrating observations with quantitative models of magma dynamics? and 2) Can
we quantify the life cycles of volcanoes. Broader questions that can be tackled
with such interdisciplinary approach are: 1) How is mantle magma production
connected through the crust and to volcanoes?; 2) How fast do magmas traverse
the crust and what controls the location of storage regions of these magmas?;
and 3) What are the physical processes that drive pre-eruption phenomena?
Obtaining the best possible and most complete data to address these questions
requires collection of data during the first signs of volcanic unrest and run-up
to eruption, followed by multi-disciplinary collection of data and samples
during the eruption. The leading participants in the Community Network for
Volcanic Eruption Response (CoNVErSe) represent a broadly interdisciplinary
group of scientists from academia and US federal agencies who reflect the wide
range of data, samples, instrumentation and modeling that currently
characterizes volcano science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.