* 1830730
* Research Initiation: Exploring Epistemologies where Engineering Meets Art
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Nadia Kellam, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 210,489.00

Recently, the combination of engineering and the arts has been championed as an
effective educational model for training future engineers. The diverse ideas and
skills required from combining engineering and art encourages creative student
thinking and opens new, non-traditional pathways into engineering. New domains
of engineering such as computer graphics, 3D printing, artificial intelligence,
and human-computer interaction require engineers to work with designers, visual
artists, and humanities scholars for their science and technologies to have
societal impact. Engineers need not just technical skills, but social awareness
and communication skills to effectively work across these domain boundaries of
art and engineering. Through combining engineering and art curriculum, these
needs are addressed in a meaningful way. These programs typically feature an
extensive collaboration or design project for students in engineering and the
arts to interact and work with one another. However, much research has pointed
out the difficulty of these interactions between participants due to the
diversity of viewpoint, background, and skills. This project aims to understand
theories of knowledge that students utilize in a collaborative engineering and
arts environment. This will help develop a better understanding of the nature of
interactions at the boundary of art and engineering. Insights that emerge from
this work promise to improve the educational experiences of engineers
interacting in these programs and foster new, diverse and inclusive ways of
working for the engineering workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
comparative study of two subsets of students at Arizona State University: (i) a
group of engineering and arts students pursuing a year-long design/capstone
project from the transdisciplinary School of Arts, Media and Engineering; and
(ii) a contrasting group of engineering students pursuing a year-long senior
design project in a traditional Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering
School. Through analysis of these student's experiences, researchers answer a
series of research questions on the range and depth of epistemological beliefs
held by participants in both populations, and any similarities and differences
among the participants. In addition, through discourse analysis of language and
terms used by participants and of observation notes of working groups,
researchers reveal philosophical viewpoints and how these viewpoints affect
communication, offering insight into effective collaboration between engineering
and the arts. The intellectual merits of this proposal include generation of
fundamental knowledge into the epistemological viewpoints and interactions in
art and engineering learning environments and conceptual frameworks of personal
epistemology in education. The broader impacts of this project include
pedagogical material for transdisciplinary engineering and media arts courses,
public outreach and participation through the Center for Science and the
Imagination, and participation in the Digital Culture Summer Institute to
introduce a diverse set of middle and high school students to engineering and
the arts projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.