* 1830497
* NRI: FND: Probabilistic Hypothesis-Driven Adaptive Human-Robot Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mark Campbell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 08/31/2023
* USD 663,869.00

Teams of humans and robots working together have the potential to transform
search and rescue operations, given the maturation of robotic technology and the
ability to task each (human or robot) individually and collaboratively. Example
applications include locating survivors or gas leaks after earthquakes or fires,
where the safe access for first responders is limited, and locating a
chemical/biological release in an urban environment. The disaster response
example offers a broad motivational challenge, given the potentially hazardous
situations for humans, trapped survivors, fast changing conditions, and
communication uncertainties. The key challenge in developing truly efficient and
high performing human-robot teams is enabling the team to intelligently reason
and act together. This research project will address this challenge by
developing hypothesis-based methods to communicate between humans and robots to
enable their collective perception about the environment, and to develop sub-
teams and tasks to address the search problem as it evolves. Broader educational
impacts include having undergraduate and high school students collaborate with
the research team to perform experiments and data collection. Outcomes include
open source algorithms and data logs for researchers in the community, and for
robotics and controls classes; dissemination through publications, conferences,
workshops and NRI meetings; and the inclusion of undergrad and high school
students and diversity programs collaborating in the interdisciplinary area of
human-robot teaming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research project is
to develop foundational theory and validated algorithms for human-robot teams
which can uniquely operate in, and adapt to, a complex and changing environment,
particularly as knowledge of the environment/tasks evolves over time. The
technical approach uses a probabilistic hypothesis formulation as a basis to
formulate both the Process Inference and Team Forming problems. Formal modeling
methods will connect human's natural language to hypotheses of the perception
and teaming tasks, thereby allowing humans and robots to communicate efficiently
and collaboratively. Hypotheses will be evaluated by the robots for information
content using physical and data driven models to capture the processes and
sensing. Importantly, both the inference and teaming will evolve as the complex
processes evolve. The hypothesis-based approaches and team adaptation will be
validated in a series of human-robot search experiments, and scaling will be
validated via large scale simulations. The approach also enables the perception
and planning to evolve as the scene evolves. This project aims to advance
cooperative robot collaboration via human-robot information exchange; the
scalability of cooperative robot teams where the team itself adapts over time as
information is collected and knowledge is formed; and demonstrate the role for
physical embodiment of intelligent systems as human-robot teams address complex
applicable models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.