* 1830218
* NRI: FND: Contact-aware Control of Dynamic Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Michael Posa, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 512,880.00

Working independently and in coordination with humans and other devices,
intelligent robots have the potential for profound positive impact on society.
To achieve this promise, robots must be fast, capable, and safe as they interact
in complex, highly uncertain environments. In this context, the fundamental
tasks of grasping and dexterous manipulation are critical: when robots touch
their surroundings, they typically operate slowly and cautiously to avoid any
accidental contact or damage. This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) research
project will develop multi-purpose algorithms for dynamic grasping and
manipulation to achieve human-like speed and effectiveness for a broad range of
applications. For in-home assistive robots, for example, safety and speed are
both important when manipulating either objects or people. Prosthetic devices
would also benefit from reliable and dynamic semi-autonomy: too often the
control burden is placed on the user, who has limited sensing and actuation
through the prosthetic interface. Additionally, both small and advanced
manufacturing industries that require interaction with multiple tools and parts
may benefit from this research. Outcomes of this research may also benefit
robotic use in safety-critical applications, such as in disaster relief
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental challenge in dexterous manipulation
lies in the complexity of the contact between robot and object. Frictional
contact introduces mathematical challenges to the governing equations of motion,
particularly discontinuities which result in a combinatorial number of hybrid
modes. This combinatorial complexity frustrates standard algorithmic methods,
typically limiting manipulation schemes to a strict sequencing of contacts,
defined a priori. This research has two central hypotheses. First, that formal,
optimization-based numerical methods can discover and verify simple (non-
combinatoric) control approaches that will be both dynamic and robust for
unstructured manipulation tasks. This simplicity parallels human control of
finger forces. Second, by explicitly considering the dynamics of manipulation,
this research will lead to more robust and capable approaches than purely static
or quasi-static methods. The algorithms will be implemented and tested on a
physical, multi-link arm and gripper and in a simulated
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.