* 1830547
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Spatio-Temporal Data Analysis with Dynamic Network Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2021
* James Wilson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 12/31/2021
* USD 141,685.00

Modeling and analyzing spatially-determined and time-varying (spatiotemporal)
interactions is at the forefront of research in many scientific and engineering
disciplines, including the social and behavioral sciences, transportation,
healthcare, economics, and epidemiology. This project represents spatiotemporal
interactions of entities as a dynamic complex network and aims to develop
statistically-principled methods for modeling, analyzing, and monitoring the
dynamic interactions. The methods developed in this work will provide scalable
solutions for problems relevant to threat detection, including understanding
spreading of diseases and viruses through human proximity networks,
understanding human migration patterns through geo-tagged social media data, and
monitoring multi-modal urban mobility networks through video footage and sensor
logs in a smart city. Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained in
interdisciplinary data science through involvement in the research. New data
structures, models, and algorithms for manipulating and analyzing spatiotemporal
networks will be implemented in the widely-used NetworkX Python
package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to advance the field of
spatiotemporal network analysis by developing new models and methods for
representing, monitoring, and predicting spatiotemporal interactions. The
research introduces new problem formulations, new analytical methods, and new
algorithmic techniques for implementation. This project has three primary aims.
First, the project will develop a dynamic embedding model in a latent hyperbolic
space to represent spatiotemporal networks. This model enables tracking
topological changes both at the network level and at the level of pairs of
entities over time. Next, the project will investigate a network surveillance
framework based on a multi-resolution exponential random graph model to monitor
complex spatiotemporal systems for real-time anomalies and threats. Third, the
project will develop a multivariate point process on collections of actors in a
spatiotemporal network to model timestamped directed events across different
regions in space. This project seeks to create an integrated framework for
simultaneously monitoring systematic risk and detecting imminent threat to a
system using multi-modal network monitoring techniques. The techniques under
development will be utilized to monitor complex systems arising from massive
spatiotemporal data accumulation, including data on human contacts through
physical proximity, social media data, and event data such as homicides in city
neighborhoods and conflicts between countries. The fundamental results derived
in this work will guide research in modeling and inference on dynamic networks
and will serve as a benchmark for future work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.