* 1830969
* EFRI CEE: Epigenomic Regulation Over Multiple Length Scales: Understanding Chromatin Modifications Through Label Free Imaging and Multi-Scale Modeling
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hao Zhang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,999,920.00

This project will develop novel computational and imaging technologies for a new
level of understanding about chromatin organization. Chromatin is the condensed
complex of DNA and proteins in every cell nucleus whose structure and function
is a core determinant of gene expression, and as such controls every aspect of
the growth, development and health of organisms. The computational work will be
used to inform experimental imaging and the imaging will correspondingly inform
the computation to develop validated models of chromatin structure at multiple
length scales. These models will enable scientists to address key questions
about how local changes in DNA at the atomic scale relate to changes in
chromatin at the nanometer scale, and ultimately alter gene expression. The new
technologies developed will be made publicly available, which will facilitate
research across disciplines spanning physics and engineering to biology, and
support the National Science Foundation's goal of Understanding the Rules of
Life. The project will involve multiple cross-disciplinary teams of graduate
students and postdoctoral scholars who will be trained for successful careers in
science and engineering. A 6-week summer course is also planned to inspire and
train high school students for the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will start by examining the single chromatin fiber problem through
exploitation of the "heat shock response" that enables cells to survive high
temperatures through activation of heat shock genes. This fundamental process
can be used to detect changes in chromatin structure associated with changes in
gene expression. Through state-of-the-art imaging, relying on spectroscopic
intrinsic-contrast photon-localization optical nanoscopy (SICLON), this work
seeks to resolve chromatin structure in vivo to as low as 5 nm length scale. To
extract the dynamics of chromatin in this region, computer representations of
the images will be generated through combined machine learning, evolutionary
optimization strategies and finite difference time domain methods. The workflow
will iteratively solve chromatin configurations and infer molecular events for
any epigenetic response. The project will build upon a recently developed
multiscale chromatin model ideally suited for molecular-based interpretation of
experimental observations. As a secondary effort, the project will scale up
systems for identifying structural effects of heterochromatin domains by
investigating the impact of methyltransferase activity on these domains. Again,
this aspect of the work will rely on further development of label-free imaging
technologies to achieve sub-10 nm resolution, with the overall goal of
quantitative and predictive understanding the 3D organization of chromatin in
the cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences in the Biological
Sciences Directorate and by the Emerging Frontiers in Research and Innovation
Program in the Division of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary Activities
in the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.