* 1830145
* EAGER: Optical and System Engineering Interrogation of Vascular Amyloid in Alzheimer's Disease
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Ramin Pashaie, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 04/30/2021
* USD 299,720.00

Alzheimer's disease is a devastating condition which has no cure and only some
treatments for symptoms are available that do not stop the progression of the
disease. This disease is the 6th leading cause of death in the United States and
the only one among the top 10 that cannot be prevented, cured or even slowed.
The objective of this project is the development of the essential technologies
to study the effect of Alzheimer's on the vascular network of the
brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main cause of Alzheimer's disease is the
accumulation of a protein, called amyloid-beta in the brain tissue. Deposits of
this substance form skeletal structures around the blood vessels which prevent
the vessels from dilating and delivering enough oxygen and energy to active
cells. This condition damages the nerve cells and contributes to the initiation
or progression of the disease. The team will design and develop imaging
technologies which allow the study of this specific effect in unprecedented
details. They will use the collected data to develop computer algorithms to
predict the state and progression of the disease based on the acquired
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.