* 1830924
* EFRI C3 SoRo: An End-To-End Framework For Soft Robot Design And Control Based On High-Performance Electrohydraulic Transducers
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Amit Lal, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,999,999.00

This project will advance a new class of motors for soft robots, based on the
electrically driven pumping of liquid. These motor units, called HASELs
(hydraulically amplified self-healing electrostatic actuators), have the
potential to enable practical and useful soft robots for safe interactions with
humans. Robot components such as hands and legs will be designed and
manufactured using 3D printing. Effective 3D printing designs, and control
software developed in the project will be made available for public download and
use. An important outcome of this project will be engineering design principles
and useful tools that will allow citizen scientists to proliferate useful robots
in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a framework for the
widespread adoption of HASELs by addressing their manufacturing, power, and
control in easily replicated motifs that will be made available to the public in
free online databases. Additionally, frontier research will be explored to
further improve the state of the art in terms of efficiency, power density,
distributed computation, sensing, and actuation. In order to achieve these
goals, the project will leverage this rare opportunity for a coordinated,
multidisciplinary effort between experts in physics, material science,
microelectronic engineering, as well as low- and high-level controls. HASELs
represent the first electrostatic soft actuators that are stable and useful
enough for broad adoption by experts and non-experts alike. HASELs are
stretchable capacitors with a liquid dielectric. When voltage is applied, the
electrodes pull together and pump the dielectric liquid, combining the benefits
of fluidically pressurized actuators with the convenience of direct electrical
power. The self-healing ability of the dielectric liquid allows for repeated use
in circumstances impermissible in other electrostatic actuators. This project
will be a four-year effort that uses increasingly complex device demonstrations
as milestones. These milestones will demonstrate annual improvements in three
key areas: (i) Reproducible and Reliable Fabrication of Electrohydraulic Robots;
(ii) Distributed Microscale Power &amp; Computation; (iii) Design &amp; Control
of HASEL Robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly sponsored by the
National Science Foundation, Office of Emerging Frontiers and Multidisciplinary
Activities (EFMA) and the US Air Force Office of Scientific Research
(AFOSR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.