* 1830640
* Paleohydrological Assessment of Extreme Flooding Events
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Scott StGeorge, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 04/30/2023
* USD 419,072.00

This research project will examine the degree to which major floods can be
identified using paleoenvironmental records, thereby lengthening the historical
time periods over which flooding can be identified and enhancing capabilities
for analyzing relationships among surface hydrology, climate, and other natural
and human-related variables. Focusing on the Red River of the North, which
separates Minnesota and North Dakota, the investigators will compile data from
tree-ring sequences of long-lived trees, timbers from historical buildings, and
subfossil logs from alluvial deposits to produce a composite record that spans
the last several centuries. These records will facilitate more accurate
estimates of the frequency and magnitude of floods prior to the 20th century.
The project will increase understanding of the factors that influence flooding
over longer time periods, with surrogate records providing data for two or more
times the duration of instrument-based flood records. The historical extension
of flood records is especially valuable for studying very large floods that
occur infrequently. New insights generated through this project can help to
determine whether extreme floods on major river systems are becoming more common
as natural and human-related factors change in river basins. By demonstrating
how natural sources of flood information can contribute to flood mitigation
decisions prior to the construction of major infrastructure, this project will
reposition paleoflood hydrology within the broader field of hazard preparedness.
The investigators will collaborate with U.S. Geological Survey staff at the
Dakota Water Science Center to use paleoflood estimates in the assessment of
future flood risks. Project results will help those responsible for managing
rivers as well as residents and decision makers to evaluate vulnerability to
floods and to weigh the potential benefits of proposed infrastructure, such as
the construction of a 36-mile, $1.7 billion diversion channel that would
redirect floodwaters around the Fargo-Moorhead metropolitan
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will determine how the extraordinary
1826 Red River flood documented downstream in Canada in historical accounts also
affected the American stretch of the river. Red River floods have caused more
than $3.5 billion in direct damages to American communities over the past two
decades and have spurred the construction or proposed construction of nearly
$2.5 billion in flood mitigation infrastructure. Because the known record of Red
River floods only extends back to the late 19th century, other sources of
information are needed to estimate the risks of future severe floods. Using an
analog approach to compare tree-ring evidence associated with recent major
floods with known stage and discharges of older events only present in the tree-
ring record, the investigators will produce estimates of the relative magnitudes
of earlier floods. For old trees that extend back into the early 19th century or
earlier, the maximum stage of past floods will be inferred from the vertical
position of anatomical abnormalities along the tree stem. The new paleoflood
record for the Red River will enable the investigators to answer questions
regarding the synchrony of flooding along the entire reach of the river and to
gauge how flooding on the northern Great Plains is related to variability in
climate and other environmental factors at local and regional
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.