* 1830127
* Disentangling the ecological drivers of body form diversity in teleost fish species
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2017,03/31/2020
* Samantha Price, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Ingram
* 03/31/2020
* USD 369,454.00

This project will investigate the factors that have influenced the evolution of
the spectacular diversity of fish body shapes, which range from globular
pufferfishes to thin elongated spaghetti eels. Experimental studies and
mechanical models have revealed how certain body shapes maximize swimming and
feeding ability of the fish, in response to ecological factors such as predator
presence or habitat and food availability, or in response to environment
conditions such as water temperature and salinity. However, very little is known
about how these ecological and environmental factors interact to explain fish
body shape over evolutionary time-scales. This research will test hypotheses of
the ecological, environmental and functional drivers of body form evolution
across teleost fishes using a dataset of body shape diversity that will be
generated from approximately 7,500 fish species. The project also will help to
digitize the fish collections of several natural history museums making the
information collected freely available to the public. Approximately 40
undergraduate students will receive training in fundamental research skills and
will work together to design and execute an ambitious group research project
based on the data they help to collect. Beyond illuminating the mechanisms by
which life diversifies, in particular the process of convergent evolution
whereby independent fish lineages have evolved similar body shapes, this study
will provide the basis for identifying functional groups of fish, which are used
for assessing aquatic ecosystem health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
use a phylogenetic comparative approach to reconstruct the history of ecological
shifts and biological innovations and their impact on trends in teleost shape
diversity. Body-shape, including regions vital for swimming and prey-capture
performance, will be estimated from approximately 20,000 teleost specimens using
geometric morphometrics and linear measurements on lateral and dorsal views. The
teleost ecomorphospace generated will provide the context for exploring the
nature of exceptional adaptive radiations, such as the African rift lake
cichlids. Large databases of biological, environmental and ecological and
functional traits will be assembled from the scientific literature and museum
records. Morphological convergence, novelty, and the ecological, environmental
and functional factors associated with them, will be identified using an
adaptive landscape approach using Ornstein-Uhlenbeck models in a robust
phylogenetic framework. The project will test predictions based on biomechanical
and physiological models as well as experimental evidence that the most
streamlined shapes will evolve in teleosts that rely more on ram feeding and
body-caudal propulsion, feed on small elusive prey, or live in environments that
are less complex, have high flow, low salinity, or high dissolved oxygen
contents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.