* 1830388
* NRI: INT: COLLAB: Soft Active Contact Pads with Tunable Stiffness and Adhesion for Customizable Robotic Grasping
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Wanliang Shan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 01/31/2020
* USD 340,879.00

As robots have a greater presence in our personal, public, and working
environments, they must be equipped for a broad range of manipulation tasks and
physical encounters. For many of these activities, such robots must be able to
grasp a wide variety of everyday objects or be capable of physical interactions
with humans or other robots. While there are robotic grippers ("end effectors")
well-suited for specific tasks, progress in cooperative robotics has been
limited by a lack of "universal" gripping systems that can handle a diverse set
of objects. Universal gripping systems have the potential to dramatically
improve robot performance and reduce costs by decreasing the number of end
effectors that a robot needs for general purpose functionality. This National
Robotics Initiative (NRI) project will address this critical need by creating
new material architectures that enable universal robotic grasping. This will be
accomplished by using materials that are capable of changing their mechanical
properties such as stiffness and adhesion, and incorporating these materials
into contact pads that the robot will use for gripping. This work will promote
domestic economic growth and well-being by impacting multiple sectors in which
cooperative robots will have an important role, including manufacturing,
aerospace, agriculture, elderly care, and rehabilitation. This project will also
contribute to educational outreach through middle/high school student workshops
and science events that will inspire students to learn more about the role of
materials in soft and human-friendly robotics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ultimate goal of this project is to realize a customizable robotic gripper that
can operate in a broad range of contexts. To achieve this, the research team
will pursue the following three interrelated research objectives. The first is
to investigate the interplay between material stiffness, surface geometry, and
the loading conditions that typically arise during robotic manipulation. This
will include the development of adhesion-controlled robotic grasping approaches
that exploit materials and structures with tunable stiffness and adhesion. The
second objective is to engineer active contact pads that allow for high adhesive
gripping forces and also high adhesion tunability. These pads will exploit a
careful understanding of how material properties influence the distribution of
mechanical stresses between contacting surfaces. The third objective is to
integrate the soft contact pads into robotic end-effectors or the fingertips of
a robotic hand. As part of this effort, the team will demonstrate enhancements
in gripping performance and versatility through a comparative study involving
objects with a broad range of shapes, sizes, weights, and mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.