* 1830418
* ATD: Threat Detection Problems in Precision Agriculture and Satellite Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Gilad Lerman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

This project explores possible techniques for threat detection by leveraging
research into related unsolved problems in precision agriculture and satellite
imaging. Some of these problems are currently solved in a laboratory setting but
do not have satisfying solutions in the practical setting of remote sensing. In
addition to security benefits, the research has the potential to save growers
money and reduce the environmental impact of agriculture by applying only the
inputs that are needed only when and where they are needed. The project's
contributions to satellite imaging and measurement would also enhance
environmental monitoring. Efficient remote sensing would enable accurate threat
detection from minimal amounts of data, while increasing the life span of
scanners and reducing associated costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims
to develop crucial methods for the data cleaning and processing necessary to
ensure meaningful results in aerial and satellite imagery. For example, the
investigators will explore a careful and novel approach to cloud removal in
satellite images. A new approach is necessary since the measurement of
vegetation indices, which help identify various threats to crops, becomes
unreliable in the presence of shadows introduced by clouds. The investigator and
collaborators will also address the technical problem of image stitching, or
solving large puzzles, for agricultural fields. The difficulty here is that
patches are very similar to each other and sometimes have very little overlap.
Other technical problems to be studied are super-resolution and inpainting in
non-uniform settings. Once these technical problems are solved, the
investigators plan to adapt and further develop techniques for threat detection,
in particular, techniques for multivariate change point detection. Robust threat
detection in agriculture will also help to optimize crop yield while minimizing
resources. Thus, advances in threat detection capabilities in these domains
broadly impact society even beyond their intrinsic
usefulness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.