* 1830856
* The ventilation of South Georgia's Deep Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ricardo Matano, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 09/30/2021
* USD 527,510.00

This project aims to characterize the physical processes contributing to the
entrainment of deep and benthic waters into the surface layers of the South
Georgia Island (Southern Ocean) and to assess their sensitivity to climate
variability. South Georgia (SG) hosts some of the largest chlorophyll blooms of
the Southern Ocean. Observations suggest that the ocean circulation drives these
blooms, but the nature of the physical processes underlying the fertilization
process are unknown. A process-oriented modeling program will seek, on the one
hand, to identify the sources and dynamical mechanisms underlying the
fertilization of the SG region and, on the other hand, to evaluate their
sensitivity to climate variability and climate change. The research is relevant
to the climate and marine ecosystem community research.Understanding of SG's
fertilization processes will not only contribute to the forecast of the impact
of climate change on the regional ecosystems but also to anticipate the
potential feedbacks that those ecosystems will have on the changing climate. Any
change in the circulation in the SG, nutrient and iron input to the euphotic
zone, continental margin discharge and biological activity will have a
substantial effect on the balance of outgassing of natural CO2 and uptake of
anthropogenic CO2. Furthermore, this study will provide some insight on which
processes and on which scale the climate community model will have to resolve
them. This research will also help in the design of field campaigns to address
the unresolved questions of primary production in the Atlantic sector of the
Southern Ocean and target sites where observations will provide answers to these
questions. Graduate training will be an important component of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are very few studies on the physical
mechanisms sustaining SG's extraordinary blooms and, in particular, on its
regional circulation. This is a matter of concern because observations suggest
that South Georgia's blooms, which are an important component of the climate
system, are primarily driven by physical processes. There are, for example, few
studies on SG's shelf circulation and virtually none on its mass exchanges with
the Southern Ocean. A pilot study, however, shows that shelf processes and its
interaction with the deep ocean are critical to bio-geochemical balance of this
region. The numerical experiments to be analyzed by this project are the state-
of-the-art for this region. It is hypothesized that SG high productivity is
based on vigorous water exchange between the shelf and the deep ocean and a
persistent, albeit still under-appreciated, coastal upwelling system. Further,
it is posited that SG fertilization is strongly dependent on wind forcing and
the expected strengthening of the SO winds will also amplify the fertilization
processes leading, therefore, to a negative feedback for climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.