* 1830745
* An integrative analysis of the primate skeleton
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Noreen von Cramon-Taubadel, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

Our understanding of human origins is primarily based on the analysis of
fossilized skeletons, rather than genetic information. However, unlike the
underlying genetic code, the skeleton changes substantially throughout life, and
different parts of the skeleton are integrated with one another through varying
genetic, developmental, and functional processes. This project will use state-
of-the-art 3D scanning and statistical methods to assess the nature and extent
of skeletal integration across primates in order to test how morphological
diversity across primates came about. The results will provide information about
the degree to which the human skeleton is unique or similar to other living
primates. As such, this project advances our understanding of the human body and
provides a roadmap for future researchers interested in reconstructing genetic
relationships from fossils. The research advances the careers of several female
scientists, including one researcher from a group underrepresented in STEM
research, provides technical training for graduate and undergraduate students,
and will result in an extensive database of virtual primate models that will be
shared with the scientific community. In addition, active outreach programs
through Buffalo's school system will promote K-12 science through engagement
with virtual technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers often compartmentalize
the primate skeleton, with cranial and postcranial elements often studied in
isolation. This has led to the empirical dissociation of adaptive integrated
systems, and a lack of understanding of how components of the skeleton co-vary.
This project will collate a large 3D database of skeletal elements for 13
anthropoid taxa and construct covariance matrices reflecting functional,
developmental, and anatomical modularity. Quantitative genetic analyses will be
used to test the nature and extent of integration patterns across primates and
assess which modules have been shaped by neutral versus non-neutral forces. The
results will create a direct link between the pattern and magnitude of
integration and the past forces that shaped primate skeletal diversity more
broadly, thus providing future researchers with a better understanding of which
traits best reflect neutral divergence, and which have been subject to adaptive
forces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.