* 1830909
* Research Initiation: Leveraging Systems Thinking to Enhance the Holistic Formation of Engineers
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Deborah Eakin, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,961.00

As the world becomes increasingly complex, systems thinking continues to gain
recognition as an important and necessary skill for future engineers. Systems
thinking does not replace traditional technical skills required of engineers,
but instead provides a complementary skill set to help better navigate complex
systems and their corresponding problems. Systems thinking is defined as a way
of framing how we see, interpret, make sense, and respond to the complex world
we encounter on a daily basis. The increasing complexity of U.S. industries
demands that universities train engineers with systems thinking skills to solve
the range of interconnected problems companies may face. This project aims to
understand the ability of engineering students to think at a system level in
order to better fit their future engineering careers. The project provides
essential insights into the preparation of 21st century engineering students
with respect to systems thinking capability. By comparing student capabilities
to the needs of employers, the current state of engineering education can be
evaluated and modified. Better understanding students' systems thinking
capability, as well as factors that may influence their capability, provides
engineering educators with new knowledge to better inform preparation of future
engineering students. This project helps to answer the need to have a large
number of qualified engineers available for U.S. industry that can engage in
higher levels of thinking required in complex systems problem domains.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a recognized challenge of current
engineering formation: how to prepare future holistic engineers to better handle
complex multidisciplinary problems. While systems thinking has been recognized
as one of the essential skills for future engineers, measurement of systems
thinking capability in this project will provide new insights. The project has
three primary tasks: 1) evaluate current engineering students' systems thinking
capability, using a previously validated survey instrument, and connect systems
thinking capability to the established theoretical frameworks (inductive and
deductive reasoning) 2) identify and explore various cognitive, demographic,
academic, and intuitional factors that influence systems thinking capability;
and 3) evaluate employers' needs to investigate gaps between students' systems
thinking capacity and employers' needs. The grounding of systems thinking
capability in the theory of inductive and deductive reasoning offers potentially
transformative research for understanding the development of systems thinking.
The comparison between student capability and employer needs will provide useful
insights for engineering educators. In addition to assessing student capability,
and comparing it to employer needs, this project identifies the underlying
factors that influence systems thinking capability, providing theoretical
guidance to the existing systems engineering body of knowledge. The
implementation of the project tasks will enhance and foster the current state of
engineering education knowledge and project systems thinking skills beyond the
classroom. Therefore, engineering students will be better prepared for their
future engineering careers and fill the U.S. industry's
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.