* 1830190
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluation of a Subcanopy Solar Radiation Model Under Real-Sky Conditions with Field Validation Measurements
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Stacy Nelson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 07/31/2020
* USD 14,001.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will study the complex interactions
among topography, forest cover, and sky conditions on solar insolation, thereby
providing more accurate and higher-resolution estimates of solar radiation
reaching the ground surface. The project will enhance the capabilities of
researchers and practitioners to incorporate the effects of atmospheric
conditions and vegetation in solar radiation models that are needed to advance
research about surface solar radiation, heat flux, and ground and surface water
temperature dynamics. In addition to evaluating a high-resolution, spatially
explicit approach to estimating the amount of solar radiation penetrating forest
canopies over extensive areas, this project will demonstrate methods for
incorporating real-sky conditions in the modeling of stream temperatures. The
integrative model to be developed by the doctoral student will have the
potential to be a powerful, spatially explicit tool for demonstrating linkages
among stream processes, land-management, and ecosystem outcomes that can be
adapted to a broad range of natural and human-modified environments. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award also will provide
support to enable a promising student to establish a strong independent research
career. The project also will provide valuable experience in collaborative
interdisciplinary research for another graduate student serving as a technician
on this project.

A recently developed subcanopy solar radiation modeling method that uses
airborne LiDAR data and is integrated with an open-source, bare-earth solar
radiation model demonstrated that light penetration through forest canopies
could be estimated and used to produce high resolution estimates of subcanopy
solar radiation for vegetated landscapes. That solar radiation model allows
parameterization of the effects of atmospheric conditions where the solar
radiation reaching the canopy surface is affected by atmospheric aerosols, water
vapor, and clouds. The information needed to parameterize atmospheric conditions
is not widely available for most locations in the United States, however.
Although values representing uniformly clear or overcast sky conditions or
published values of historic averages can be used, values more representative of
real-sky conditions should improve the accuracy of the solar radiation estimates
for specific locations and time periods. The doctoral student will build on
these recent advances in solar radiation modeling and the increased availability
of remotely sensed data by incorporating the combined effects of atmospheric
conditions, forest canopies, and topography to improve estimates of subcanopy
solar radiation in a Southern Appalachian headwater basin. The student will
develop open-science workflows to compute the Linke Turbidity value and the
clear sky index using existing methods and available satellite data for the
parameterization of atmospheric conditions. She will test the validity of the
solar radiation models with general and computed atmospheric condition
parameters, and she will evaluate model accuracy with field measurements of
subcanopy solar radiation. She also will determine whether the inclusion of
real-sky and forest canopy conditions to estimate solar radiation improves the
accuracy of steam temperature estimates.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.