* 1830816
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Interpreting hominin subsistence strategies from small mammal remains
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Jessica Thompson, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 22,410.00

A focal issue in archaeological research has been to understand how the
emergence of uniquely human attributes (e.g., large brains, complex
technologies, and high-fidelity social cooperation) may relate to past changes
in dietary and foraging behaviors. For example, using stone tools to target
large-bodied prey and subsequent food-sharing practices most likely formed part
of a complex behavioral pattern that satisfied both the caloric and nutritional
needs while also building social cohesion and complexity. This doctoral
dissertation project will investigate small mammal prey as another potentially
important dietary component for hominins. Small mammal acquisition is typically
associated with technological complexity (i.e., snares and nets) yet these
animals have also been simultaneously considered "easy" targets for early human
ancestors that obviate the need for complex tools. Reasons for this
contradiction probably lie within the ecological and behavioral diversity of
small mammals, which potentially demands a broad range of foraging strategies.
The project will advance knowledge about dietary hominin adaptations, foster
student training and mentoring, international research collaborations, and
public science outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By incorporating
taphonomic, ethnoarchaeological, and stable isotope analyses of small mammals
remains from a Late Pleistocene and Holocene archaeological sequence, the
investigator will test how small mammal subsistence strategies vary between two
hominin species (Homo floresiensis and Homo sapiens) and between two modern
human subsistence lifestyles (hunting-gathering and agriculture). Taphonomic
analyses of small mammal remains will identify which animals were accumulated in
the bone assemblage at Liang Bua and what agents (e.g., predators) were
responsible. Stable isotope and ethnoarchaeological analyses will be used to
elucidate small mammal diet and habitat through time as well as aid in
identifying bone surface modifications from modern small mammal hunting
practices, respectively. This study will also offer a framework for similar
small mammal taphonomic studies investigating subsistence strategies of two
hominin species at different geographical time periods and/or regions. In
addition, this project will employ a novel Bayesian statistical method for
predicting accumulating agents on an assemblage-level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.