* 1830881
* EFRI C3 SoRo: An integrated approach towards computational design, fabrication and understanding of bio-hybrid soft architectures capable of adaptive behavior
* ENG,EFMA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* George Lauder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

The goal of this project is to model, design, fabricate and study micrometer to
centimeter size soft bio-hybrid robots that bring together artificial elements
and living biological cells. Living components promise to provide these robots
with a natural organism's abilities to self-assemble, heal, grow, and to adapt
to varying environments. This project is made possible by recent advances in
fabrication techniques that allow artificial elements to be combined with an
array of living cell types such as muscles and neurons. The proposed mini bio-
hybrid robots are thus compliant, configurable, biocompatible, and can generate
power from local nutrients. Bio-hybrid robots can also exhibit adaptive
behaviors in response to uncertain environments, and thus offer the promise of a
host of high impact applications including localized drug delivery,
environmental exploration and chemical sensing, evaluation of potential surgical
sites within the body, and precision manipulation and fabrication. This is in
line with the national need to reduce healthcare costs by enhancing medical
effectiveness as well as stimulating the development of advanced manufacturing
techniques to increase competitiveness. This effort speaks to a broad audience:
what can spark the imagination of potential young scientists better than
bringing tiny robots to life. Excitement in this area will be leveraged via
activities ranging from museum exhibitions to the deployment of high school and
K-12 intuitive learning modules, in order to foster interest in advanced
computing, mechanics, math, manufacturing, and
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft robotics is currently constrained by a lack
of rigorous engineering methods. Intuition-driven approaches are further
strained in the case of bio-hybrid systems due to the inclusion of the living
component, which is even less well understood. This project seeks to create a
systematic approach based on modeling, simulation, and fabrication to overcome
these limitations and enable deployment and scalability. Central to this project
is the concept of functional units, hierarchical bio-hybrid assemblies that can
be combined into integrated robotic systems capable of higher level functions,
much like the organization of living organisms and object-oriented software. By
embracing this analogy, five fundamental building blocks (muscle and neuron
cells, elastomers, multi-stable buckling structures, wireless conformable
electronics) are considered, so as to: (1) introduce a novel mathematical
formalism based on Cosserat rod assemblies to model their mechanical response,
actuation and interaction with the environment; (2) develop software to simulate
the dynamics of composite functional units and to optimize them according to a
desired target behavior; (3) fabricate and test obtained solutions, and update
models based on experiments; (4) showcase new understanding by engineering
integrated bots able to perform complex tasks. Thus, this effort overall deals
with enabling the vision of autonomous, adaptive mini-bots and laying the
analytical, computational and experimental foundations of a bio-hybrid soft
engineering science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.