* 1830707
* Entanglement Physics of Quantum f-electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Piers Coleman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 540,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education in condensed matter physics, in the subfield of
f-electron physics and quantum matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of
matter on atomic scales is governed by quantum mechanics, which describes the
motion of particles as a wave, evolving according to the Schrodinger wave
equation. While the application of this equation to isolated electrons is fully
understood, the corresponding many-body version of this equation that governs
the collective quantum behavior of electrons inside matter is far too complex to
be solved in detail. The astronomical scale of this complexity may be grasped by
noting that the number of electrons in a pound of iron is larger than the number
of stars in the known universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the strange
manifestations of quantum mechanics is a phenomenon known as entanglement,
whereby remote electrons in a material intimately correlate their motion. The
unexpected collective behavior of electrons that results from this entanglement
has the capacity to endow quantum matter with emergent properties, such as
magnetism, superconductivity, or superfluidity, and many more that are
presumably not yet discovered. The quest to understand and manipulate these
emergent properties, and to relate them to the underlying quantum mechanics is a
key goal of modern condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
supports research in the area of f-electron materials, a unique class of metals
that can be fine-tuned to the brink of magnetism where they develop a special
quantum state called a "Quantum Critical Point". Quantum critical points can be
thought of as a kind of electronic stem cell - a state of matter that can easily
transform itself into a broad class of novel quantum phases, such as
unconventional superconductors. By developing a new mathematical description of
these quantum critical points and the phases they can transform into, the PI
aims to gain a new understanding of the physics of quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students and postdocs will be involved
in an essential way in the research, and will be mentored and trained in a broad
range of theoretical techniques. The PI also plans to write a popular book
introducing the frontier of quantum condensed matter physics to non-
experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education in condensed matter physics, in the subfield of f-electron physics.
The research has three main subheadings: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) New approach
to quantum criticality: Using a new Schwinger boson method, and working in
conjunction with experimentalists, the research team will develop a theory of
ferromagnetic quantum criticality in heavy-electron materials. This work will be
extended to antiferromagnets and will be used to compute the generalized phase
diagram of heavy fermions. The research team will develop a theory for the co-
existence of magnetism and the Kondo effect. By extending early work of Larkin
and Pikin, the research will develop a theory for the quantum annealing of
finite-temperature first-order phase transitions into quantum critical points at
absolute zero. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Analytic-computational approach to
entanglement &amp; novel order in rare-earth materials: Working with theorists
at the Flatiron Institute, New York, the research team will apply Matrix Product
State approaches to simple one- and two-dimensional Kondo lattices, focusing on
the low-entanglement case of the Kondo insulator, using these methods to
establish and explore the composite nature of heavy
fermions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) A new approach to Raman and Photoemission
phenomenology: Generalizing the theory of optical lattices to crystal fields,
the research will develop a theory of the Raman interaction of light with
crystal-field levels in f-electron materials. A new criterion for measuring the
degree of localization of f-electrons using angle-resolved and core-level x-ray
photoemission will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students and
postdocs will be involved in an essential way in the research, and will be
mentored and trained in a broad range of theoretical techniques. The PI also
plans to write a popular book introducing the frontier of quantum condensed
matter physics to non-experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.