* 1830986
* SBIR Phase II:  Transparent Flexible Quasi-Ceramic Intelligent Multifunctional Coatings for Corrosion and Biofouling Protection
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* ANUPAMA CHATURVEDI, FLORA COATINGS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2021
* USD 874,241.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to develop and commercialize a transparent, thin
multifunctional coating for corrosion and biofouling prevention on coated
surface. Its environmentally friendly product will be an efficient ready-to-use
single component product that can be applied with ease, and would dry in ambient
conditions without the need for external heating equipment. The global annual
expenditure to mitigate corrosion is in the range of $2.5 trillion, roughly
equal to 3.4% of the world's GDP. Protecting assets from corrosion is, hence, a
critical requirement for all the industries. A broad range of applications can
benefit from this coating technology such as aviation industry where removal of
toxic chromium compounds from coating procedures is of high priority, automobile
manufacturing where extended corrosion protection to vehicles without using
toxic treatments is constantly sought, structural engineering where providing
long life protection to bridges is always needed, marine engineering where
protecting ships from corrosion and not contributing to ecological imbalance is
long sought, military where minimizing the maintenance downtime of tanks and
guns is of prime importance, hospitals that are interested in longer lasting
medical implants, and paints and coating industry that is desiring removal of
volatile organic components from their paints and coatings. The proposed coating
is expected to offer scratch resistance and oleophobic characteristics in
addition to corrosion protection. The initial success of this project will
result in two high-volume products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to develop a specialized single-part, ready-to-use, nominally bioceramic
liquid coating for protection against corrosion and fouling activities. On
application over desired surface, this transparent liquid transforms into hard-
yet-flexible coating. This thin coating composition consists of in-place
generated nanoparticles of organometallic compounds in the 3D network of
polysilsesquioxane. The reactivity of the precursor to coating is designed such
that material can react with substrates in ambient conditions and dries to solid
film without the need of any external heating. The hardened coating adheres to
most surfaces including metals, ceramics, plastics, glasses, and wood. The
optimum thickness of coating is approximately ten microns and can impart various
desired surface functionalities to the coated object. In this project, efforts
are directed towards optimization of current composition to be compatible with
broad range of commercially available topcoat materials. The optimized coating
composition will be subjected to a rapid properties screening before third party
testing, validation and approvals. An extensive field testing will be conducted
in collaboration with potential customers. This innovative coating technology
will initially result into two products that can be used in place of
carcinogenic hexavalent chromium compounds that are currently in use for the
corrosion protection of metals. While one of the products would act as a
corrosion prevention compound that can adhere to commercial topcoat paints, the
other would act as self-cleaning coating to prevent biofouling
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.