* 1830516
* NRI: FND: Hybrid Active-Passive Actuation for Safety and Performance in Physical Human-Robot Collaboration and Rehabilitation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Zinn, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 749,704.00

Physical cooperation between a person and a robot requires a range of
performance characteristics that is difficult for traditional robots to meet.
Sometimes a robot must have high stiffness to support an object for a person to
work with or to perform a precise task of its own, but at other times it must
have low stiffness to ensure the safety of a person who makes contact with it.
Sometimes a robot must control the interaction force between itself and a
person, but at other times it must move along a precise path regardless of the
force applied to it. Existing actuators such as electric, pneumatic or hydraulic
motors cannot achieve this performance combination, so a new approach to robotic
actuators is required. This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) research project
will study the design and control of robots that use a combination of active
components (motors) and passive components (brakes) to meet these opposing
demands. This actuation approach, referred to as Balanced Active-Passive Hybrid
Actuation, will provide high power capabilities while possessing the unique
characteristics required for human-robot physical collaboration. This research
will enable new capabilities for cooperation between people and robots and will
open unserved application areas such as cooperative high-power manufacturing
robots, high-power rehabilitation robots, and high-performance exoskeletons. One
important application is rehabilitation robotics for retraining intentional
movement after neural injury such as stroke. The hybrid active-passive actuators
developed in this research will be applied to create a strong and accurate, yet
also safe, rehabilitation robot for the legs, which will be used to test leg
force and movement control and develop rehabilitation methods for stroke
survivors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop design
principles and control approaches for hybrid active-passive actuators capable of
providing high power and high force-control bandwidth. The research will combine
a series-elastic electric motor for low-bandwidth force control, a parallel
direct-drive electric motor for high-bandwidth force control, and a parallel
brake for efficient very high-bandwidth support against applied external forces.
A physical test actuator will be built according to these design principles and
used to develop and test a bandwidth-partitioning controller for coordinating
the multiple actuators. The resulting design and control techniques will be used
to build a two-axis parallel linkage manipulator for applying arbitrary planar
force fields to the foot of a human user. The system will be tested for its
ability to haptically render virtual mechanical environments such as viscous
curl fields. These curl fields will be used to study motor control of the leg,
with the goal of developing rehabilitative tasks for stroke survivors to promote
the recovery of coordinated movement and postural
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.