* 1830036
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research Food-Water-Energy Nexus: Enabling adaptive integration of technology to enhance community resilience
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Ni-Bin Chang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 06/30/2023
* USD 838,416.00

Many cities across the globe are facing difficult challenges managing their
food, water and energy systems. The challenges stem from the fact that the
issues of food, water and energy are often tightly connected with each other,
not only locally but also globally. This is known as the Food-Water-Energy (FWE)
nexus. An effective solution to a local water problem may cause new local
problems with food or energy, or cause new water problems at the global level.
On a local scale, it is difficult to anticipate whether solutions to one issue
in the nexus are sustainable across food, water and energy systems, both at the
local and the global scale. Innovative solutions that encompass the nexus are
particularly important to enable cities to better manage their food, water and
energy systems and understand the benefits and tradeoffs for different
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a 29-country initiative
through the joint Belmont Forum- Joint Programming Initiative (JPI) Urban
Europe. The Sustainable Urbanization Global Initiative (SUGI)/Food-Water-Energy
Nexus is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that
bring together the fragmented research and expertise across the globe to find
innovative solutions to the Food-Water-Energy Nexus challenge. The call seeks to
develop more resilient, applied urban solutions to benefit a much wider range of
stakeholders. The rapid urbanization of the world's population underscores the
importance of this focus. International partners were invited to develop
solutions for this challenge. The funds requested will be used to support U.S.
participants to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries and that bring together natural scientists,
social scientists and research users (e.g., civil society, NGOs, and industry).
Participants from other countries are funded through their national funding
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to generate actionable
information by analyzing the distributed production and storage of materials and
energy flows into, out of, and within a community/city given their consumption
patterns and supply chains associated with various FWE nexuses. This project
will develop a multi-scale modeling framework to address the inter-relationship
between multiple stressors affecting the food-water-energy nexus in 3 urban
environments, Amsterdam, Orlando, and Paris. The models will investigate the
impacts of increasing metropolitan populations, rapid land use change, shifting
social, economic and governance norms, escalating climate variability, and
changing ecosystem services within each of the investigated FWE nexus to
elucidate the resultant water, carbon, and ecological footprint for each
location. This information should ultimately enable us to understand the trade-
offs and balances between various drivers and their impacts on each segment on
the nexus which will help to develop scenarios that can optimize the
sustainability of the food-water-nexus components for each location. This
information will be used to understand the role of key technologies in different
types of nexuses associated with different urban planning scenarios affect the
final sustainable solution; and how different social networks help evaluate the
acceptance of these potential technologies across different cultural contexts.
This knowledge can then be used to understand both the physical and social
resilience of the location and community to potential
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.