* 1830991
* Collaborative Research: Mapping and Understanding Seismic Anisotropy in the Northeast Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2023
* John Collins, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 178,842.00

Understanding the structure of the seafloor and how plate tectonics, which
causes plate motion, volcanism, and megathrust earthquakes in subduction zones
works, is important for understanding various types of geohazards and what
triggers them. This knowledge is critical in order to plan for and understand
how to mitigate and/or minimize the impact of disasters, such as those that have
occurred in recent years in Thailand and Japan. Global seismic tomography, which
uses seismic signals from earthquakes and other earth movements to image Earth's
deep structure, has long been the tool of choice to image and understand the
structure of Earth's interior and how it deforms. To this end, present
tomographic images indicate that the northeast Pacific plate in the area between
the continental U.S. and Hawaii is more complex than predicted by present
oceanic plate models. Because this apparently atypical area is far from any type
of known thermal feature, such as a mid-ocean ridge or a hotspot (i.e., a
concentrated upwelling of heat and thus magma from deep inside the Earth like
that which formed the Hawaiian Islands) a different mechanism must be acting.
Due to the current lack of seismic recording stations in the northeast Pacific,
the resolution of crustal and underlying mantle structure in this area is under-
resolved and may have resulted in misleading theories of how the Pacific plate
has evolved over time. This research addresses this problem by deploying an
array of 25 ocean bottom seismometers for 15 months to capture and record
seismic signals from earth motions. These data will allow the determination of
real structures and will target the part of the Pacific plate that is 40-50
million years old. These new seismic data will allow exploration of the local
seismic anisotropy (the nonuniform mineral/crustal structural orientation).
Anisotropy forms when mantle minerals align with mantle flow directions or when
a plate, such as the Pacific plate, responds to forces tugging along its edges.
The analysis of seismic anisotropy therefore allows scientists to explore mantle
processes that form, move, and ultimately cause the subduction of Earth's
tectonic plates. Broader impacts of the project include graduate student and
postdoctoral training in state-of-the-art geophysical at-sea and onshore seismic
processing and modeling. Undergraduate students will be involved with special
projects. The work complements other international global seismology efforts and
involves collaboration with U.K., German, and French scientists. The work
broadens participation of underrepresented groups in the sciences by supporting
two investigators whose gender is underrepresented in the sciences and who serve
as role models for students and other geoscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research provides an integrated analyses of seismic and other geophysical data
that will elucidate the structure, heterogeneity, and dynamics of the ocean
crust, lithosphere and asthenosphere in a 600~kilometer wide region west of the
Moonless Mountain Seamounts on the Pacific plate halfway between the US mainland
and Hawaii. Seismic data will be collected using an array of 25 ocean bottom
seismometers. Research targets include a regional study, covering of the
seismometer array deployment area which permits analysis of surface waves,
receiver functions, surface wave azimuthal anisotropy, and shear-wave splitting
in the area. Results provide insights into the local seismic structure of 40 to
50 million-year-old Pacific lithosphere and will answer questions about whether
this area conforms to predictions from models of normal lithospheric plate
cooling or if secondary processes, such as small-scale mantle convection, are
impacting plate behavior and crustal/mantle structure. Results will be tested
against predictions for a suite of mantle flow conditions and mineral
alignment/anisotropy modes. The project will also use the newly collected
surface wave data to improve global surface wave dispersion maps, reducing
imaging biases in the global dataset that result, in part, from uneven data
coverage in the study area. The ocean bottom seismometer array covers an area
for which there is inadequate data for the Pacific Array as identified by the
global community of seismologists. These data will serve a large global
community of seismologists that conduct global tomographic and other studies
that examine shallow and deep-Earth heterogeneity and processes that help us
better understand how the Earth works and the impacts deep seated mantle-driven
processes can have on Earth's surface. The work complements that recently
carried out by an international, collaborative, group of US, UK, German, and
French scientists in the Atlantic Ocean, which makes possible a comparison of
results between both ocean basins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.