* 1830750
* I-Corps: Determining the Relative Location of Malicious Nodes within Vehicle-to-Vehicle Wireless Networks for Driver Safety
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Gregory Durgin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will enable
global aspects of: 5th Generation cellular, manufacturing's industry 4.0
automation and data exchange, connected and autonomous vehicles, and smart
cities 3.0 initiatives, focusing on improving the positioning capability of
wireless transceivers. The connected vehicle market alone is expected to be
valued over $22 billion by 2022 as the demand for accurate positioning data
grows with the deployments of autonomous vehicles. A key economic driver for
these initiatives is to generate new use-cases in delivering accurate real-time
positioning for end-user applications. In the global market of positioning data,
accurate estimation of user equipment location will be crucial for new
communication systems. By enabling next generation wireless systems to determine
their positions locally with respect to each other, any reliance on Global
Positioning System (GPS) accuracy and availability may be decoupled from their
operational requirements. This will not only provide real-time safety
applications for end-users, but also allow new mobile broadband services in
areas where GPS is degraded, such as in dense urban cities. This I-Corps project
seeks to determine the feasibility of a new smart antenna for next generation
wireless systems. The smart antenna leverages low-cost antenna manufacturing and
consolidated electrical circuits, to communicate a special protocol to next
generation wide-band radios. This protocol, which has already been developed and
proof-of-concept-ed, is the key enabler to making this new smart antenna provide
direction-of-arrival-estimation per frame of wide-band communication networks.
This project's product is comprised of a single smart-antenna accompanied with
support software that provides a single-channel radio with localization
capabilities. Currently, accurate real-time localization is only capable using
multiple-antennas and cumbersome signal processing algorithms which may not be
portable into existing hardware. With the new smart antenna, a radio can
maintain above 90% packet delivery rates, while performing angular estimation of
the received frame. Through a customer discovery process with key stakeholders
in the communications field, this new smart antenna may prove to provide true
direction-of-arrival-estimation on radio platforms which currently are not able
to provide such functionality. A go/no-go market decision is expected at the
completion of the I-Corps program.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.