* 1830071
* Kelvin-Helmholtz turbulence in complex environments
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2023
* William Smyth, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 798,182.00

This project focuses on mixing events that occur in sheared flows close to
boundaries and in other complex environments. For example, shear-driven mixing
events near the ocean surface flux heat and CO2 into the ocean interior.
Previous studies of shear-driven mixing events have assumed that the event is
isolated in space and time, i.e. it begins with smooth, laminar flow and is
located far from any boundary or other significant flow structure that could
impact its evolution. This research will address the effects of spatially
proximate influences such as the ocean surface, the bottom, or another nearby
mixing event. The main tool will be a sequence of direct numerical simulations
of sheared flows with either a boundary or another flow structure close enough
to influence the mixing. Results will be used to guide parameterization of
turbulent fluxes near the ocean surface and in deep ocean currents such as dense
overflows. The results will be useful in understanding dense bottom currents,
surface mixed layers and in parameterizing the resulting turbulence. The project
will support a postdoc and a graduate student. Both of these junior scientists
will learn and use advanced numerical simulation skills. In addition, both will
have the opportunity to take part in research cruises to observe shear-driven
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kelvin-Helmholtz (KH) ansatz is
a common and useful model for ocean turbulence. It is often used to describe
turbulence near boundaries, e.g., in near-bottom gravity currents or at the base
of a surface mixed layer. While linear theory tells us that boundary proximity
can affect the basic length and time scales of KH billows, little is known of
the effect on the nonlinear evolution and subsequent mixing. For example, KH
billows with lengths up to 300m have been observed within 50m of the surface in
the equatorial Pacific. In these cases, boundary proximity is likely to have a
large effect on the resulting mixing and on air-sea property transports. In
isolation, KH instability becomes turbulent via a well- explored sequence of
secondary instabilities. This sequence is sensitive to the details of the
initial shear flow, and it has a great influence on the amount of mixing that is
ultimately achieved. It is hypothesized that a nearby boundary will alter the
sequence of secondary instabilities and thereby change the amount of mixing.
Even far from boundaries, e.g. in the thermocline, mixing events occur
sporadically and may therefore feel the influence of other, nearby events. Using
the petascale machines at UCAR, a sequence of direct simulations will be made of
KH events in the presence of boundaries and other flow features. Results will be
used to interpret observations of shear-driven mixing events near the surface in
the equatorial oceans and to broaden our understanding of the KH instability
mechanism as it operates throughout the ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.