* 1830175
* ATD: Collaborative Research: Extremal Dependence and Change-Point Detection Methods for High-Dimensional Data Streams with Applications to Network Cybersecurity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* George Michailidis, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 88,015.00

The project is motivated by the need to develop advanced network monitoring
tools coupled with automated statistical methods for the quick detection of
Internet traffic anomalies due to ongoing attacks or impending cybersecurity
threats. Emphasis is placed on detecting cybersecurity threats such as highly
distributed malware infections, which can launch coordinated and crippling
distributed denial of service attacks on the nation's Internet infrastructure.
This will be achieved through a study of the so-called darknet traffic data.
Malicious actors in the network systematically probe the Internet space for
vulnerable or misconfigured devices. In doing so, they automatically send data
to the entire Internet address space, which includes the space of unused
Internet addresses. This destined-to-nowhere traffic is indicative of malware
infection attempts or stealthy vulnerability scanning. The investigators aim to
develop and deploy specialized tools that allow cyber-security analysts to
efficiently analyze darknet traffic data. The research involves a team of
computer engineers and statisticians, who will work closely together to
implement a prototype system for detecting as well as mapping and identifying
world-wide malicious activity in the Internet. The project will create and
communicate to the public a set of simple-to-interpret risk indices that
summarize the current darknet threat activity. This effort will potentially
enable the prevention and mitigation of cybersecurity network traffic
threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding Internet threats, which continue to
evolve due to the dynamic nature of Internet actors and the rapid expansion of
the Internet of Things ecosystem, requires adequate data at fine-grained spatial
and temporal scales. The project team has access to unique cyber-security data
collected at Merit Network, Inc. that capture Internet-wide activity including
network scanning, malware propagation, denial of service attacks, and network
outages. This data consists of unsolicited Internet traffic destined to a routed
but unused Internet address space, referred to as a darknet. This project will
develop algorithmic and software infrastructure to collect and organize darknet
data into high-dimensional, multivariate data streams, and will study
statistical methods based on (i) extremal dependence, (ii) change-point
detection, and/or (iii) high-dimensional sparse signal detection and recovery to
inform the construction of Internet threat indices that quantify the risk of
malicious scanning, degree of network vulnerability, risk of denial of service
attacks, etc. Statistics of extremes in high-dimensional setting is a
challenging problem since it requires the modeling/estimation of an infinite-
dimensional parameter---the spectral measure. Using multivariate regular
variation, this project will study novel hyper-graphical models that quantify
and provide interpretable abstractions for the simultaneous occurrence of
extremes in high-dimensions. Using limit theory for maxima of dependent
variables, the project team will address open theoretical problems on the
characterization of extremal dependence hyper-graphs and sparse signal detection
in high-dimension. This analysis will lead to the development of novel threat
indices that exhibit spatial dependence that will be analyzed with fast,
scalable change-point detection algorithms. The new change-point methodology is
designed to achieve large computational gains vis-a-vis standard approaches
without compromising statistical accuracy and would be a significant
contribution to the analysis of large data streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.