* 1830642
* NRI: FND: The Urban Design and Policy Implications of Ubiquitous Robots and Navigation Safety
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Boris Pervan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

This research project will investigate how to reshape 20th-century
transportation infrastructure (such as highways, intersections, roads, and
sidewalks) for the 21st-century so that it may accommodate autonomous vehicles
while addressing the needs of the entire community. To do so, it will explore
trade-offs between three key elements: safety, usability, and aesthetics. It
will then propose a suitable balance between these elements by developing a
framework for reshaping the existing infrastructure. The resulting framework
will serve to inform city planners, architects, and landscape architects how to
plan and design cities in which autonomous vehicles safely interact with humans,
and it will serve to educate roboticists on how to ensure that the technology
they are developing has a positive societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate the critical link between the urban landscape and
navigation safety of mobile co-robots, from self-driving cars to delivery
drones, or any mobile co-robot that operates on city streets and sidewalks. It
will address fundamental questions of safety and trust in operating ubiquitous
robots in dense urban environments by determining what changes to the urban
infrastructure can simultaneously ensure safety, usability, and environmental
sustainability. It will bring to light opportunities enabled by ubiquitous co-
robots, and more to the point it will show how to leverage that technology to
make changes in the transportation infrastructure that lead to positive changes
for society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.