* 1830291
* NRI: FND: COLLAB: A Foundational Approach to Muscle Actuators that Lowers Barriers to Muscle-Powered Robotics Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Robert Wood, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,826.00

This National Robotics Initiative (NRI) project will promote the progress of
science and advance the national prosperity by developing a foundational
approach towards muscle-powered machines that move using biomimetic muscle
actuators. Biomimetic muscle actuators, or robot muscles, are actuators that
closely mimic the properties of biological muscles in nature. A common set of
challenges in actuator selection and design, and modeling and controlling
behaviors and properties emerge among different muscle actuators. This award
supports identifying and unifying modeling, control, and design strategies that
would lower the barrier to muscle-powered robotics research. A significant
effort to de-risk robot muscles for designers is the creation of a robot muscles
toolkit, an accessible software and hardware toolkit for designing muscle-
powered machines and for democratizing the development and proliferation of
these technologies at a broad scale. Design challenges and competitions will
spur the interests and community building for those interested in robot muscles
across all ages and experiences, from K-12 to college students and researchers.
Local arrangements for outreach in the San Diego and Greater Boston Area
communities are planned for stirring interest in robotics for underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel, data-driven process and structure for
parameterizing a common set of biomimetic features that define muscle actuation
will be developed in order to anchor modeling, control, and design strategies
across a so-called performance and configuration space. These methods can be
employed across muscle types and generalize beyond currently available muscle
actuators. There is a strategy for muscle selection over multi-dimensional
performance criteria that incorporates both empirical data and physics models.
Design strategies for muscle configurations for amplification along these
performance dimensions, generalizable across muscles, will be investigated. New
technologies will be able to be easily added into this framework to perform
quantitative comparison studies without replication of gold standard
actuators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.