* 1830753
* Dimensions US-China:  Allosomes:  An Unexplored Dimension of Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2025
* Thomas Kocher, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,750,000.00

Despite more than 150 years of scientific study, our understanding of the
mechanisms of speciation is still incomplete. Early work emphasized the
importance of geographic isolation to limit gene flow among populations. Without
gene flow, populations might then evolve into new species over long periods of
time. More recent work has focused on the role of natural selection in
accelerating the evolution of species, with or without gene flow among
populations. This project tests a new idea, that the rapid evolution of new
allosomes can accelerate the rate of speciation in some lineages. The
researchers will focus on the exceptionally diverse lineage of cichlid fishes
found in tropical areas around the world. More than 2,000 species of cichlid
fishes are known, making them the most rapidly speciating lineage of extant
vertebrates. Recent work has revealed unexpected diversity in the allosomes of
these fishes. This diversity may be due to a unique behavior in which females
mouthbrood eggs and larvae for periods of up to three weeks. The associated
differences in behavior and physiology between males and females causes
different genetic changes to be favored in males and females. This pattern is
known as genetic conflict. This project will test the hypothesis that these
genetic conflicts are responsible for the rapid evolution of new allosomes. In
turn, this rapid evolution is thought to be important in the rapid rate of
speciation in this group. The project will promote scientific exchange between
the U.S., Europe, China and Brazil. It will also provide research training
opportunities for undergraduate students at University of Maryland.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will use genomic techniques to
characterize allosomes in cichlid fishes from Africa and South America. Regions
of genetic differentiation between males and females will be identified using
whole-genome DNA sequencing. Long-read sequencing technology will be used to
characterize changes in the sequence and structure of chromosomes during the
early stages of allosome evolution. Comparative phylogenetic analysis will be
used to determine whether high rates of allosome turnover are associated with
life history traits. The specific focal trait is female mouthbrooding, which
correlates with antagonistic selection between males and females. To determine
whether evolutionary changes in allosomes create genetic incompatibilities the
researchers will measure the fitness of hybrids between species with different
allosomes. These data will allow theoretical predictions about the mechanisms of
allosome evolution to be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.