* 1831106
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: The Cyanobacterial Bloom Microbial Interactome as a Model for Understanding Patterns in Functional Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Morgan Steffen, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,313.00

In recent years, harmful outbreaks of toxic cyanobacteria have reached new
levels in water bodies all over the world. These cyanobacterial blooms are
threatening freshwater lakes. The toxins pose substantial health risks to
humans, pets, livestock, and wildlife. Rather than focusing strictly on
nutrients and climate like previous research, this project explores the complex
bacterial communities that co-occur with cyanobacteria. The project will test
the hypothesis that cyanobacteria are supported through a mutually beneficial
relationship with a mixture of other bacteria species. This project will make
new discoveries about how to mitigate cyanobacterial blooms by comparing
different ones across the world during important periods in their life cycles.
This project will develop an enhanced understanding of the interactions between
cyanobacteria and associated species. This project involves researchers at four
U.S. institutions, one of which focuses on undergraduate education. There will
be training of at least five Ph.D. and 20 undergraduate students. The project
will specifically recruit under-represented minorities into STEM fields to help
prepare a diverse scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study the fundamental interactions driving one of the most common environmental
problems: freshwater toxic cyanobacterial blooms. The central hypothesis is that
these blooms constitute complex interactions of cyanobacterial species and
associated bacteria. These groups of bacteria co-evolved to form a community of
synergistic species, each with unique metabolic capabilities that are critical
to the growth, maintenance, and demise of the bloom. Three approaches will be
used: (1) a global survey of cyanobacterial blooms throughout the phases of the
bloom, (2) a targeted series of metagenomic surveys, and (3) experimental work
in the lab and field at sites in China and North America. This project will also
explore the roles of nutrient inputs, nutrient ratios, and various forms of
nitrogen. New analyses will investigate the taxonomic identities and functional
outcomes of these cyanobacterial communities. The results of this project will
lead to improved predictions about the toxicity of blooms threatening human
activities. This research aims to mitigate harmful cyanobacterial blooms by
using a realistic approach based on community ecology and evolutionary
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.