* 1831160
* SBIR Phase II: Software for Developing Consumer-Driven Health Care Solutions
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Mary Kay O'Connor, PatientsVoices, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 12/31/2021
* USD 928,003.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is that the technology provides health care
systems with a very accurate view of what their patients experience during
health care encounters - what is going well and importantly, what specific
problems are frustrating patients. With this insight, providers are able to
quickly and efficiently resolve issues. Patients are increasingly active in
deciding where they receive care. As health care spending declines, providers
find themselves competing for patients. To attract patients and drive market
share, health systems must deliver not just excellent clinical care but also
positive patient experiences. Patients that have a negative health care
encounter often choose to go elsewhere. When they do, providers lose
margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project addresses the industry need for better insight on how to
quickly and efficiently improve patient experiences. Surveys which are the norm
in health care fail to deliver service failure details. The company's software
goes beyond current text analysis solutions by automating the classification of
patient feedback based on the ideas and sentiment expressed by patients. These
results are converted into precise analytics and displayed in dashboards so
front-line managers can quickly identify problems and make rapid improvements in
patient experiences. Previously the company demonstrated the technical
feasibility of its software by focusing on a narrow set of providers. This
research will refine the software so that it is capable of analyzing patient
feedback across a wide range of health care organizations. What operational
changes will have the greatest, positive impact on patient loyalty and market
share? Results from this project will answer that question for a broad range of
health care organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.