* 1831262
* SBIR Phase II:  Aggressive Maneuvering of Small Autonomous Robots in Home Environments
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2019
* David Jun, Petronics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 12/31/2019
* USD 563,867.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable mobile
robots to coexist harmoniously with people in their homes and offices. The
market for consumer and office robots is projected to grow 17% annually, seven
times faster than the market for manufacturing robots, reaching $1.5B by 2019.
An important step toward market growth is creating autonomous robots that are
unobtrusive, intelligent, and highly agile. Accomplishing this requires robots
to be small enough to stay out of the way and fast enough to elegantly avoid
humans and environmental obstacles. Inappropriate noise levels and safety
concerns make it unlikely that airborne vehicles will be prevalent in indoor
environments, whereas wheeled mobile robots can achieve near-silent operation.
Tiny, fast robots are unobtrusive enough to use as a low-cost surveillance tool
in home or office security, and portable enough for covertly investigating
hostile situations. People with severe disabilities could travel vicariously by
combining a virtual reality headset with a telepresence robot.&lt;br/&gt;Fast
maneuvering robots could be used as a compelling educational or entertainment
platform for kids and adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will integrate the Phase I
feasibility work on multi-surface aggressive maneuvering for small robots into a
consumer-affordable hardware platform suitable for commercialization. In
addition to developing a miniaturized robotic platform, this project will also
address challenges outside the scope of Phase I related to home-scale autonomous
navigation to locations of interest, which can be fixed (such as a room) or
dynamic (such as the location of a pet). Such challenges&lt;br/&gt;include
multi-room mapping, planning, path execution, and high-speed obstacle avoidance.
This project will also develop fail-safe reactive techniques for navigation in
situations where a model of the environment is either incorrect or altogether
unavailable. Four key Phase II objectives will address these challenges: 1)
multi-room surface-aware maneuvering with vision-based localization, 2)
efficient maneuvering in the presence of obstacles and clutter, 3) map
initialization for monitoring places of interest, and 4) development of the
final hardware platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.