* 1831177
* STTR Phase II: A Low Cost Robotics kit for Elementary Education
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Tom Lauwers, BirdBrain Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 07/31/2021
* USD 817,999.00

This STTR Phase II project supports standards-based math education in elementary
school classrooms with a hands-on technology intervention. Research has shown
that many elementary teachers suffer from low confidence and limited subject
content knowledge in math and struggle to develop instruction designed to meet
or exceed common core math learning goals. Teachers and researchers alike seek
new approaches to engage students and improve teacher effectiveness to improve
learning outcomes. The primary goal of this project is the development of a
flexible, user-friendly, hands-on robotics kit with associated curriculum and
support for teachers, that will engage students in learning math content, align
with core curriculum, and measurably increase student achievement. The
commercialization of this research-based classroom kit will enable school
districts to adopt active learning into their math pedagogy. Ultimately, this
promotes the NSF mission to increase national prosperity through science
innovation by improving math preparation for students across the United States
and preparing them to participate in careers that drive the advancement of
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core contribution of
this work is composed of a flexible hardware kit to enable active learning
within the core elementary curriculum as well as more traditional maker
activities, and a suite of apps that allow students to use this kit to learn
specific math content while also providing options to learn computational
thinking through general purpose programming apps. To accomplish this, the team
employs a proven design process in which hardware, software, and curriculum are
simultaneously designed to align to learner goals, evaluated in classroom
studies, and iteratively refined. The kit will combine the ease of use and
simplicity of a regular snap-together style electronics kit with the flexibility
of a programmable microcontroller. The apps developed for this project will
build on a new math-based paradigm for robot programming. These math-oriented
apps will remove the barrier of programming skills for elementary teachers and
students alike when using the electronics kit for math instruction.
Simultaneously, programming apps will enable open-ended explorations of making
and computational thinking. Another contribution of this project will be the
testing and analysis of the hardware system and complementary math curricula.
Formative evaluation will enable exploration and understanding of novel
mechanisms for learning math, and evaluation of the program's efficacy will
enable characterization of the impact on student outcomes in math achievement
and attitudes towards math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.