* 1831203
* SBIR Phase II:  Robust Nanofiltration to Enable Challenging Chemical and Pharmaceutical Separations
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Shreya Dave, Via Separations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,228,412.00

This SBIR Phase II project focuses on advancing the domestic manufacturing
capabilities for high-value nanomaterials for new membrane materials.
Previously, the company has developed a novel membrane material with
considerable economic, environmental, and nutritional impact in industrial
process applications. Commercially available nanofiltration (NF) membrane
systems employ polymer membranes, which have inherent chemical and thermal
intolerance and are therefore difficult to clean or cannot be used in all
separation streams. Meanwhile, 12% of US energy consumption is dedicated to
thermal separations, a number that can be cut by a factor of 10 with appropriate
physical separation technologies. This technology has applications across food
&amp; beverage processing, pharmaceutical production, semiconductor
manufacturing, and chemical/petrochemical
refining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating nanometer-scale features on large areas
(tens of square meters) will enable technical opportunities for a multitude of
products and applications. In this SBIR Phase II project, the company is
conducting process development, pilot demonstration, and scale up efforts toward
coating graphene oxide thin films for nanofiltration membrane separations
applications. Today?s membrane processes are limited by the selectivity and
durability of the nanofiltration membrane. Improved selectivity and operational
conditions from the material platform enables improved downstream processes, and
new product development. The technology is tolerant to elevated temperatures,
extreme pH, organic and chlorinated solvents, and high levels of oxidizers.
Transitioning from thermal separations to membrane separations saves 90% of the
required energy. Meanwhile, payback time is &lt; 3 months when improving clean-
in-place (CIP) protocol for existing NF processes. This is a game changer for
the separations industry. Key separations of interest include desalting, whey
concentration, sugar fractionation, fatty acid separation, nutraceutical
extraction, pharmaceutical purification and black liquor
concentration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.