* 1831512
* Dimensions: Collaborative Research: Processes that Generate and Maintain Phylogenetic, Genetic, and Functional Diversity of the Freshwater Mussel Holobiont across Multiple Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Carla Atkinson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 977,466.00

The term 'holobiont' is used to refer to an organism as the sum of the
interactions between the host and the microbes associated with them (the
'microbiome'). Yet, the extent to which diversity at different levels of
biological organization in host and microbiome communities influence functional
diversity within ecosystems represents a considerable gap in our understanding
of global biodiversity. This project will represent a landmark in understanding
what generates and maintains biodiversity in river ecosystems. Freshwater
mussels are a highly imperiled, species-rich group of animals that play critical
roles in rivers through their filter-feeding and cycling of nutrients. Although
the ecological value of freshwater mussels is widely appreciated, little is
known about how factors like genetic diversity of individual species, species
composition and diversity of mussel communities, or interactions between mussel
communities and their gut microbiomes structure these ecological processes
across environments and geographic scales. Similarly, little is known about how
host-microbiome interactions have structured the evolution of both groups over
time. If the processes and mechanisms underlying patterns of biodiversity in
these animals can be identified, managers will be better armed to make informed
decisions for conservation and restoration efforts that will ultimately benefit
the entire ecosystem. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using approaches that scale from
individual-to-population-to-species levels and above, this project seeks to
understand ecological and evolutionary associations among the environment,
genetic diversity, functional traits, and community assembly across both host
and microbiome phylogenies in contemporary taxa and ancestral lineages. This
research will integrate analyses of (1) intraspecific genetic diversity in a
suite of freshwater mussel species, (2) phylogenetic diversity of communities of
mussel species as well as their associated microbiomes, and (3) functional
diversity of the mussel-microbiome holobiont. Integrating these three dimensions
of biodiversity will allow us to comprehend the mechanisms that underpin the
roles that freshwater mussels play in ecosystems, and to understand the
fundamental ecological and evolutionary processes that structure biodiversity in
space and over time. Furthermore, this work will extensively populate public
databases with new data on species distributions, abundances, microhabitat
environmental characteristics, and DNA sequence variation that will have impacts
on basic evolutionary and ecology research while also informing conservation and
management of a highly imperiled and ecologically important
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.