* 1831082
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of a Miniaturized Multiwell Plate Reader
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Kevin Seitter, Cerillo, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,097,741.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be an instrument that alleviates several
current difficulties in the growth measurement of many microbes, especially
anaerobic and other fastidious organisms. A large number of these species are
naturally occurring in the human body, and have recently been shown to play
critical roles in allergies, autoimmune diseases, dietary health, cancer,
infection response, and more. The study of these species is considered by many
to be the next frontier of modern medicine, especially as current approaches to
managing infectious diseases, such as traditional antibiotics, appear to be
losing effectiveness. However, current measurement technology is largely
incompatible with the specialized environments and chambers in which anaerobic
organisms must be grown. There is a large unmet need for better ways to measure
anaerobic bacterial growth; this need is growing quickly as interest in the
field increases. The ability to conduct high-throughput experiments in
specialized environments will become critical as research into various human
microbiomes accelerates, and demand for high-volume data grows. The existing
market for high-throughput measurement devices is at least $300 million and
growing. This platform will allow for systematic studies of cell culture growth
that can be accomplished easily and economically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase II project proposes to develop and refine a miniaturized multi-well
plate reader that measures optical characteristics of up to 96 cell samples for
measuring growth of many microbial samples simultaneously. The continuing rise
of systems and computational biology demonstrates a growing demand for large
amounts of quantitative data, and the variety of microbes relevant to the human
body necessitates such an approach. However, these measurement techniques are
not universally accessible due to current instruments' complexity, size, and
cost. This project will continue development of a miniature, simplified version
of a device called a multi-well plate reader, expanding the availability of
parallel growth measurement (and other metrics) to a wider array of researchers
and environments. The first goal is to simplify the instrument's electronics,
add an on-board display for clarity, and allow battery-powered operation. The
next goal is to accelerate equilibration to any surrounding environment to allow
proper functioning even in extreme conditions, by measuring a wide array of
environmental variables at different points in space and time. The third goal is
to solidify the device's mechanical aspects for reliability and stability in a
shaker. Finally, this project will support the development of a fully-functional
wireless interface for control and data management, allowing effective remote
use in any environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.