* 1831950
* Excellence in Research: Numerical Algorithms for Fluid Poroelastic Structure Interaction Models
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Mingchao Cai, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,876.00

The research project aims at developing advanced numerical methods for the
complex fluid poroelastic structure interaction (FPSI) models, which play a
critical role in various applications. For example, they are widely used in
biomechanic modeling of tissues, teeth, and bones. Other application areas
include environmental sciences and reservoir engineering. The research team will
propose, analyze, and implement effective and efficient numerical algorithms for
some FPSI models. The project will involve postdoc researchers and some
undergraduate students at a HBCU and therefore broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in research. The research and educational efforts are
expected to help the participants to gain experience from such a challenging
computational science topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerical simulations of fluid
poroelastic structure interaction problems are challenging because they are
multi-domain, multi-scale, and multi-physics models, the subdomain models are of
different types, discretization schemes that mimic physical laws are difficult
to design, and the stability and accuracy are hard to preserve in partitioned
numerical algorithms which decouple the computations of the coupled models. The
objective of this project aims at developing efficient and effective numerical
algorithms that can address the these difficulties. In particular, the
investigator and the team members will consider decoupled preconditioning
techniques based on a monolithic formulation, two-grid methods combined with the
Robin-Neumann iteration, multi-rate time-stepping schemes which use different
time step sizes in different subdomain models, domain decomposition methods, and
multigrid methods that can accelerate the convergence of the numerical
algorithms. The project has the potential of stimulating more novel decoupled
algorithms for various coupled multi-domain and multi-physics models in
different applications. It is expected that the algorithms and the corresponding
analysis in this project will have a broad impact on several branches of applied
mathematics such as numerical analysis and computational physics. The developed
numerical algorithms will also provide powerful tools in biomechanic computation
and reservoir engineering simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.