* 1831551
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: A Data Science Platform and Mechanisms for Its Sustainability
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Sudha Ram, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

This research will design and develop a data science platform that provides
access to documents. The platform will make available for the first-time
analytical tools, using natural language computer processing and data science to
enable systematic research and inquiry by practitioners, project proponents,
scholars, and the public to answer a host of critical questions.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Using natural language processing and data science, this research
will design and develop a data science platform. The research team will produce
a blueprint for the platform and validate its functionality with a community of
scholars and practitioners. The team will establish the platform structure,
ingest data, and refine analytical tools to integrate documents across many
repositories, link text to metadata even when text comes from one source and the
metadata from another, infer more detailed types of metadata that are not
present in any of the existing repositories from analysis of the text, and allow
researchers, contractors, and policy analysts to pose complex questions and
answer them via analysis of documents. The team will also build a user community
to catalyze scholarship and application and develop long-term mechanisms to
ensure the sustainability and continued growth, management, and use of the
platform and its resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.