* 1831244
* SBIR Phase II:  An Intelligent Water Monitor and Loss Mitigation Service for Building Owners
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Matthew Cusack, Mobius Labs, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2023
* USD 1,266,825.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will enable the creation of a powerful, simple
to use, low-cost Internet of Things (IoT) device needed to facilitate a dramatic
reduction in water waste and damage, transform maintenance from responsive to
predictive, and improve the health and quality of life for residents. This
project will revolutionize how we track and manage water usage, improve
conservation, eliminate water waste, and lower overall operating and maintenance
costs. At the same time, the new monitoring system enables large reductions in
water consumption, electricity utilization and carbon generation relative to
water production, transmission, distribution and recycling. This will improve
the water system just as electrical usage and monitoring dramatically improved
energy consumption for buildings, i.e. in lighting systems. The data analytics
solution is scalable within all water fixtures Most importantly, it can be cost-
effectively produced in the U.S. and create sustainable, green jobs. We envision
this project will eliminate the need for replacing water fixture parts on a
schedule because we don?t know when or how things fail, and it will enable Smart
Buildings and Smart Cities to protect an increasingly scarce and expensive
resource. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will build upon the
successful technical and customer discoveries from Phase I to develop the
ability for a building owner to know when a leak occurs in a water fixture
before it does damage, wastes a precious resource, or creates a potential health
risk. In Phase I, we demonstrated a Minimum Viable Product that is essentially a
?smoke alarm for water fixtures? that provides a building owner alerts when a
water fixture presents signs of a leak, before it does damage. The device is
inside an affordable platform can be economically produced in the U.S. Current
estimates are that ~23% of water produced is wasted and does damage in the
process. Building owners seek a solution that will conserve water, reduce costs
and improve their environmental impact. In Phase II, we will measure water from
drips to flowing water, develop an IoT device that is simple to install and use,
develop powerful analytics for predictive rather than reactive maintenance, and
generate data valued by insurance companies and property owners. Data analytics
can make the water delivery and consumption process considerably more reliable,
and reduce loss and damage significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.