* 1831249
* SBIR Phase II:  In-line sensor for monitoring monoclonal antibody production based on hydrogels containing peptide aptamers
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Prashant Tathireddy, Applied Biosensors, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,378,131.00

This SBIR Phase II project will benefit society by reducing the cost of
manufacturing biologic pharmaceuticals and improving their quality, including
pharmaceuticals that are currently too costly to manufacture because they target
relatively small patient populations. In order to accelerate the availability of
newly discovered drugs, the pharmaceutical industry and federal regulatory
agencies have identified a great need for advances in process analytical
technologies (PATs) in biomanufacturing. This project will advance state-of-the-
art PAT by providing a continuous in-situ sensor enabling novel methods of drug
quality assurance. This multi-analyte sensor will allow biopharmaceutical
companies, for the first time, to monitor the concentration of the product in-
situ as it is being produced along with the concentrations of other important
cell culture conditions. This ability unlocks new avenues for optimizing
biopharmaceutical production which consumes about 35% of the biologic drug cost-
of-goods. Efficient control of upstream processes using sensors such as the one
proposed here is expected to reduce these costs by up to 30%. Furthermore, this
technology can be directed towards other analytes by replacing the bound
affinity ligands. Thus, this technology can be used as a sensing platform in
biopharmaceutical manufacturing or medical diagnostics, food processing, and
water quality monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance
scientific knowledge of biosensing, hydrogel chemistry, and process analytics by
developing the first continuous monoclonal antibody (mAbs) sensor suitable for
biomanufacturing. Remarkable progress has been made in developing affinity
ligands that specifically bind to targets, but thus far the primary application
has been medical therapeutics. This project will develop a biosensor adapting
affinity ligands, aptamers in particular, for the first time for application in
bioprocess monitoring. This will be accomplished by synthesizing the first
antibody-responsive hydrogel containing covalently attached peptide aptamers.
Each of the four objectives will focus on hydrogels, electronics, software and
system validation respectively. The mAb biosensor will be capable of monitoring
quality and yield of mAbs besides the key parameters: pH, osmolality, glucose,
and lactate in cell culture environments. This novel hydrogel will be the basis
for the first in-situ bioreactor sensor for real-time antibody measurements
during biomanufacturing. This adaptable technology can be leveraged towards a
number of protein targets; thus, this project represents a transformative
approach that will advance scientific knowledge of biosensing across a multitude
of applications. Thus, the proposed sensor array will be a powerful tool to
advance process analytics and biomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.