* 1831192
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Throughput and Scalable Nanoparticle Characterization for Life Sciences Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2022
* David Freedman, nanoView Diagnostics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2022
* USD 934,244.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop an instrument platform that will
facilitate development and translation of next generation diagnostics and
therapeutics that are based on a class of nanovesicles called extracellular
vesicles (EVs). EVs, which are nanoparticles shed by cells, are being
investigated for early detection of diseases, including cancer, cardiovascular
disease, and neurodegenerative disorders, from biofluids without the need of
invasive tissue biopsies. The lack of tools and techniques to perform high-
throughput characterization of EVs is limiting translation. The platform under
development will enable an understanding EVs produced by cells. The global
market for nanoparticle analysis instrumentation in the life sciences is
estimated at $5.9 Billion. The EV market, which is a subset of this market, is
rapidly growing, with a predicted compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 47.3%
over the next five years. Biological nanoparticles are playing an increasing
role in life science applications and better, target-specific, faster tools are
needed to characterize them in a high-throughput way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase II project will complete the development of an instrument platform to
enable Extracellular Vesicle (EV) measurements and characterization. The
platform will include a customer configurable consumable, eliminating the
requirement for an expensive custom robotic arrayer step, removing barriers to
end-user adoption and decentralizing discovery. Also, long-term shelf-life of
the consumable will be established. In addition, improvements into the imaging
platform will enable visualization of the smallest nanoparticles, relaxing the
complexity and cost of the platform and providing a functional advantage over
competitive offerings. The platform will automate much of the workflow, reducing
operator hands-on time. The resulting platform will enable EV measurements with
5X-to-30X less sample volume, detect 100X-to-10,000X less concentrated targets,
and increase throughput by using a workflow that bypasses purification
requirements needed by other techniques. The completion of these objectives will
result in a life science research tool for researchers and industry working on
EV-based diagnostics and therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.