* 1831393
* 2018 Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation (SI2) Principal Investigators Workshop
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Francis Timmes, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2019
* USD 85,065.00

This project will host a 2-day workshop in Washington, DC, which will bring
together the community of Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation (SI2)
awardees (with the goal of involving one principal investigator from each
Scientific Software Elements (SSE), Scientific Software Integration (SSI), and
Scientific Software Innovation Institutes (S2I2) project, many of which are
collaborative awards) from approximately 250 awards. The workshop will have
participation from Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering
(CDS&amp;E), Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and
Processes (CRISP), and Venture funded PIs as well as SI2 Early Concept Grants
for Exploratory Research (EAGER) and Rapid Response Research (RAPID) awardees.
In addition, the proximity to NSF will encourage participation by Program
Officers from across the Foundation. Goals of this workshop include: (a)
providing a focused forum for PIs to share technical information with each other
and with NSF Program Officers, (b) encouraging exploration of emerging topics,
(c) identifying emerging best practices across the supported software projects,
(d) stimulating thinking on new ways of achieving software sustainability, and
(d) disseminating the shared experiences of the researchers via an online web
portal. The workshop is expected to host close to 150 SI2 and other awardees,
other speakers and panelists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will
support the exchange of ideas among the current software cyberinfrastructure
development projects. It will provide guidance on issues related to the
development of robust software and to the problem of software sustainability
with the broader agenda for national software ecosystem. Involvement of program
officers across NSF is expected to help the interdisciplinary SI2 awardees
understand the relevance and impact of cyberinfrastructure throughout the NSF.
The participation of these researchers and program officers in a common forum
will help ensure that the cyberinfrastructure software developed as part of SI2
projects will be relevant and broadly applicable to the most science and
engineering domains possible. The results of this workshop thus have the
potential to guide cyberinfrastructure development and cyberinfrastructure
driven research for both the participating projects and for the wider software
development community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.