* 1831740
* Improving Undergraduate Engineering Students' Spatial Skills Through 3D Interactive Virtual and Physical Manipulatives
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ning Fang, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

There is evidence that well-developed spatial skills are strongly correlated
with student success in the STEM disciplines. Indeed, the National Science Board
identified spatial skills as one of the three critical cognitive skills, along
with mathematical and verbal skills, that promote high-level thinking and
reasoning leading to the success of students in STEM. This project aims to
improve undergraduate engineering students' spatial skills by updating and
assessing an educational technology called 3D Interactive Virtual and Physical
Manipulatives (VPM). The VPM technology simultaneously integrates virtual
(computer) manipulatives and physical (real-world, tangible) manipulatives, so
learners can use multiple senses to process a series of dynamic mental images
while performing spatial tasks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is
to develop new types of manipulatives with real-world engineering applications
to improve undergraduate students' spatial skills and to motivate and inspire
interest in engineering. The effectiveness of the VPM technology for
undergraduate engineering students will be studied through traditional
educational research methods involving quantitative and qualitative data
collection, and electroencephalography measure neural efficiency while student
participants are performing relevant assessment tests. The research findings
from this project will add to the STEM education knowledge base by generating
new insights into how simultaneous integration of virtual and physical
manipulatives works to enhance learning, and why. The successful completion of
this project will enable STEM undergraduates, particularly engineering
undergraduates, to improve their spatial skills, helping to prepare them for a
successful career in STEM. The research results of this project will be
disseminated to the STEM education community through conference presentations
and journal publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.