* 1831116
* Collaborative Research: Greenland Geodetic Network (GNET) Research Networking Activity
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Robert Hawley, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Olivia Lee
* 11/30/2022
* USD 140,847.00

This project stimulates scientific interest in an existing facility and dataset
developed in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF), Office of Polar
Programs. This facility consists of 58 Global Positioning System (GPS) receivers
located around the rocky coastline of Greenland, many of which have been
collecting data nearly continuously for more than 10 years. This project fosters
new and innovative research from these data by reaching out to science
communities that include GPS experts and non-experts, or scientists that have
not traditionally used GPS in their research. The investigators are increasing
awareness of the facility and dataset and making the dataset more easily
accessible. This project is important because it encourages innovative science
from an existing large dataset that represents substantial investment of time,
logistics, and funding by the NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Greenland Geodetic
Network (GNET) is currently jointly managed by the US and Denmark. This project
is developing a Research Networking Activity aimed at encouraging innovative
scientific research from the existing GNET dataset. The project specifically 1)
broadens community awareness of, and engagement with, the GNET resource through
the development of a data portal; 2) encourages new and innovative use of these
data with the guidance of a scientific Steering Committee that includes
researchers both internal and external to the GPS community; and 3) provides
guidance for continued GNET research and network maintenance based on input from
the Steering Committee and community feedback, obtained at international
conferences. The objective of these activities is to make GNET data more
accessible to GPS experts and non-experts, with the express purpose of
encouraging the science community to pose and answer new questions associated
with this unmatched dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.