* 1831623
* Community Facility Support: The Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS)
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Gregory Tucker, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,916,962.00

The Earth's surface is undergoing continual rearrangement of its landscapes,
coastlines, and soils by processes such as landslides, floods, and storm waves.
The Community Surface Dynamics Modeling System (CSDMS) supports scientific
research into these and other Earth-surface processes: soil erosion, glaciation,
river sedimentation, coastal change, sea-floor processes, and many natural
phenomena that can impact human life and infrastructure. CSDMS focuses on the
development and applications of computer models that help researchers and other
professionals understand these processes and their potential impacts on human
activity. The organization provides support in three main areas: community,
computing, and education. Community-oriented activity includes maintaining an
interactive online database for sharing of research software and other
resources, hosting an annual scientific conference, and providing logistical
support for workshops and related events. Computing-related services include
developing software technology for running and coupling process models, hosting
high-performance computing resources, providing technical computing assistance
to scientists, and designing and promoting common standards and best practices
for research software. Educational activities include workshops on various
technical topics, and a web-based repository of online educational materials,
such as animations, lecture slides, and laboratory
exercises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSDMS community addresses a broad range of
scientific questions that bear on Earth's surface, its stratigraphy, and their
changes over time. A fundamental goal is to develop an ever-improving body of
knowledge that predicts the dynamics of Earth's surface: how the physics,
biology, and chemistry of formative processes operate, how the movement of
sediments and solutes shapes the seascape and landscape, how the system reacts
to natural and human forcing, and how the processes give rise to bathymetry,
topography, and stratigraphy. CSDMS cyberinfrastructure developments address
fundamental challenges in integration and standardization of scientific software
by designing interface standards and providing framework services. Building on
major CSDMS advances of the past five years, new technology planned for the next
phase will allow for easy pathways from model user to model developer, through
an expanded CSDMS software stack. Enhancing core functionality to allow for
smooth data-model integration will offer a step change in model validation,
uncertainty quantification, and model-data synthesis opportunities. New
geospatial capabilities in the suite of robust CSDMS cybertools will bring
predictive modeling to a new level of sophistication. By easing the process of
model-data coupling, CSDMS aids innovation in the science of Earth-surface
processes by allowing the community to simulate landscape response to changes in
climate or natural hazards, as well as to policy-driven land-use or
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.