* 1831086
* SBIR Phase II: A Cloud Managed Solution for Public Transit Signal Priority and Emergency Vehicle Preemption of Traffic Lights
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Timothy Menard, SinWaves, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,449,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to lay a foundation for vehicle to
infrastructure communication focused on applications that add direct value to
mobility. Many solutions are focused on getting information to the vehicle,
while it is often the infrastructure that requires vehicle information to
operate more efficiently. Currently, traffic signals enforce the right-of-way of
everyone regardless of in-vehicle technology. This is why optimizing their
effects on the road network can provide tremendous benefit. There are
significant benefits to transit as well, like buses and light rail that, when
given priority at intersections, improves on-time performance which is a major
factor in ridership rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances
the work of the joint standardization of the National Transportation
Communications for Intelligent Transportation Systems Protocol (NTCIP) to
achieve interoperability between various traffic signal controller vendors to
enable shared control and organization between different operating agencies. It
is not unusual to have sections of roadway be managed by local, county, and
state within the same small area. These overlapping jurisdictions produce
fractures within the road network resulting in the asynchronous timing of
traffic signals. The aim is to consolidate the management into a signal network
capable of coordinating large areas of traffic signals to increase mobility's
overall efficiency. With a cloud solution that is capable of speaking to each
networked intersection, vehicle telemetry data and route information can be used
to proactively optimize signal timing. Working with prioritized vehicles such as
buses, fire trucks, and ambulances, pilot studies will be conducted to perform
priority and preemption along routes that cross jurisdictions. Each pilot case
will be analysed based on key performance indicators set forth by the
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.