* 1831212
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Formulation for the Delivery of High Concentration Protein Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Paul Brown, Elektrofi Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,631,997.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to transform intravenous (IV) infusions of
biologic medicines into simple subcutaneous (SC) injections. Biologics have
improved the treatment of human disease. Unfortunately, their delivery is
burdensome. The standard of administration of these biologics is often by IV
infusion at low concentrations, which can take multiple hours to deliver, cause
patient discomfort, and increase the risk of infection. Although SC injection is
preferred, constraints on SC volume (1.5-2.0 mL) would necessitate
concentrations much greater than 100 mg/mL, which are often unfeasible.
Solutions at concentrations exceeding 100 mg/mL are highly viscous (honey-like),
making them difficult to inject and leading to unstable products. This project's
microparticle suspension technology can deliver high concentrations while fully
preserving the protein structure, function, and efficacy. Transforming the
delivery of biologics offers advantages to patients, healthcare providers,
payers, and biopharmaceutical companies. Patients will experience less pain and
discomfort, save time, have fewer infections, and have better access to
biologics. Healthcare providers will be able to process more patients, decrease
the chance of complications, and use fewer human resources. Payers will have
decreased reimbursement costs. Biopharmaceutical companies will have patented
product differentiation and the ability to develop otherwise intractable
biologics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project aims to develop a
soft atomization manufacturing platform for the production of microparticle
suspensions capable of transforming intravenous (IV) infusions of biologics into
simple subcutaneous (SC) injections. The standard of administration of biologics
is intravenous infusion at low concentrations, which can take hours to deliver,
cause patient discomfort, and increase the risk of infection. Although SC
injection is preferred, constraints on SC volume (1.5-2.0 mL) necessitate
concentrations greater than 100 mg/mL, which are often unfeasible. Solutions at
concentrations exceeding 100 mg/mL are highly viscous (honey-like), making them
difficult to inject and leading to unstable products. This project's gently
processed microparticle suspensions can deliver high concentrations while
preserving protein structure and bioactivity, an accomplishment not well-
demonstrated with other microparticle technologies. This project aims to advance
the readiness level of the innovation by performing process calibration of a
bench-scale system, followed by developing and characterizing the resulting
particles and suspensions produced on that system. With well-formulated
suspensions, in vivo pharmacokinetic and efficacy studies will commence. The
project will support the development of manufacturing capabilities towards a
goal of transitioning to pilot-scale production. This project aims to offer
advantages to patients, healthcare providers, payers, and biopharmaceutical
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.