* 1831274
* SBIR Phase II:  Advanced Computational Imaging System for 3D Surface Microgeometry and Reflectance Properties Measurement
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Lingfei Meng, MURA INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 05/31/2021
* USD 923,904.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project can lead to a revolution in 3D microgeometry
and reflectance properties measurement of object surfaces at the micron-scale
range. The proposed technology will significantly improve photorealistic
rendering in digital prototyping, and therefore reduce the waste from using
physical material samples during design, engineering, and manufacturing. This
technology will help reduce product development time and cost, and lead to a
greater sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a
computational imaging system that allows for high-resolution 3D microgeometry
and reflectance properties measurement of object surfaces. The current
approaches for 3D surface measurement at the micron scale are based on
sophisticated optical and mechanical components that are expensive and can be
difficult to use, and most of these approaches cannot capture the full
appearance of a surface, such as diffuse reflection, specular reflection, and
surface roughness. The goal of this research program is to develop a combination
of hardware and software that can measure 3D surface microgeometry and
reflectance properties with micron-scale accuracy. The proposed technology is
expected to achieve superior performance at greatly reduced
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.