* 1831504
* I-Corps: Air-Stable and Low-Cost Metal Inks for Wearable Electronics and Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Chuan-Jian Zhong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 04/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
commercialization of a new metal ink technology in the markets of wearable
electronics and sensors which depend heavily on printable and conductive inks in
scalable manufacturing of electronic circuits on flexible materials. In today's
society wearable electronics and sensors have found increasing applications in
daily life, especially for human health monitoring and point-of-care diagnostics
via wireless interfaces with smartphones. The market for wearable electronics
and sensors is forecast to reach about $52 billion by 2020, with the market
revenue being expected to grow at a Compound Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of about
16%. Findings from the customer discovery in this project will identify the
market opportunity of the technology and develop the business model, leading to
potential start-up business, technology licensing, and importantly, a business
plan suitable for the product prototyping and evaluation by industrial partners
and review by potential investors. The project will also train students and
researchers for their better preparation to be entrepreneurially competitive,
and to enhance their understanding of what it takes to pursue the
entrepreneurship and the technology commercialization.

This I-Corps project focuses on determining the commercialization feasibility of
a new metal nanoink technology which can enable manufacturers of flexible and
wearable electronics and sensors. While the current use of silver inks has
dominated the printable electronics and wearable sensors industries, the high-
temperature processing requirement is inadequate for common temperature-
sensitive flexible materials and the propensity of metal oxidation or mobility
degrades the printed electronics. To address the pain of high-temperature and
high-cost manufacturing with a high failure rate, the core technology in this
project features an air-stable and low-cost metal ink formulation with an
innovative low-temperature processing capability for manufacturing wearable
electronics and sensors on flexible materials. To be competitive in the global
markets of conductive inks and wearable sensors or electronics, key questions in
the customer discovery focus on understanding the driving force for the targeted
market, the value proposition specific to customer segments, the cost breakdown
related to the manufacturing process, the decision-making process in adopting
new technologies for manufacturing and packaging, and the major players and
influencers in the manufacturing or product ecosystem.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.