* 1831283
* Vibration damage of rock landforms: contribution of anthropogenic and natural energy sources to bedrock fracture and erosion
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2022
* USD 396,114.00

This project investigates damage created by natural and anthropogenic vibration
sources in freestanding rock landforms, such as arches, towers and fins. While
the ability of earthquakes to trigger slope failure is well known, comparably
little attention has been given to the role of human vibration sources in
driving rock damage, as well as the cumulative effects of repeated exposure on
the long-term stability of rock landforms. The investigators identify several
sources able to excite resonance and generate damage: earthquakes, wind, trucks,
trains, helicopters, and sonic booms. To achieve broader impacts, the
investigators will work with National Park Service managers to share knowledge
and materials for public dissemination, including animations and sound files, as
well as conduct management briefings on potential effects of anthropogenic
vibrations on the long-term stability of geologic features. They will train
students at the bachelor's, master's, and doctoral levels, including groups
underrepresented in STEM, and conduct outreach activities with Native American
tribal organizations. They will develop a new science-art collaboration that
will result in a publicly shared art piece communicating the dynamic nature of
Earth surface landforms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will develop
methodology to assess vibrational modes of geological features from ambient
resonance sensing, compile vibration source energy characterizations from
seismic and infrasound field data, generate important new data sets measuring
resonance induced by select transit sources, and create new statistical analyses
of monitoring data to contextualize individual events and sources. They will
then use monitoring data to parameterize a broadly-applicable, conceptual
fracture mechanics model generating quantitative comparison of the long-term
cumulative impact of purely natural or added anthropogenic vibration energy in
driving rock mass damage. The analysis creates a unique opportunity for
quantitative comparison of anthropogenic and natural contributions to the
mechanical degradation of geological features, including the cumulative effects
of vibration events across a broad range of magnitudes. This study focuses on
culturally valuable rock features in Utah, but the results will be broadly
applicable across the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.