* 1831795
* SCC: Building Safe and Secure Communities through Real-Time Edge Video Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Shannon Reid, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,276,958.00

The emergence of intelligent technologies is enabling a new era of connection
between community residents and the surrounding environments, both in the United
States and around the world. With the new wave of growth in urban areas,
ensuring public safety is an essential precursor toward "smart" cities and
communities. This project proposes a novel "intelligent" policing technology as
a transformative solution to efficiently enhance law enforcement, while
minimizing unnecessary interactions and maintaining resident privacy. The
proposed technology offers a network of smart cameras that do not require
continuous monitoring, but instead are trained to generate alerts on the spot in
real-time. Since the cameras identify behaviors and not identities, they can
reduce biases, minimize false alarms, and protect personal privacy. The
intelligent policing technology will be co-designed and co-created with the
direct help of community residents, neighborhood leaders, and local business
owners, as well as agencies including the City of Charlotte, and local law
enforcement agencies in Charlotte-Mecklenburg and Gaston counties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research makes fundamental advances in
multiple areas from computer vision, computer architecture, and real-time edge
computing, as well as criminology and community-technology interaction. It paves
the path for bringing the recent advances in deep learning and data analytics to
enhance the safety and security of communities without jeopardizing the privacy
of residents. To this end, this project formulates social-technical advances to
efficiently analyze and assist communities and governing agencies in making
real-time, smart reactions. The project enables real-time vision processing near
the cameras (edge nodes) and cooperative processing over the edge network. At
the same time, the proposed research interprets, formalizes, and models public
safety and security events to be machine detectable, reducing biases, and
enabling broad-based community support and trust. By demonstrating the use of
powerful emerging edge computing technologies, the project will highlight the
applicability and adaptability of such technologies to tackle many community
challenges and broader smart cities and cyber-physical systems (CPS)
applications, including smart transportation and pedestrian safety.
Additionally, the proposed community-based pilots will serve as exemplars to
other communities across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.