* 1831031
* Building Bridges: Broadening the STEM Conversation in Rural Mississippi
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Leslie Burger, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Monya Ruffin
* 09/30/2019
* USD 74,320.00

Many of the nation's poorest-performing schools are in rural areas. Anecdotal
information suggests participation in and access to informal STEM learning
opportunities in Mississippi - a state with among the lowest STEM-career
readiness in the nation - is unequally distributed among geographic regions and
sociocultural environments. Informal learning programs in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) have the potential to reach into rural communities
and provide a bridge to greater STEM access, literacy, and career readiness.
Building Bridges: Broadening the STEM Conversation in Rural Mississippi will
initiate a dialog among key practitioners, experts, and stakeholders in informal
STEM learning focused on identifying the causes of and solutions to STEM
inclusion barriers among rural youth. The goal of this Advancing Informal STEM
Learning (AISL) Conference Project aligns with NSF's mission to promote the
progress of science for all segments of society, including rural K-12 students.
Solutions to STEM disconnections identified in Mississippi through this project
will have relevance and transferability to rural communities across the
southeastern US, given regional commonalities in socioeconomic, educational, and
cultural factors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to conduct an
interactive and participant-based summit that brings together key leaders and
experts from informal science learning institutions and organizations, STEM-
related agencies and industries, and rural community groups to improve methods
for linking informal STEM learning opportunities with rural, K-12 students. The
goal of the project is to identify the common barriers and explore potential
solutions to informal STEM participation by rural K-12 students in Mississippi.
With the guidance of a steering committee, a Mississippi STEM Consortium will be
formed and convened at a 2019 Mississippi Informal STEM Consortium Summit with
the following goals: (1) Identify broad barriers to informal STEM learning in
diverse and rural K-12 populations. (2) Define crucial and transformative
elements in informal STEM programs deemed successful in rural student
recruitment and engagement. (3) Improve collaborative networking to enhance the
role of informal education in building statewide STEM capacity. These objectives
will be met by developing, implementing, and evaluating statewide needs-
assessment surveys and a two-day summit of Consortium members. The project
evaluator will ensure process and outcome evaluations are properly conducted
throughout the entire course of the project to inform planning, promote
iterative improvement, monitor progress, and ensure achievement of desire
objectives. With regards to broader impacts, it is anticipated that outcomes
from this project will have impact within and beyond Mississippi's borders.
Expected project outcomes include scientific manuscripts on needs-assessment
surveys, modified approaches to existing informal STEM activities, future
research on identified informal STEM participation barriers and mitigation
measures, new collaborations that broaden participation and expand future
research, and a draft Informal STEM Strategic Plan for Mississippi. Varied
dissemination methods will be used to communicate the findings
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference project is funded by the AISL
program, which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments. This includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to
and engagement in STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on
and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments, and developing
understandings of deeper learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.