* 1831253
* SBIR Phase II:  A suite of flexible printed MRI coils for newborn to adult patients
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Pierre Lechene, InkSpace Imaging, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2021
* USD 1,415,547.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project aims to develop
a suite of screen-printed receive coils for Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI),
that are flexible, lightweight, low-cost and adapted to the entire population
from infants to adults. MRI is widely used to establish a broad variety of
clinical diagnosis, but suffers from long examination times and a high rate of
failure, resulting in a yearly loss of more than $4 billion in the United States
alone. Printed receive coils are extremely flexible, lightweight, and conform
well to the human body. With this technology, coils can be designed and
manufactured inexpensively to fit all patient sizes, thus improving image
quality and enabling robust acceleration of the method. These benefits can
contribute to increase the success rate of MRI exams, speed up procedure time,
enhance the clinical workflow, and reduce equipment costs. Printed coils will
improve the quality of care offered by MRI suites and increase the availability
and use of MRI to a wider patient population. Overall, this project will develop
a clinical-ready system capable of delivering the full economic and clinical
benefits of printed coils, which will contribute to a reduction of the
healthcare costs associated with MRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
fully realize a clinical-ready system consisting of a collection of printed,
flexible lightweight MRI coil arrays, and connecting to a single universal cable
to interface with the MRI scanner. A first part of the project will focus on the
design of the cable and the associated connection scheme allowing interchange of
multiple printed coil arrays of different sizes. Different strategies will be
examined with the intent of maintaining high performance and safety while
maximizing the advantages brought by printing. A second project goal will focus
on the development of a collection of printed coil arrays for patient sizes
ranging from newborn to adult, that are compatible with the universal cable and
for both 3T and 1.5T scanners. The arrays will be designed for body imaging and
will consist of 32-channel devices divided into 16-channel posterior and
anterior portions. Their performance will be compared to a commercial 32-channel
product. The final system will meet all the safety requirements for medical use
and will be ready to be manufactured at scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.