* 1831084
* SBIR Phase II:  Dynamic Nanopores Enabling Non-toxic Cryopreservation to Advance Centralized Manufacturing &amp; Transport of Regenerative Medicines
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Xiaoxi Wei, X-Therma Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2022
* USD 1,243,322.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will continue
development of cutting-edge nanopore technology that will greatly enhance
biological preservation of regenerative medicines such as stem cells, complex
tissues, and organs. Such a technology has the potential to greatly improve the
biobanking and transport infrastructure of healthcare for on-demand cells and
tissues, improved mass trauma care and advanced personalized medical procedures.
Biopreservation is required in regenerative medicine at nearly all levels in the
acquisition of source material, isolation, storage and shipment of a final
product to patient. Yet critically, the field lacks the ability to safely and
efficiently preserve these tissues and medicines while maintaining high cell
viability and function after cryopreservation, severely limiting product shelf
life. Nowhere is the absence of a biobanking technology more palpable than organ
transplantation, where the time window between donor and recipient (4-7 hours)
is not enough to properly match donations, screen for pathogens, or transport
long distances. Enabling the United States to safely bank organs at subzero
temperature will significantly enhance national healthcare. The US faces strong
commercial and competitiveness reasons to invest in all facets of regenerative
medicine, including organ therapies. Cryopreservation solutions would indirectly
enable significant savings to the healthcare system, the patient, and healthcare
insurance companies with the cost savings from regenerative medicine treatments
estimated to be nearly $250 billion per year in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cytotoxicity of current
biopreservation techniques is largely associated with inefficient cryoprotective
agent and water delivery across the cell membrane during cooling leading to
irreparable cell damage from ice formation. Phase I established a fundamentally
different approach to cryoprotective agent (CPA) optimization by developing
first-in-the-field bioinspired nanopores as transmembrane mega highways to
facilitate safe and efficient intracellular delivery and removal of
cryoprotective agents during cryopreservation and dramatically increase post-
thaw cell yield, viability, and function. The pore-formers assist CPA loading at
reduced temperatures to make up the functional loss of biological protein
channels at cold temperatures, reduce the amount of CPA required to remarkably
low concentrations, and expand the selectable range of CPAs, all while
dynamically dissociating at physiological temperature to prevent open-pore
toxicity. Further R&amp;D effort will diversify molecular design, optimize lead
molecules, scale-up production, and perform cryopreservation studies on
regenerative medicines of major therapeutic significance such as stem cells and
complex tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.