* 1831428
* Collaborative Research: Dimensions: Integrating phylogenetics, ecophysiology, and transcriptomics to understand the diversity of hornwort-cyanobacterium symbiosis
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Fay-Wei Li, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,190,978.00

Only a few remarkable plants can form beneficial partnerships with nitrogen-
fixing bacteria. These include a few species of bryophytes, ferns, cycads, and a
small group of flowering plants. Because of their importance to crops, a lot of
research has focused on the relationship between legumes and the bacteria that
fix nitrogen for them - rhizobia. Much less is known about an even more
widespread partnership between plants and cyanobacteria. Because cyanobacteria
are generally less dependent on the plant host than rhizobia, they could be an
excellent partner for engineering helpful nitrogen fixation into crop plants.
However, our current understanding of plant-cyanobacterium partnerships is poor.
The species and genetic diversity of helpful cyanobacteria is virtually
unexplored. Similarly, the plant genes involved in these partnerships remain
unknown. Hornworts, one of the three bryophyte lineages, are an outstanding
system to study plant-cyanobacterial relationships. This study will investigate
phylogenetic, functional, and genetic aspects of the hornwort-cyanobacterium
partnership. In doing so, the research will explore an array of questions that
will provide new insights into how these unique plants interact with their
bacterial partners to fix nitrogen. One postdoctoral fellow, three graduate, ten
undergraduate, and five high school students will be trained. In partnership
with the Science Teachers Association of New York State, an educational video
will be made. This video will showcase the various forms of plant-cyanobacterium
relationships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research are first to
uncover the phylogenetic diversity of hornworts and cyanobionts. Then to
elucidate the functional diversity of symbiotic nitrogen-fixation. Finally, the
research will reveal the genetic components of the association between hornworts
and their cyanobionts. The researchers will reconstruct the hornwort tree-of-
life using a phylogenomic approach. Then, for each hornwort sample, the genetic
diversity of the cyanobiont community will be characterized. Comparing the
hornwort and cyanobiont diversity will shed light on host-symbiont specificity.
The research will also study patterns of co-evolution, and the roles of
cyanobacterial symbiosis in hornwort evolution. Next, population and microcosm
studies will be used to test the interaction among hornwort microbiome
diversity, environmental variables, and nitrogen-fixation rates. Finally,
multiple pure hornwort and cyanobiont cultures will be isolated. Once isolated,
their symbioses will be reconstituted under controlled environmental conditions
in the laboratory. Time-course RNA-seq data will be generated to identify
putative genes that are core for symbiosis establishment and linked to variation
in symbiotic behaviors. The results of this research will enable comparisons
across all three major forms of plant-microbe mutualistic interaction to fully
characterize the evolutionary and genetic underpinnings of
symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.