* 1831176
* SBIR Phase II: IVUS Drug Delivery for Critical Limb Ischemia
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Joseph Kilroy, SoundPipe
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 815,740.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop a drug delivery technology to address
the unmet need of antiproliferative drug delivery below-the-knee. In the United
States, there are 323,000 new critical limb ischemia (CLI) patients each year.
CLI is the most severe stage of peripheral artery disease (PAD), atherosclerosis
of the lower limbs. Ultimately, 40% of CLI patients will undergo lower limb
amputation as a result of CLI, half of whom will then die within a year.
Existing technologies have failed in these vessels, resulting in higher rates of
patient amputation. This project will create a better intravascular drug
delivery tool to treat PAD patients after angioplasty. This improved drug
delivery will provide three key societal benefits: 1) reduced costs and greater
efficiency when revascularizing the vessels of critical limb ischemia patients,
2) a reduction in healthcare costs by reducing repeat procedures, and 3)
improved patient outcomes resulting from improved drug delivery achieved using
image guidance. If successful, this technology may improve patient health while
reducing treatment costs for millions of patients around the world. This will
also improve understanding of what aspects of CLI treatment are most effective
by offering the flexibility to vary different aspects of drug delivery. When
completed, this project will enhance the understanding of intravascular drug
delivery with ultrasound and microbubbles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will provide strong technical innovation through a new ultrasound drug delivery
device and new methods to evaluate cardiovascular drug delivery devices. Using a
combination of intravascular ultrasound and drug loaded microbubbles, this
project will provide better localization of delivery with lower drug doses. This
project will then evaluate the drug delivery platform using realistic models of
human disease from donated tissue combined with routine techniques
(histopathology) and more recent advances (microCT) to evaluate the effect of
the disease on drug delivery. The core research objective of this project is to
deliver paclitaxel to human diseased arteries with the new intravascular
ultrasound and microbubble drug delivery platform. It is anticipated that this
project will result in an improved drug uptake over the existing technologies in
diseased arteries where drug uptake is poorest. The data and techniques from
this project will be used to compel adoption among interventionalists and to
validate the the drug delivery system as a tool to prevent amputations in CLI
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.