* 1831682
* Excellence in Research: Time Domain Astronomy in the Caribbean: Detecting and Characterizing the Fastest Astrophysical Transient Events
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Antonino Cucchiara, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2022
* USD 498,125.00

This research project seeks to exploit the unique location of the University of
the Virgin Islands Robotic Telescope (VIRT) to monitor and detect short-lived
(transient) and explosive astronomical events. The VIRT is in a "blind spot" in
the global coverage of astronomical transient events, and its robotic capability
allows it to respond within minutes of the identification of such events. This
will allow new discoveries as well as rapid monitoring of known transient events
from ongoing multi-wavelength observational surveys, allowing astronomers to
characterize transient events at multiple wavelengths and understand the
mechanisms responsible for them. By supporting a postdoctoral researcher, this
project will strengthen the astronomy research program at the University of the
Virgin Islands (UVI). It will also provide research opportunities for students
in the Physics program at UVI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will
implement a real-time data analysis pipeline for the VIRT, create a lightcurve
template database, and build a modern machine-learning infrastructure for rapid
classification of astronomical transient events. The project will bolster the
research and education programs at UVI by supporting a dedicated postdoctoral
researcher and involving undergraduate students in several aspects of the
project. It will thus help realize UVI?s potential in research and help
establish it as a major research and education
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.