* 1831977
* Excellence in Research: Dynamics of High-L States of Rydberg Atoms
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Daniel Vrinceanu, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 273,951.00

The scientific goal of this project is to deepen understanding of so-called
high-L Rydberg states of atoms, or atomic states with high angular momentum.
These are hydrogen-like states in which one electron is excited quite close to
the ionization threshold. These states are very fragile, and easily perturbed by
surrounding electric and magnetic fields; such Rydberg atoms interact strongly
with other particles due to their large spatial volume. These states contrast
with the low-angular momentum (low-L) states that are easily accessible in the
lab by laser excitation from the ground state, and which have been studied
extensively. The less studied high-angular momentum (high-L) Rydberg states have
unique advantages and pose certain challenges to both experimental and
theoretical approaches. They are important due to the role they play in key
processes in a wide range of environments. For example, Rydberg states played a
critical role in cosmology during the recombination era, shortly (approximately
200 thousand years) after the Big Bang. Rydberg atoms are also now being studied
for potential use as building blocks in quantum computation, somewhat similar to
the role that semiconductors play in classical computers. Indeed, both Rydberg
atoms and semiconductors owe their value to their exceptional versatility,
sensitivity to environment and ease of control. This project will involve
undergraduate students from underrepresented communities, providing valuable
experiences in theoretical atomic physics research through year-long active
mentoring, and summer research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
makes progress in the following three specific science projects: (1) Calculate
the rates for angular momentum mixing of Rydberg states in dilute plasmas, (2)
Optimize and design pulse shapes that facilitate intrashell coherent population
transfer among degenerate highly excited Rydberg states, and (3) Calculate cross
sections and rate coefficients for electron spin changing collisions of Rydberg
atoms. The common theme for the three aims is to expose the rich, undervalued
physics qualities of high-L Rydberg states that emerge from the underlying SO(4)
symmetry group of the degenerate hydrogenic shell states. The Hilbert space of
problems involving Rydberg states is extremely large, so direct exact quantum
mechanical solutions are often numerically difficult due to extreme fluctuations
in the wave functions. This program proposes to use a dual quantum-classical
strategy, in which results obtained from feasible quantum mechanical
calculations for low enough n values are compared and extrapolated by using
classical mechanics calculations, by virtue of the correspondence principle and
the underlying symmetry. Since it acts at a rather fundamental level, this
research program is favorable to engaging junior and senior undergraduate
students in relevant research at the forefront of atomic and molecular
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.