* 1831153
* Identifying the Community Cultural Wealth of Successful Black Science Students through Participatory Action Research
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Julie Stanton, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,958.00

Black students persist in undergraduate science degree programs at a lower rate
than all other racial and ethnic groups. Many of the barriers that Black
students face in science programs have been identified. However, a major
shortcoming of prior research is a lack of focus on the strengths that Black
students use to succeed in science. To address attrition of Black students in
science, it is critical to understand not only the barriers they face, but also
the mechanisms by which academically successful Black students complete
undergraduate science degrees. This IUSE Exploration and Design research project
will use a participatory action research approach to investigate the strengths
of academically successful Black undergraduate science majors. Research results
will be widely-disseminated to raise awareness of Black students' community
cultural wealth, which is the knowledge, skills, abilities, and contacts that
they use for educational success. This qualitative study will help to build a
foundation for testing hypotheses about Black students' community cultural
wealth, thus contributing to the national need to study critical issues in
undergraduate STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
research project is to understand the persistence of Black students in earning
undergraduate science degrees. To achieve this goal, a team of faculty and
undergraduate researchers will collaborate to examine the mechanisms Black
students use to succeed in their undergraduate science majors. The aims of this
project are to: (1) investigate the capital, knowledge, skills, abilities, and
contacts used by Black science majors; and (2) raise faculty awareness of the
community cultural capital that successful Black students draw upon. The capital
that Black science majors use to succeed will be characterized at a doctoral
university (University of Georgia) and a college that primarily awards associate
degrees (East Georgia State College). Research results will be used to create a
student-led workshop for raising faculty awareness of the capital Black students
bring to their science majors. It is expected that this awareness will help
faculty to better support Black students' persistence in earning undergraduate
science degrees. This awareness may also contribute to more effective faculty
support for all students. The workshop will also help address implicit bias, the
unconscious attitudes and stereotypical opinions people have against certain
groups of people. This project seeks to contribute to a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce by characterizing the community cultural wealth that
Black students bring to their undergraduate science majors and by determining
actions for raising awareness of this capital.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.