* 1831268
* SBIR Phase II:  X-Ray Focusing Device for 20-100 keV Photon Energies
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Nicolaie Moldovan, Alcorix Co.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 08/31/2021
* USD 798,975.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project targets the fabrication
of devices capable of focusing X-rays with high energy (from 10 keV to above 100
keV) to spot sizes as small as 7 nanometers. This capability is critical for
imaging, microtomography, and elemental and structural analyses of materials and
will permit imaging in spectral ranges and at resolutions unavailable today.
These devices will enable scientists to better image the interplay of structure
and functionality for a wide variety of applications, including the development
of life-saving drugs, the creation of materials for high-tech devices, and for a
number of important basic scientific purposes. The devices? primary use will be
in high-end synchrotron radiation facilities and in X-ray microscopes with in
specialized industrial and research environments. These devices form a special
class of high-value consumables, addressing a global market segment worth about
$7 million today with the potential to increase to more than $14 million in the
near future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project is
threefold. First, the innovative method of fabrication explores and exploits the
ultimate capability of atomic layer deposition (ALD) for achieving nanometer-
scale smoothness in very thick, multilayer films. Unlike related methods that
rely on deposition onto wires and slicing, this method uses ALD to deposit
sequences of low and high refractive index materials onto batch-fabricated
cylindrical silicon precursors, with well-controlled layer thicknesses varying
from a few nanometers to tens of nanometers. Subsequently, polishing the wafer
will yield membranes with hundreds of high-value focusing devices on a single
wafer, minimizing the processing costs per device. Second, the envisioned wafer-
level processing method allows for a necessary tilt control of the precursors,
not possible with wires, for better focusing properties. Third, the method is
extendable towards depositing sequences of more-than-two material layers, which
enables the fabrication of step-wise graded index diffractive devices with
single foci and featuring ultimate diffraction efficiency. Phase I qualified the
individual key processes and proved their integration capability into a complete
fabrication sequence, while Phase II will deal with the fabrication and testing
of prototypes and preparation for production, using long runs of atomic layer
deposition processes, as is necessary for functional
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.