* 1831952
* LTER:  Luquillo LTER VI: Understanding Ecosystem Change in Northeastern Puerto Rico
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2025
* Whendee Silver, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 01/31/2025
* USD 5,834,807.00

Since the Luquillo LTER began in 1988, multiple hurricanes and droughts have
affected the site. Building on a 90-year research history on ecology in natural
and human-modified forests, the Luquillo LTER has shown that while tropical
forests exhibit resilience to individual disturbance events, the potential
combination of increased frequency of intense storms, like Hurricane Maria in
2017, and more frequent drought, may compromise ecosystem resilience in the
long-term. The Luquillo Long-Term Ecological Research Program (LTER) combines
long-term measurements, experimental manipulations, and computer simulations to
determine the effects of changes in the frequency and intensity of disturbance
events, such as hurricanes and droughts, on tropical forests represented by the
Luquillo Mountains in eastern Puerto Rico, USA. During the next six years, the
Luquillo LTER will document the impacts of Hurricane Maria, the most intense
storm to impact the island in ninety years, on the forests of the Luquillo
Mountains while continuing to evaluate the potential effects of increased
drought predicted for the region. It is important to understand how tropical
forests respond to these disturbance events because they play a key role in
global carbon and water dynamics and provide essential ecosystem services, such
as clean water and carbon dioxide absorption, to people worldwide. The Luquillo
LTER will continue to train numerous undergraduate and graduate students, as
well as secondary school students and teachers, especially members of
underrepresented groups, producing a cadre of new multidisciplinary scientists
and citizens who have the skills and experiences to address the pressing
environmental challenges of the 21st Century.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
tests hypotheses that changing disturbance regimes, interacting with the effects
of past disturbance events, will result in new combinations of species and
altered biogeochemical dynamics different from previous environmental conditions
and characteristics. These new ecosystem states will arise from the legacies of
multiple disturbances, as well as from the immigration of species adapted to
drier and hotter conditions associated with canopy openings and more frequent
droughts. The research will continue to characterize the spatial and temporal
dynamics of biota and biogeochemical processes in native tabonuco forest and
leverage elevational variation in the Luquillo Mountains as a climate proxy to
provide context for our measurements. The continuing Canopy Trimming Experiment
will test hypotheses that more frequent intense hurricanes will increase the
dominance of shade intolerant species with cascading effects through other biota
and consequences for biogeochemical dynamics. Two new experiments, the
Throughfall Exclusion Experiment and the Stream Flow Reduction Experiment, will
address hypotheses that increased drought frequency will alter species
composition and distribution as well as soil carbon and nutrient storage along
hillslopes and in streams. Computer models and data-model integration will
provide predictive understanding of the combined effects of increased drought
and hurricane frequency on tropical forests, as well as facilitate synthesis
across scales, and forecasting of future ecosystem
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.