* 1831005
* I-Corps:  An Interactive Query Interface
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Isil Dillig, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 09/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
enable companies and end-users to more easily extract relevant information from
data sources. This system can be beneficial for a wide range of companies
including e-commerce, business intelligence, and database and could systems. It
is envisioned that this technology will be used in two ways: First, companies
can use the system internally to enable easier and faster data access for their
employees, thereby reducing dependence on database administrators and cutting
costs. Second, companies could use the system externally to provide a better
search interface to their customers. In addition, this technology can
potentially also be useful to academic researchers, particularly within social
and natural sciences, by allowing them to easily extract relevant
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project provides an interface for
extracting data from databases by writing English sentences. Although relational
databases are the most common choice for the storage of information, retrieving
a relevant subset of the data from them requires expertise in a formal query
language. This technology allows end-users to query information stored in a
relational database without having to learn a formal query language. The
technology is based on a research which combines advanced natural language
processing techniques with automated program synthesis and repair. A key
advantage of this approach is that it is database-agnostic and does not require
end-users to know the database schema.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.