* 1831128
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Analyzing Backlash against Gender Equity in Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Emily Carian, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

One marker of a modern society is the belief that organizational rewards should
be based on merit and not on ascriptive characteristics like sex and race.
However, sometimes when organizations attempt to make their hiring, evaluation,
and promotion processes meritocratic, their employees, consumers, and the public
resist these changes. While there are numerous theories that suggest what might
underlie such backlash, there is little evidence of what causes it. This project
asks what produces backlash to gender diversity initiatives and which factors
can reduce backlash. The project will address a fundamental social psychological
question: which factors can override the psychological tendency for individuals
to defend their group status and the status quo when either appears to be
threatened? Findings of this project can help organizational leaders increase
buy-in as they attempt to implement changes that will reduce workplace gender
inequity and make their firms more meritocratic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study
derives hypotheses from diverse sociological and psychological literatures,
including group position theory, system justification theory, moral foundations
theory, and identity control theory. Hypotheses suggest that messaging that
provides data illustrating the extent of the gender inequality or its
illegitimacy, minimizes threat to male group position, justifies the
intervention using particular moral values (like loyalty and respect) or
business motivations, or frames the intervention as influencing rather than
adjusting the organizational practices, will be more successful in garnering
support for the initiative compared to messaging that does not. Using six
original experiments, the project determines whether and among whom support for
an organizational gender intervention increases if its announcement: (1)
provides data illustrating the extent of the gender inequality; (2) provides
evidence that the gender inequality is illegitimate; (3) reduces threat against
male group position; (4) justifies the intervention using particular moral
values; (5) justifies the intervention using business motivations rather than
moral motivations; and (6) frames the intervention as influencing or adjusting
the organizational practices. Subjects will be recruited from a nationally
representative sample, thus enhancing the external validity of the findings.
Findings will provide evidence for key theories and assist business
organizations in deriving strategies to reduce gender
inequity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.