* 1831475
* SCC: Community-Based Automated Information for Urban Flooding
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Mikhail Chester, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

Flooding is the most damaging natural hazard in the U.S. and around the world,
and most flood damage occurs in cities. Yet the ability to know when flooding is
happening and communicate that risk to the public and first responders is
limited. At the same time there is a surge in digitally connected technologies,
many at the fingertips of the general public (e.g., smartphones). The need is
for new flood information that can be generated from primary observations that
are collected in exactly the right places and times to be coupled with the
ability to more effectively communicate this risk to communities. This project
will develop the Integrated Flood Stage Observation Network (IFSON), a system
that can take in crowd-sourced information on flooding (from cameras, a
smartphone app, and social media), intelligently assess flood risk (using
machine learning), and communicate those risks in real time. IFSON will be
scalable to any community or city and will provide a backbone for new crowd-
sourced technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will i) integrate
several new technologies (each that directly engages with different communities)
to provide new insights into and communication capacity around urban flooding
hazards, ii) connect a range of communities to each other in near-realtime (from
the general public to first responders to infrastructure managers) and develop
flood sensing and avoidance capacities that can be used anywhere in the U.S. or
even internationally, iii) develop new insights into how urban morphology
contributes to flood risk, and iv) leverage prior funding by connecting
practitioners from existing sustainability research networks and sending data to
CUAHSI and eRams. Additionally, this research will develop outreach activities
that will educate the public and practitioners on how flooding hazards occur,
their impacts, and how to mitigate risks. The research will directly empower and
engage local citizens in flood event reporting and response, and explores a
concrete model for what it would mean to have a "smart and connected community"
for minimizing flood risk. Although driven by a number of novel technologies and
techniques, the central focus of this work is on the interface of community with
technology and, in particular, how modern network technologies can engage and
bring together ordinary citizens, city planners, first responders, and other
local stakeholders within a shared, collaboratively constructed information
space; a broad range of educational and outreach opportunities are included to
engage stakeholders and amplify project impact. In addition to training students
through research positions, the project will create a summer Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) program. It will also connect with national, state, and
local societies across a number of disciplines. For example, the project will
work with the City of Phoenix during their Monsoon Preparedness day to educate
first responders on how to use project results. Interdisciplinary course modules
that show how to engage various communities (including the public, first
responders, and infrastructure managers) in mitigating flood risk will be
developed and disseminated. Additionally, infrastructure managers will be
recruited to participate in workshops on how project data will reveal new
insights into the condition of infrastructure and what strategies can be
employed to reduce hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.