* 1831303
* STTR Phase II:  Occupancy Estimation and Energy Savings with True Presence Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Olga Boric-Lubecke, Adnoviv, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,373,868.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will extend to a number
of applications, including smart buildings, home automation, and security. The
development of this new technology for efficient indoor sensing, and development
of new algorithms for occupancy sensing and counting techniques, will have
immediate implications in the building automation and home construction
industries, where improved occupancy sensing is necessary to achieve the promise
of Smart Buildings that adjust environmental conditions such as lighting and air
conditioning automatically to suit the needs of the occupants. Implementing this
false-alarm free technology will realize millions of dollars in cost savings
from reduced energy use. Such energy savings would impact the US energy
independence while helping to cut greenhouse gas emissions. In addition to
"smart building"/energy efficiency applications there are also significant
opportunities to apply these highly-reliable and difficult-to-defeat sensors to
facility security, military, law-enforcement/correctional facilities and in-home
care monitoring. This project represents Broadening Participation: As a woman-
owned minority business in an underrepresented geographical location (Hawaii),
the success of Adnoviv will bring opportunity for graduate students through our
relationship with the University of Hawaii and encourage young girls to enter
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Research
(STTR) Phase II project will result in a revolutionary advance in occupancy
sensing for smart buildings and energy-use reduction by providing a low-cost
sensor capable of real human presence detection and occupant count and
eliminating the issues that have limited the utility of occupancy sensors in
many applications. The feasibility of using radio frequency Doppler radar to
detect human cardiopulmonary activity and estimate number of occupants using a
low power system-on-chip (SoC) platform will be demonstrated. In particular,
reliable occupant detection without false alarms, and occupant count estimation
will be investigated to further enhance energy savings potential, especially in
conjunction with heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) loads. The
significant commercial potential of such True Presence Occupancy Detection
Sensors in energy-saving applications will be demonstrated in partnership with
one of the largest building automation companies in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.