* 1831019
* SusCHEM: Fundamental Studies on Lyopreservation of Adult Stem Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2017,08/31/2022
* Xiaoming He, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 284,133.00

1605425 &lt;br/&gt;He, Xiaoming &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lyopreservation of living
cells for banking in a state of suspended animation at ambient temperature makes
it possible to achieve low-cost maintenance and convenient distribution of the
cells. The ready availability of cells is crucial for the wide application and
eventual success of cell-based therapies involving tissue engineering,
regenerative medicine, cell transplantation, blood transfusion, and stem cell
therapy. The objective of this project is to perform a systematic investigation
to understand the protective effect of trehalose, a nontoxic sugar, during
freezing and drying of trehalose-laden human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs)
and in banking the dried cells at ambient temperature. As trehalose has been
used for many lower organisms to survive extreme cold and drought in nature, it
is hypothesized that trehalose-laden stem cells will behave similarly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will have a significant impact on improving
healthcare by facilitating the development of cell lyopreservation as an
enabling technology for the success of cell-based medical treatments. The use of
a nontoxic sugar (trehalose) to replace toxic chemicals (e.g., dimethyl
sulfoxide or DMSO) for cell banking is well aligned with the NSF SusCHEM
initiative to replace toxic chemicals with earth-abundant, inexpensive, and
benign materials. To understand the fundamental science of drying living cells
for banking in a state of suspended animation at ambient temperature, three
specific research tasks are proposed. These include (i) investigation of the
effect of freeze-drying parameters on the kinetics of drying trehalose solutions
important for lyopreservation of primary hADSCs and on the microscopic
morphology of the dried products, using freeze-drying microscopy and a benchtop
freeze-dryer for small and large samples, respectively; (ii) simulation and
experimental quantification of the biophysical responses of the trehalose-laden
hADSCs to freezing and drying including cell dehydration and intracellular ice
formation important for cell survival; and (iii) analysis of the morphology,
survival, long-term proliferation, and stem cell properties and functions of the
primary hADSCs after freeze-drying and banking at ambient temperature. The stem
cell properties and functions will be assessed by the expression of stem cell
gene and protein markers and their capability of adipogenic, osteogenic, and
chondrogenic differentiation. A high survival and intact function of the primary
hADSCs are anticipated after freeze-drying and long-term storage at ambient
temperature under optimal conditions.&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Biotechnology
and Biochemical Engineering Program of the CBET Division is cosponsored by the
Biomaterials Program of the Division of Materials Research.