* 1831524
* RIDIR: A Big Data Approach to Understanding American Growth
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Konstantinos Arkolakis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,004,899.00

This project uses a big data approach to find out what lies behind the
tremendous growth in the American economy in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries. This award supports a team of researchers, Costas Arkolakis and
Michael Peters at Yale University, and Sun Kyoung Lee at Columbia University,
who employ artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies to link and
then analyze massive amounts of historical US federal census, Department of
Labor, and Bureau of Labor Statistics data. The transformation of the US economy
during this time period was remarkable, from a rural economy at the beginning of
the 19th century to an industrial nation by the end. More strikingly, after
lagging behind the technological frontier for most of the nineteenth century,
the United States entered the twenty-first century as the global technological
leader and the richest nation in the world. Results from this project will allow
Americans to understand how people lived and how business operated. It will
reveal the past that led us to where we are now in terms of people, geography,
prices and wages, wealth, revenue, output, capital, numbers and types of
workers, urbanization, migration, and industrialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, multiple data sets, involving variables such as family status,
age, ethnicity, occupation, literacy, and income, are linked. This enables
researchers to build a robust picture of the factors that shaped the American
economic geography and to illuminate major aspects of America's economic growth
during the "Second Industrial Revolution" (1850-1940), a period characterized by
an influx of people of European origin. One analysis constructs pairs of parent-
child data and investigates, over time, how a child's chance of moving up
relative to the child's parents has evolved. Another reveals how economic shocks
and policies affected trends in intergenerational mobility. A third uses
digitized plant-level Census of Manufactures data to explore the factors that
contributed to manufacturing growth at the firm level and how this, in turn,
affected America's aggregate economic growth. The data will be shared with other
researchers in fields such as economics, history and sociology, enabling them to
uncover the underlying forces of America's remarkable economic transition and
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.