* 1831047
* I-Corps:  Use of eHealth to Personalize Exergame Prescriptions
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Hsiao-Lan Wang, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to create a
new service technology to improve physical activity engagement by developing
personalized physical activity prescriptions with market-available exergames and
fitness mobile applications (fitness app). This technology is a theory- and
research-based service process that targets maintaining physical activity
engagement. The application has the potential to improve fitness function in
individuals at any age and in any physical condition when he/she engages in
physical activity. The technology can have several broader impacts on society:
(1) as a nation, we are in need of creative solutions to improve the general
health and fitness of our citizens; (2) according to the US Census bureau, in
2050, the 65+ age population is predicted to be over 80 million (twice that in
2012) who need to be fit; and (3) chronic illnesses result in significant
reduction in productivity of the working population - the severity of illness
can be reduced by improving the fitness of the
individual.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims (1) to determine what
the customer segments and value propositions are for the technology; (2) to
identify in what format the application should be delivered to make a
market/product fit; and (3) to establish the readiness to transit the technology
as an automated marketable service product. As of today, the technology exists
as a manually prescribing procedure for patients who suffer from fatigue
symptom. It has been thoroughly validated by pilot tests. Personalization
features gauge and match multi-level factors, so the likelihood of adherence to
the physical activity prescription is very high. The Exergame Grading Scheme is
used to rate intensity of fitness attributes and energy expenditure of exergames
and fitness app. The personalized physical activity prescriptions are generated
by the Exergame Grading Scheme based algorithm, so that the prescription can
challenge the individual's functional capacity. The intellectual merit lies in:
(1) identifying the right combination of hardware/software technologies that can
accurately implement the product; and (2) implementing a solution that is
scalable in mass volumes with low cost per unit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.