* 1831962
* Excellence in Research: Fast Functional Imaging of Neural Networks with Nanoelectrode Arrays
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hargsoon Yoon, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,723.00

The objective of this collaborative research project is to develop a novel
Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) imaging system which can simultaneously
image multiple areas of brain including deep brain structures in behaving
animals. This will enable, for the first time, chronic imaging of fast neural
activity for deep brain structures and neuronal networks with spatio-temporal
resolution of 1 ms and 100 micrometer. The PIs will validate it in a neuronal
network in deep limbic and brainstem structures, but once developed it could be
used anywhere in the brain. This EIT imaging technology for fast neural activity
could lead to radical advances in understanding brain function and enable
quantitative mathematical modeling and analysis of neural systems. This could
aid the development of new treatment for neurological disorders like
schizophrenia, depression and epilepsy, as well as advancing cognitive and
computational neuroscience. This interdisciplinary research project will also
enhance research capacity and promote the participation of underrepresented
minority (URM) students in STEM education. Overall, this project will implement
new technology and approaches that support our goal of increasing the
participation and contributions of URM populations in neural engineering and in
STEM, in general. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional neural imaging is critically
important to determine the group cellular events that are associated with the
local neuro-physiological changes in neural networks. Recent functional neural
imaging technologies have allowed the exploration of the brain at the cell-
biological level for the understanding of the mechanisms of mentation and brain
diseases. Despite various advances, no current neural imaging technologies meet
the spatio-temporal resolution and imaging coverage required to measure
functional connectivity and information processing across and between cortical
and deep brain structures in behaving animals. The proposed system can perform
functional imaging of group activity involved in functional networks. If
successful, these efforts will produce a platform that will enhance fundamental
understanding of underlying mechanisms in neuroscience. It is expected that the
system to be developed can assess neural activity in various nodes of functional
networks thereby bridging the gap between global process and individual cell
activities and substantially extend our ability to probe functional networks in
the brain. This project will address the challenges to the national
competitiveness and sustained STEM global leadership that can be better met
through the full utilization of all of the nation's talent and resources.
Improving the state of diversity and inclusion in science and engineering will
allow the full benefit of a well-educated and scientifically literate population
in HBCUs. STEM and neural engineering research and education will prepare our
URM students for the next generation of technology and will meet the strong
demand from industry for a well-prepared work force and leaders equipped with
the necessary scientific understanding of advanced
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.