* 1831481
* RIDIR: Collaborative Research: Integrated Communication Database and Computational Tools
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jennifer Pan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 209,486.00

This project will develop an integrated research framework for sociotechnical
cybersecurity research and broader investigations of information provenance by
behavioral, information, and computer scientists. Currently, researchers are
mainly limited to natural language processing of large bodies of online text.
This project will make it possible to analyze larger information worlds,
including those from such countries as China, and the flow of information,
including video and audio information, in newspapers, TV, and online sources.
The project addresses a core goal of cybersecurity research, which is to
understand the provenance, flow, and termination of information warfare, and
censorship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at constructing an
integrated and unified information database that combines mass communication
data from TV and print sources from six locations, with data from two popular
online communication platforms. The project will generate a variety of metadata
and time series data on topics, actors, events, and sentiments presented in
communications by automated multimodal content analysis using text, image,
video, and audio. Variables will be linked to identify trajectories of
information flow between communication channels through multiple platforms. It
will develop a new class of computational models and algorithms that can
automatically analyze both verbal and nonverbal communications data by machine
learning, computer vision, deep learning, and natural language processing. This
project will allow researchers across the computational and social sciences to
access the metadata and time series data through a search interface for
qualitative research, a statistical package for quantitative research, and
various visualization tools. This project will therefore link previously
untapped data sources using cutting-edge computational methods to enable
scholars to conduct systematic research on large-scale patterns in the emerging
information and communication ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.