* 1831767
* Collaborative Research: Repeated Evolution of Color Vision in Jumping Spiders: An Integrated Approach to Understanding Diversification of Visual Systems and Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Wayne Maddison, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,028,734.00

Color vision has evolved repeatedly across the animal kingdom, yet how and why
it evolves remains poorly understood. Even less is known about how major
transitions in color vision influence the evolution of color signals used in
communication, such as the colorful displays that males use when courting
females. The proposed research capitalizes on a unique opportunity to gain
deeper understanding on these fronts: the repeated evolution of color vision in
the spider family Salticidae, often called jumping spiders. The research program
will (1) address outstanding questions about species relationships in the
Salticidae, (2) use this improved understanding of species relationships to
illuminate patterns of evolution in color vision, (3) quantify the genetic and
functional bases of shifts in color vision, (4) test key hypotheses about the
foraging benefits associated with color vision, and (5) investigate whether
differences in color vision result in predictable changes to color use during
signaling. Such connections have proven to be elusive in other well-studied
systems (e.g. primates), but should be of widespread interest. In addition, the
research team will partner with the science-media company Day's Edge Productions
and a coalition of four museums led by the Cincinnati Museum Center to engage
the broader public in the science of color and vision through a series of short
films, a content-rich website, and a portfolio of educational activities for use
in classrooms, community programming, and museum exhibit spaces. This integrated
research program thus addresses key unanswered questions about how and why
animals see color, while at the same time engaging the public in the process and
outcomes of its discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will
provide significant advances across a number of distinct scientific fields, and
novel insights into phenotypic diversification through integration across these
fields. First, the research will provide critical new phylogenetic information
for understanding salticid diversity, including resolution of deep subfamily
relationships and the first phylogenies for a number of species-rich sub-groups.
These phylogenetic outcomes will be of broad utility to researchers studying
salticid biology and the evolution of rapid radiations. Second, by
characterizing the genetic basis of multiple independent transitions to true
color vision, the research will provide new opportunities to understand whether
color vision evolves along common pathways known from other systems (e.g.,
through opsin duplication) or has followed novel routes (e.g., retinal filters,
as discovered recently in one salticid lineage). Third, investigations of the
role that color vision plays in foraging efficiency will offer the exciting
prospect of connecting differences in color vision to fitness. Finally, by
connecting variation in visual function to diversity in visual signaling, this
research may reveal a central role for sensory function in biodiversification.
Synthesis of these multiple lines of research will offer an unprecedented view
of why color vision evolves and how it shapes animal
biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.