* 1831913
* Dimensions: Diversity and constraint in the germination niche: Implications for persistence in a biodiversity hotspot
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Johanna Schmitt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 2,063,828.00

In an uncertain world, timing is everything. For plants, the timing of seed
germination determines whether individuals will survive and reproduce. The
timing of germination also influences whether populations can persist in
particular environments. Many plants use cues such as temperature, day length,
and soil moisture to time germination during favorable conditions. Species
differences in these cues may thus determine the climatic conditions in which a
species can persist. In turn, these differences can shape their distribution
across the landscape. How do responses of these cues evolve? Will they continue
to evolve if the environment changes? How do these patterns determine species
persistence and distribution under current and future conditions? The research
team will address these questions in Mediterranean climates within the
California Floristic Province (CFP). The CFP is a biodiversity hotspot
characterized by strong climate variability. This research will investigate how
germination responses to environmental cues have evolved in a group of native
CFP wildflower species. To do so, the team will use a combination of greenhouse
experiments, genomic studies, and comparative analyses. The project will use
data from historical collections and develop models to understand how these
processes shape the distribution of these species across the CFP. The results
will contribute a deeper understanding of how responses to environmental cues
shape plant life cycles. This will provide insight into the forces driving trait
evolution, population persistence, and species distributions. As part of the
activities, three postdoctoral scholars, a graduate student, and several
undergraduate students will receive research training and mentorship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate functional, genetic,
and phylogenetic diversity of germination timing in the Streptanthus
(jewelflower) group. First, the research team will characterize germination
responses to temperature and moisture across the group. Second, they will
identify candidate genes and pathways that drive these differences in responses.
Next, they will determine the consequences of those patterns for individual
fitness. They will assess how those patterns have evolved across the group and
evaluate possible constraints to past and future evolution. Finally, a process-
based model that integrates these mechanisms into predictions of life history
timing across a range of environmental conditions will be developed. This new
model will be incorporated into existing demographic models for predicting
population persistence and species distributions. Together, this research
integrates three dimensions of biodiversity- functional diversity in traits
driving life history responses to cues; genomic variation underlying that
diversity, and divergence and constraint across the Streptanthus clade- to
understand the evolution of the life history timing, and how variation in
responses to environmental cues will influence the ecological function of
population persistence and species distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.