* 1831944
* LTER:  Multi-decadal responses of prairie, savanna, and forest ecosystems to interacting environmental changes: insights from experiments, observations, and models
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2025
* Peter Kennedy, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 01/31/2025
* USD 5,725,964.00

Human activities are altering the earth's ecosystems and creating unprecedented
combinations of carbon dioxide (CO2) concentrations in the atmosphere, supplies
of limiting nutrients like phosphorus and nitrogen, and rates of disturbances
such as fire. At the same time, humans are increasing species extinctions and
the spread of invasive species, including pests, and pathogens. Researchers at
the Cedar Creek Long Term Ecological Research Program (CDR) are using long-term
models and data from grasslands, savannas, and forests to understand and
forecast how these interacting human-driven environmental changes will alter the
earth?s ecosystems and the ability of ecosystems to provide the services that
support human well-being. This work builds on the CDR hallmark of combining data
from long-term experiments and observations to explore the interactive effects
of changes in resources (nutrients, atmospheric carbon dioxide), abiotic aspects
of the environment (temperature, precipitation), biodiversity, and disturbance
(fire, land use change) on linked ecological processes at local to global
scales. In addition to this primary research goal, the CDR program will continue
to develop a diverse, globally competitive workforce in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Math (STEM) by mentoring undergraduate researchers and
providing them with independent research and professional development
opportunities. CDR also will continue to increase public scientific literacy and
public engagement with STEM through K-12 education programs, citizen science
activities, membership and volunteer programs, public tours, adult education, as
well as arts and humanities partnerships. These activities reach thousands of
visitors and participants each year, including teachers, neighbors, public
officials, and other members of the public in
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CDR research will continue its multi-decadal
studies of the ecological impacts of multiple environmental change drivers,
including the longest-running biodiversity and elevated CO2 experiments in the
world, and some of the world's longest-running studies of nutrient enrichment
and fire frequency. New CDR research initiatives will build from past insights
and seek more general understanding and predictive ability. For example, a new
forest biodiversity experiment will build on past CDR biodiversity research to
disentangle the roles of multiple facets of biodiversity (functional,
phylogenetic, and species) and use trees to test the generality of biodiversity
theory. Second, new experiments replicated in the long-term biodiversity
experiment and savanna will determine the interactive effects of drought,
nutrients, warming, and biodiversity on ecosystem processes and stability.
Third, new initiatives will develop and test models that predict how ecosystems
recover from chronic nitrogen enrichment. Fourth, new experiments will test
hypotheses about the how consumers such as bison and fire disturbance interact
to restructure and alter the functioning of grassland, savanna, and forest
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.