* 1831133
* Excellence in Research: Engineering Two-dimensional Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Nanomaterials for Sweat Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Fei Yan, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,001.00

This project seeks to boost participation and academic success of
underrepresented minority students in the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at North Carolina Central University, a historically black
university. The research builds on our extensive research experience in sensor
development and nanotechnology, and will benefit from the close collaboration
with scientists in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering and
Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at North Carolina State
University. Specifically, the grant will provide support for eight undergraduate
students and four graduate students for their independent and/or thesis
research. The students will be involved in the development of flexible and cost-
effective platforms for sweat sensing, which will considerably improve our
ability of tracking a person's physiological state in a real-time fashion, and
will thus provide a new opportunity for medical diagnostics and therapy. The
students will use the knowledge and experience gained in the research to prepare
for future careers in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
disciplines, industry, and/or higher education. Moreover, the strategies
developed in this study are expected to provide new insights into a wider range
of applications in environmental monitoring, forensic investigation, and medical
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a novel
wearable technology for real-time monitoring of the various trace constituents
in sweat, these include water, electrolytes (e.g., chloride, sodium, potassium,
magnesium and ammonium etc.), and metabolites (e.g. lactate and glucose). Real-
time sweat sensing presents an intriguing and cost-effective way to monitor the
well-being of human body, which would be very useful for early stage medical
diagnose and healthcare. However, the current sensing technique usually fall
short of providing satisfactory portability, sensitivity, and selectivity. Two-
dimensional (2D) ultrathin layered transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD)
materials emerged as a promising substrate for sweat sensing. The proposed
research will focus on three integrated objectives: 1) Understanding the
fundamentals of sweat sensing with 2D TMD materials, 2) Developing capabilities
to synthesize pristine 2D TMD nan sheets and noble metal nanoparticle-TMD
heterostructures with desirable chemo-physical properties, and 3) Developing
prototype 2D TMD materials-based sensors showing capabilities of sensing the
constituents of sweat with high sensitivity and selectivity. Along with the
proposed work on research and development of 2D materials-based sweat sensing
devices, outreach and education activities will be integrated to broaden
participation in scientific research, to train next-generation work forces, and
to broadly disseminate the results to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.