* 1831548
* Collaborative Proposal: EiR: Understanding Interactions of Gold and Silver Nanoparticles with Proteins to Achieve Optimum Surface Plasmon Effect
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Xiuping Tao, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 213,808.00

A variety of diseases are identified by protein markers. Nano-sized particles
using metals such as gold and silver possess unique electronic and optical
properties, which can be significantly altered when effected by an external cue,
such as the interaction with a specific protein. Developing a fundamental
understanding of nanoparticle-protein interactions and their associated optical
properties is critical for the development of novel detection devices with high
sensitivity and selectivity for detection of diseases, such as cancer and
Alzheimer's. The knowledge obtained from this proposed research on nanoparticle-
protein interactions will further assist in the development of novel
technologies for the biomedical, materials, and energy sectors. This project
connects researchers and resources at Howard University and Winston-Salem State
University to integrate education and research training for students at the
undergraduate and graduate levels. The project will provide rigorous training
opportunities for the next generation of African-American and other students
from underrepresented groups pursuing careers in Chemistry, Chemical
Engineering, Physics and Mechanical Engineering. Results from the current and
developing research on the nanoparticle-protein interactions, bio-simulations
and biosensor design will be incorporated into workshops and classes, to expand
the interests and experience of under-represented students in the STEM fields.
This will promote successful academic and career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the fundamental plasmonic response of
gold and silver nanoparticles interacting with proteins is critical for
molecular detection. This includes understanding the electronic properties and
electromagnetic spectrum of discrete uniform gold and silver nanoparticles. This
also includes understanding nanoparticle interactions with protein markers in a
biochemical environment. The interactions of interest include physical and
chemical coordination of the nanoparticles to the protein and the
electromagnetic and plasmonic response from protein-nanoparticle interactions.
The project will be achieved by coupling experimental spectroscopy with
computational simulations at multiple scales (quantum, atomistic, molecular and
continuum). The proposed study aims to elucidate different factors, including
proteins' packing structure based on nanoparticles varying in type, shape, and
means of surface functionalization. These fundamental nanoparticle-protein
interactions will determine the plasmonic effect on electromagnetic and
plasmonic signals. Simulations at the microscopic and macroscopic levels will
provide knowledge on both the physical interactions and chemical reactions of
nanoparticles and proteins, which are crucial for correlating nanoparticles'
optic signals following environmental responses. Moreover, chemically modified
nanoparticles' electronic structure, optical spectra, and magnetic properties
will be studied using local surface plasmon resonance spectrum or surface
enhanced Raman spectroscopy. These experimental results will be validated with
quantum simulations. Subsequently, theoretical studies will more clearly explain
spectrum signals and lead to improved experimental design of the target sensor.
The multidisciplinary research team consists of experts in quantum and atomistic
simulations, bio-nano interface, protein folding, experimental optical sensor
design, and nanoparticle synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.