* 1831920
* EAGER:  Exploring phylogenetic diversification of phycodnaviruses across aquatic ecosystems in the Puget Sound region
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Michael Zanis, Seattle University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 248,179.00

Viruses are the most abundant, widespread, and diverse biological entities on
earth. To date most viruses have been intensely studied in light of animal and
plant health. Yet, these viruses are a small fraction of the earth's total viral
biodiversity, and as a result the vast majority of viruses on earth remain
unexplored. Studying virus diversity is a major challenge in biology with
important consequences for understanding the earth's biosphere. To address this
challenge, this project will study phycodnaviruses, an exceptionally diverse
group of viruses that infect algae found in lakes, rivers, and oceans around the
world. Phycodnavirus diversity and population dynamics will be explored in lakes
which are critical natural resources impacted by local and regional
environmental changes. The results of the study will be of broad importance as
these viruses affect algal blooms and ultimately the cycling of nutrients within
lakes. The study of phycodnaviruses will be of use to other scientists and
provide valuable information for the management of freshwater resources. The
research will fill fundamental gaps in our knowledge by discovering novel
viruses and determining the environmental conditions driving virus diversity in
lakes. This research will also provide a powerful platform for training
undergraduate students in a broad range of scientific methods and enhance both
student and public appreciation for the hidden biodiversity within
lakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phycodnaviruses provide a model system for exploring
phylogenetic patterns of diversification based on their extreme diversity
(~350,000 'species'), high abundances, ecological roles, rapid turnover rates,
and biogeographic distributions. Using well-developed metagenomic and
phylogenetic methods, an innovative longitudinal survey in the Puget Sound
region will be used to discover the ecological and phylogenetic diversification
of phycodnaviruses across freshwater ecosystems that vary in nutrient levels and
host composition. In addition to the discovery of phycodnavirus lineages, this
research tests the hypothesis that patterns of phycodnavirus diversity and
abundance (onset, peak, and decline) are influenced by changes in aquatic
environmental conditions among lakes. The project will characterize
phycodnavirus diversity through two approaches: targeted sequencing of the
polymerase B gene and phycodnaviral whole-genome sequencing from environmental
DNA samples across urban and wilderness lakes. Phylogenetic, bioinformatic, and
statistical analyses of DNA sequences and limnological measures will be used to
identify patterns and relationships between viral diversity, seasonality, and
environmental variables. This research is expected to discover novel
phycodnavirus lineages with unique genome architectures, high levels of viral
diversity within and between lakes, and clear examples where novel viral
lineages emerge to generate new species assemblages linked with season and/or
geography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.