* 1831278
* Conference: 18th International Conference on the Cell and Molecular Biology of Chlamydomonas to be held June, 2018, Washington, DC
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the 18th International Conference on the Cell and Molecular
Biology of Chlamydomonas, to be held June 17-21, 2018 at the Carnegie
Institution in Washington, DC. The meeting will start with a public forum
emphasizing the utility of the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas as a model
for studying biology in complex organisms. Formal sessions will include a
combination of plenary lectures, talks and poster sessions. There will be ample
opportunity for sharing latest research results and for exploring collaborative
possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chlamydomonas is an outstanding model for
understanding many biological processes. Recent advances in the field, including
new technological capabilities, will be highlighted in this meeting. Among the
topics for discussion will be structure and function of flagella; plastid
structure, function and biogenesis; carbon metabolism; cell cycle,
photoperception, heat and circadian control; novel studies and developing
systems; and recently developed resources for reverse genetics. The meeting will
bring together seasoned investigators with early-career scientists in a venue
that will encourage informal discussion and sharing of latest research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms,
Cellular Dynamics and Function, and Systems and Synthetic Biology Clusters in
the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and by the Physiological
Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program in the Physiological and Structural Systems
Cluster of the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, all of which are in
the Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.