* 1831242
* SBIR Phase II:  Engineering brewer's yeast for enhanced flavor production during fermentation
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Charles Denby, Berkeley Brewing Science Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,449,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to develop engineered brewer's yeast to
produce hop flavor compounds during beer fermentation, so as to replace the need
for agriculturally produced hops. Using agriculturally produced hops as a flavor
component poses several challenges: 1) hops farming is natural resource
intensive, 2) flavors imparted by hops are inconsistent from batch-to-batch, 3)
lengthy agriculture timelines decouple demand from supply, and 4) new flavor
varieties are restricted by slow and capital intensive hops breeding programs.
This project establishes a product development framework for engineering
brewer's yeast to produce flavor compounds during fermentation that are matched
to consumer preferences. The technology developed during this project will allow
for sustainable, consistent, on-demand production of hop flavors, and, in
addition, may be extended to additional flavors and other fermentable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will develop
engineered brewer's yeast for production of flavor compounds that are ordinarily
derived from hops. At present, the beer industry relies on agriculturally
produced hops to impart organoleptically rich flavors and character to beer.
Engineered yeast strains will serve as a drop-in replacement for conventional
brewing strains, in that they both ferment beer and produce flavor compounds at
concentrations desired in the finished beer. By applying an agile development
framework towards yeast strain development, new brewer's yeast strains will be
generated that produce flavor bouquets preferred by brewers and consumers. Genes
that encode biosynthetic pathways for production of flavor compounds will be
incorporated into brewer's yeast, and various gene regulatory programs will be
tested that give rise to myriad flavor bouquets in finished beer. Strains will
be initially evaluated in small-scale micro-aerobic fermentations and analyzed
by GC/MS to screen for relevant flavor compound concentrations. Based on
screening results, strains with desired target flavor compound concentrations
will be used to produce beer at industrial pilot scale for evaluation by sensory
analysis panels as a means of generating consumer feedback. This workflow will
be deployed in an iterative fashion to optimize the performance of the hops
flavor-producing brewer's yeast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.