* 1831282
* Excellence in Research: Skin Tissue Regeneration using Smart Scaffolds
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Komal Vig, Alabama State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2024
* USD 499,983.00

The need is great for specialized skin tissues that can be used for wound
healing and for replacement of skin damaged due to disease (e.g. diabetes caused
ulcers) or injury (e.g. burns.) Though bioengineered skin research has been very
active for over 40 years, available commercial products are still subject to
rejection, infection and scarring, lack vascularization (blood vessels) and do
not match the texture or color of the surrounding skin. The goal of this project
is to address these limitations by developing a fully functional skin with
minimal or no graft rejection, with wound healing capabilities, and that is
individualized to match the texture, color and vascularization of the host
tissue. Structure for the bioengineered skin will be provided by electrospun or
3D printed smart scaffolds consisting of polymers or composite hydrogels and
bioinks (fluids that contain materials that provide the environment needed to
support cell adhesion, proliferation and differentiation) that have been
optimized for tissue generation and tested for antibacterial and antiviral
activities. The optimized cell scaffolds, 3D printing methods, strategies and
other technologies can be further refined to regenerate other organs (e.g.
livers), thus establishing an exciting new research direction. The
multidisciplinary expertise in nanobiotechnology, bioengineering, cell biology
and immunology required for this project will provide invaluable opportunities
for students involved in the research. Students will also benefit from the
unique community of Alabama State University, a historically black university
(HBCU) located in Central Alabama, and collaborative Universities and industry
scientists and engineers. This setting, the Principal Investigator's strong
commitment to undergraduate education and the project's appeal is expected to
result in an increase in the number of minorities and women participating in the
workforce in the region, state, and nation in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to bioengineer
fully functional skin tissues that can be used for wound healing and replacing
skin damaged by disease or injury. Meritorious attributes include: no or minimal
graft rejection, wound healing capabilities, antimicrobial protection,
vascularization, and individualized texture and pigmentation that matches the
host tissue. Key to the project's success is the development of smart scaffolds
and bioinks into which growth factors, antimicrobials, nanoencapsulated
DNA/cells, proangiogenic materials, decellularized ECM, etc. can be incorporated
and skin models in which texture and pigmentation can be controlled. The
Research Plan is organized under seven objectives. OBJECTIVE 1 is to develop
novel biocompatible, cell and tissue specific, hydrogel materials and bioinks.
Components to be designed and optimized include: synthetic polymer (PLA and PEG)
scaffolds, composite hydrogels (collagen-chitosan and chitosan-alginate)
scaffolds, electrospun composite (chilosan-pCL with PLGA-PGA nanofibers)
scaffolds, gelatin-sodium alginate bioink, gelatin-fibrinogen-collagen bioink
and decellularized ECM bioink (porcine cartilage and heart tissues). 3D
scaffolds will be printed from the described hydrogels and bioinks, with further
incorporation of various growth factors and ECM proteins. OBJECTIVE 2 is to
produce smart infection resistant and genetically modified scaffolds and
bioinks. Antibacterial/antiviral enhancement will be achieved by incorporation
of encapsulated coated (silver PVP, gold, and silver) carbon nanotubes into the
scaffolds and bioinks. A non-viral gene delivery system to enhance tissue
generation will also be developed. OBJECTIVE 3 is to characterize the physical
and chemical characteristics of the scaffolds and bioinks. Scaffold morphology
will be analyzed using Scanning Electron, Transmission Electron and Atomic Force
Microscopy (SEM, TEM and AFM). Functional groups in macromolecules will be
determined using Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR). The
compression modulus will be determined using an INSTRON machine. The equilibrium
swelling ratio will be measured using the conventional gravimeter method.
Porosity will be measured using a displacement liquid that easily enters pores.
OBJECTIVE 4 is optimization, development and characterization of skin tissues.
Two layer skin tissues will be grown using fibroblasts (dermis) and
keratinocytes (epidermis) and stem cells that can be differentiated into
fibroblasts and keratinocytes as the skin grows to full thickness. Optimization
of cell scaffolds will be assessed by determining seeding efficiency, cell
proliferation, cell viability and cell attachment. Scaffolds and skin tissues
will be analyzed histologically using SEM, TEM and AFM analyses, and mRNA
expression levels of different skin compartment markers will be investigated
using real-time PCR. OBJECTIVE 5 is to develop skin tissues with
vascularization. Two approaches will be used: a) ex vivo development of
vascularized skin by incorporating proangiogenic molecules in cell scaffolds
prior to skin tissue development, and b) an in vivo approach that relies on
dermal microvasculature cells to achieve vascularization post-skin tissue
development. OBJECTIVE 6 is to develop skin tissues with melanotic features.
Primary epidermal melanocytes will be cultured and used with fibroblasts and
keratinocytes for 3D bioprinting of full thickness skin. Melanocyte morphology,
proliferation, viability, melanin production and interactions with the
fibroblasts and keratinocytes will be determined using technologies similar to
those used in previous objectives. OBJECTIVE 7 is to assess the antimicrobial
effects of skin tissues. The smart scaffolds with antimicrobial properties
developed under Objective 2 will be used to develop human and mouse 3D skins
that will be infected with skin bacteria, e.g. Staphylococcus aureus or
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Antimicrobial efficacy will be assessed by quantifying
the post infection bacterial load (plate counting) and structural evaluation
(ultrasound) of the infected skin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.