* 1831593
* Science Learning+: STEM Teens: Examining the role of youth educators as learners and teachers in informal STEM learning sites
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2017,02/29/2024
* Adam Hartstone-Rose, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,162,101.00

One way to encourage youth to pursue training in the STEM fields and enter the
STEM workforce is to foster interest and engagement in STEM during adolescence.
Informal STEM Learning Sites (ISLS) provide opportunities for building interest
and engagement in the STEM fields through a multitude of avenues, including the
programming that they provide for youth, particularly teens. Frequently, ISLS
provide opportunities to participate in volunteer programs, internships or work,
which allow teens both to learn relevant STEM knowledge as well as to share that
knowledge with others through opportunities to serve as youth educators. While
youth educator programs provide rich contexts for teens to engage as both
learners and teachers in these informal STEM environments, research to date has
not yet identified the relationship between serving as youth educators and STEM
engagement. Thus, the goal of this project is to document the impact of youth
educators on visitor learning in ISLS and to identify best practices for
implementing youth educator programs. The project studies STEM interests and
engagement in the youth participants and the visitors that they interact with at
six different ISLS in the US and UK. This project is funded through Science
Learning+, which is an international partnership between the National Science
Foundation (NSF) and the Wellcome Trust with the UK Economic and Social Research
Council. The goal of this joint funding effort is to make transformational steps
toward improving the knowledge base and practices of informal STEM experiences.
Within NSF, Science Learning+ is part of the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
(AISL) program that seeks to enhance learning in informal environments and to
broaden access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines youth educator experiences related
to STEM identity, educational aspirations, and motivation. The project also
identifies outcomes that the youth educators have on visitors to ISLS in terms
of knowledge, interest, and engagement in STEM. The specific aims are: 1)
Outcomes for Teens - To measure the longitudinal impact of participation in an
extended youth educator experience in an ISLS; 2) Outcomes for Visitors - To
compare visitor engagement with and learning from exhibits in ISLS when they
interact with a youth educator, relative to outcomes of interacting with an
adult educator or no educator; and 3) Outcomes Across Demographics and STEM
Sites - To examine differences in visitor engagement based on participant
characteristics such as socio-economic status (SES), age, gender, and ethnicity
and to compare outcomes of youth educator experiences across different types of
ISLS. This research, which draws on expectancy value theory and social cognitive
theory, will follow youth participants longitudinally over the course of 5 years
and use latent variable analyses to understand the impact on the youth educators
as well as the visitors with whom they interact. Importantly, the results of
this research will be used to develop best practices for implementing youth
educator programs in ISLS and the results will be disseminated to both academic
and practice-based communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has clear and
measurable broader impacts in a variety of ways. First, the project provides
guidance to improve programming for youth in ISLS, including both the sites
involved directly in the research and to the larger community of ISLS through
evaluation, development, and dissemination of best practices. Additionally, this
project provides rigorous, research-based evidence to identify and describe the
outcomes of youth educator programs. This study directly benefits the
participants of the research, both the visiting public and the youth educators,
through opportunities to engage with science. The findings speak to issues of
access and inclusivity in ISLS, providing insight into how to design
environments that are welcoming and accessible for diverse groups of learners.
Finally, this project provides evidence for best practices for ISLS in
developing programs for youth that will lead to interest in and pursuit of STEM
careers by members of underrepresented groups.