* 1831202
* SBIR Phase II:  Engineering Design Instruction Software for implementing Objectives of Next (EDISON) Generation Standards in K-12
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Christopher Whitmer, Parametric Studio Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2022
* USD 885,480.00

This SBIR Phase II project, the Engineering Design Instruction Software for
implementing Objectives of Next generation standards (EDISON), will combine
Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) concepts together with
engineering design, simulation, Augmented Reality (AR), 3-D printing, and real-
world experiments. The project will create a collaborative platform for middle
school engineering projects where students create, analyze, simulate, and
construct designs for several types of projects like bridges, cars, circuits,
simple machines, drones, and robots. This project will provide positive
experiences with STEM and engineering in middle school, when many students lose
interest in these economically vital fields. EDISON will foster STEM engagement
and inquiry in middle school, by leveraging gaming, team collaboration, 3D
printing, and augmented reality. The project will create engineering experiences
that connect math and science content directly to real world applications to
improve student academic performance in traditional science and math subjects.
This work has the potential to promote effective integration of engineering in
K-12, prepare students for future careers, expand scientific literacy, and
engage diverse groups of students in STEM, supporting NSF's
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will produce
a collaborative engineering design platform for middle school, containing
realistic design tools, content creation, embedded standards-based STEM
assessment, and tools supporting prototyping and testing. EDISON provides end to
end solutions for team-based engineering in middle schools and maintains
engagement through gamification. This project will develop sophisticated tools
that are lacking in existing engineering curricula, and support math and science
standards alignment using model-based engineering, virtual design collaboration,
and embedded tools for student evaluation. In this work the Phase I prototype
will be extended by developing reusable design modules for circuit design,
simple machines, aerodynamics, and programming. Testing tools using sensors and
Augmented Reality will be added for real world data collection and analysis.
Numerous modular standards aligned lessons and a content creation interface to
facilitate EDISON?s transition to an instructional platform will be created.
Finally, in collaboration with our University partner EDISON will be extensively
tested and student outcomes evaluated in 6th, 7th, and 8th grade classrooms
using a combination of embedded, quantitative, and qualitative methods. The goal
is to better meet the STEM instructional needs of educators and students with
superior capabilities, engaging experiences, and easy to use
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.