* 1831530
* Genes, physiology, and reproductive fitness in high altitude environments
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Cynthia Beall, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2023
* USD 449,999.00

This research tackles a long-standing question about the relationship between
genotype and phenotype. A gene called EPAS1 illustrates that complex
relationship by modifying the expression of hundreds of target genes that cause
biological responses to maintain oxygen homeostasis when oxygen supplies are low
at high-altitude or relatively low after high-oxygen therapy. Healthy people
with a dampened response to high-altitude, reflected by an absence of the
typical increase in hemoglobin concentration at high altitudes, provide a
natural laboratory for discovery. In addition to explaining the different ways
to adapt successfully to low oxygen environments, this special case may improve
understanding of genotype-phenotype relationships under other conditions.
Examples include inappropriately engaging oxygen homeostasis pathways by
premature infants, people with wounds that will not heal, and fighter pilots who
are all exposed for hours or days to extremely high oxygen levels and are at
risk of pathologies including blindness upon return to normal oxygen levels.
Learning the balance of healthy levels of gene products and their associated
physiological traits in the study population can provide a model for designing
successful clinical interventions. This project will also support international
research collaborations, community science outreach, and undergraduate student
training and mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The relationship between genetic,
phenotypic and reproductive variation is central to the goal of understanding
the sources of human biological variation. This research is designed to
determine pathways from the EPAS1 locus to biological adaptations in a sample of
400 women living above 3000m who participated in a previous study. The proposed
research will revisit them to collect new hematological, cardiopulmonary, and
respiratory traits and integrate them into the rich body of genomic,
physiological, and reproductive data they have already provided. Variation at
the EPAS1 locus and its target genes and their proteins will be assessed for the
extent to which they associate with the adaptive phenotypes and the lifetime
reproductive success of these women. An integrated genomic approach will choose
a subset of target genes hypothesized to associate with physiological
adaptations. Analyses will consider factors such as sociocultural influences,
iron, and infection status.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.