* 1831088
* SBIR Phase II:  An additive method for manufacturing customized textile products
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Elizabeth Esponnette, unspun, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 1,449,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will demonstrate
an additive manufacturing process to produce 3-D woven textile products at
scale. Presently, the clothing manufacturing industry still relies on manual
sewing machines that were invented over one-hundred and seventy years ago. This
system limits the manufacturing process and textile capability; an abundance of
steps leads to waste, inefficiencies, and segmented products. Further, due to
the low cost of foreign labor, the US textile industry has effectively come to a
halt: 97.3 percent of all clothing sold in the United States in 2015 was
imported. This project seeks to develop a novel method for manufacturing woven
textile products by employing additive manufacturing methodologies to automate
the production process, while simultaneously enabling complete customization and
on-demand production. This technology will enable premium and competitive
textile manufacturing to return from overseas, creating high value-added jobs
and a designer community in the United States while also generating tax revenue.
In the same way that 3-D printing technology has revolutionized the hard goods
manufacturing process, this project seeks to create an entire new industry of
additively manufactured textile products, enabling significant opportunities for
future innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a novel technology
to manufacture near-net-shape three dimensional woven textile products. To
develop this technology, this project first proved feasibility through creating
constituent textile panels of non-standard shapes with 3-D topography in Phase
I, laying the foundation for continued development into fully three-dimensional,
seamless, finished products produced in-situ through Phase II. By additively
producing garments from a unique 3-D model complete customization to each
individual consumer is possible on a large scale, though this has never before
been accomplished. Further, through the on-demand production of clothing
customized to individual consumers, the need for substantial inventory buildup
is eliminated. In this way, additively manufactured textile products are both
more desirable to consumers and more economical to producers. As such, the
societal and environmental benefits of automated and on-demand textile
manufacturing within the United States are significant, including eliminating
massive amounts of waste from typical cut-and-sew manufacturing techniques,
revamping a struggling American manufacturing industry, and minimizing the
economical, environmental, and geopolitical implications of the United States?
current dependence on a convoluted global supply
chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.