* 1831954
* EiR: Doping cubic boron nitride, an extreme material for power electronics and radiation detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* MVS Chandrashekhar, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 08/31/2023
* USD 982,651.00

This project focuses on cubic boron nitride for extreme applications. Boron
nitride is member of the family of semiconductors known as III-nitrides, which
consist of nitrogen and a Group III element such as aluminum, gallium, and
indium. This family of materials has realized the solid-state lighting industry
and revolutionized microwave communications. Cubic boron nitride is an ultra-
wide bandgap material, transparent to visible light and absorbing only in the
deep ultraviolet. It could have a transformative impact on power electronics for
electric vehicles, smart grids, and space technologies. Its exceptional
hardness, high thermal conductivity and corrosion resistance could also allow
this material to replace diamond in harsh environments. Studies of boron nitride
will also contribute to fundamental knowledge of III-nitride semiconductors. The
project is a collaboration between Howard and Morgan State University, two
Historically Black Colleges (HBCUs). The project enables Morgan and Howard
students to participate in a cutting edge technology with commercial
implications. The project explicitly engages both graduate students and
undergraduates in "hands on" research activities. The project will fund senior
design projects at Morgan and Howard, where students will translate physical
electronics discoveries into real systems. The project will encourage greater
minority participation in graduate research programs at HBCUs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize the full potential of cubic boron
nitride (c-BN), it is desirable to have both n-type and p-type conduction
enabling bipolar devices as well as Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor
(CMOS) logic. It has been demonstrated that shallow n-type (silicon doping), and
p-type (beryllium doping) are possible, making c-BN a unique outlier among
ultrawide bandgap materials (UWBGs). In this work, we investigate doping and
compensation strategies to evaluate the promise of c-BN. In addition we measure
physical properties of this material such as mobility and breakdown field as a
function of defect morphology (updating historical data as necessary). The work
involves both small (&lt;1 mm) commercial single-crystal c-BN samples, as well
as large area thin films grown at Morgan State. All measurements will be
interpreted by comparing with first-principles density functional theory (DFT)
calculations that provide a true atomic physics-based understanding. One of the
challenges of the work will be to produce polytypic pure material. In order to
accomplish this during chemical vapor deposition (CVD), the less stable
hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) polymorph is etched or sputtered away allowing
the production of the cubic phase. We will test 3 methods to do this: i) etching
by H2, ii) use of fluorine-based precursors and iii) ion-beam assistance, on
single-crystal HPHT diamond substrates. Surface preparation and post-annealing
will be guided by DFT calculations. Compensation and doping by intrinsic point
defects (e.g. vacancies) are likely to play a strong role in this UWBG material,
and DFT will be a critical tool to understanding the origin of the doping, and
electrical transport. Diodes and metal-semiconductor-metal structures will be
used as test devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.