* 1831057
* I-Corps:  Smart Automation of Garden Monitoring and Maintenance
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Dustyn Roberts, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to make
growing produce more convenient and accessible to a new generation of gardeners
while enabling student engagement and professional development of the team. The
project aims to reconnect people with the way that food is grown in a way that
helps them and the planet. This connection is critical to helping people make
healthier food choices. By enabling people to grow their own food, we also
connect them with the reality of seasons and enable them to make choices that
are better for the environment. The project will also provide a platform for
student engagement with entrepreneurship, product development, and engineering
design. Students are a part of and have shaped smart garden automation from the
beginning, and the team plans to continue to work with academic institutions to
maintain this relationship. Finally, the NSF I-Corps program will help this team
develop the skills necessary to create value from ideas. This learning curve
will be critical as the team moves forward on this project, and will better
prepare them to be both leaders and mentors for others in the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is about a smart gardening system
that lets gardeners grow more plants with less work. By harnessing recent
technical advancements in low-power wireless communication, moisture sensors,
and networked device protocols, the system makes gardening more convenient and
accessible. When paired with a smart phone or web interface, this system has the
potential to better enable a generation of gardeners and lead to healthier
people, more efficient water usage and storm-water management, and a lower
average carbon footprint for a given person's diet. The intellectual merit in
this project is demonstrated by the fact that there are no existing systems on
the market that can do all of things that this project's invention is set to do.
The NSF I-Corps program will help the project team recognize the market segments
for any potential commercial product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.