* 1831020
* Excellence in Research: Evaluating thiol-peptides with auxiliary binding groups as chelators of mercury(II)
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Maria Ngu-Schwemlein, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2021
* USD 328,663.00

In this project, co-funded by the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate program and the Chemical Structure, Dynamic and Mechanism B
program, Professor Maria Ngu-Schwemlein and her collaborator Dr. John Merle, of
the Chemistry Department at Winston Salem State University are developing eco-
friendly biomolecules to sequester toxic mercury ions. The goal of this project
is to design effective thiol-peptides to immobilize mercury ions for
applications in environmental remediation of mercury polluted water, and as
sensors or reporters of mercury ions. It may also afford a basis for future
research in developing genetically engineered plants that are useful for
phytoremediation. This project lies at the interface of bioorganic, inorganic,
analytical, and computational chemistry, and therefore provides an excellent
breadth of education for scientists and students. The project activities also
provide a high level of education and research training to prepare
undergraduates, primarily underrepresented groups at this historically black
university, for entry into advanced degree programs and careers in science.

Peptides offer inherent high affinities for their targets due to the versatility
of its monomeric units, which offer a wide variety of donor atoms and contribute
to specific secondary structures. The proposed syntheses include thiol-peptides
with different auxiliary binding groups to evaluate complex formation with
mercury(II) and to assess for enhanced mercury(II) immobilization through
increased complex stability. In this project, oligopeptides consisting of di- or
multi-cysteinyl residues with added auxiliary groups (O-, N-, or aromatic pi
donors) are prepared to answer the following questions: (1) How do multi-thiol
peptides containing different auxiliary donors form complexes with mercury(II)?
(2) Can auxiliary binding groups form significant binding specificities
resulting in sterically hindered peptide-mercury complexes that are kinetically
stable? (3) What is the significance and stability of type II beta turn in
cysteinyl peptides for binding mercury(II)? (4) What are the spatial
accessibilities in these peptide ligands that can be identified for chemical
conjugation with carriers or fluorophores for immobilizing and sensing
mercury(II)? The findings from this study could be useful for developing
effective chelators of mercury(II) for applications in environmental
remediation, human health protection, and sensing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.