* 1831107
* Travel Award Program for Young Scientists to Attend 25th International Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering (ISCRE-25), to be held in Florence, Italy May 20-23 2018.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Benjamin Wilhite, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 01/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

CBET-1831107&lt;br/&gt;PI: Benjamin A. Wilhite&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant
will provide partial travel support for twenty US-based young scientists to
attend the 25th International Symposium on Chemical Reaction Engineering
(ISCRE-25), to be held in Florence, Italy May 20-23 2018. This biennial
international symposium focuses on the frontiers of Chemical Reaction
Engineering (CRE) and provides an opportunity for international networking in
the reaction engineering community. CRE is the discipline that quantifies the
interactions of transport phenomena and reaction rates in relating chemical
reactor performance to operating conditions and feed variables. The organizing
committee of ISCRE-25 has a broad range of skills in chemical reaction
engineering and will provide for a vibrant and diverse international symposium.
It is anticipated that more than 200 attendees will participate based on data
from previous conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ISCRE-25 is organized by a team
of 15 European faculty and industry practitioners, supported by an international
scientific committee of 32 leading members of the CRE community spanning the
Americas, Europe and Asia. The Conference will include 6 invited plenary
lectures, 12 keynote lectures, selected lecture presentations, and poster
sessions. The focus areas of the Conference are: 1. Chemical Kinetics, 2.
Advances in Chemical Reaction Engineering and Design. 3. Multiscale Approaches
to Chemical Reaction Engineering. 4. Novel Materials in Chemical Reaction
Engineering. The meeting participants will benefit from state-of-the-art reviews
and presentations by leading experts, by exchanging the latest advances on
frontier research subjects, and by debating controversial points with their
peers in the CRE discipline. The meeting will also provide an opportunity for
interaction and cooperation among industrial and academic researchers. The award
of travel funds and registration subsidy is expected to attract young scientists
from the US to the meeting that they may otherwise be unable to attend. The
participants will have an opportunity to interact with each other and with
experienced researchers in the field, which could positively influence their
professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.