* 1831141
* NIST-ASTM-NSF-ASME Workshop on Challenges in Representing Manufacturing Processes for Systemic Sustainability Assessments - Student Travel; College Station, Texas; June 18-22, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Karl Haapala, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2019
* USD 39,056.00

This award provides support for the NIST-ASTM-NSF-ASME Workshop on Challenges in
Representing Manufacturing Processes for Systemic Sustainability Assessments.
The funding partially supports the travel and attendance costs of US scientists,
postdoctoral researchers, and graduate students. The workshop is designed to
engage the research community in discussions on emerging topics in advanced
manufacturing, nanomanufacturing, sustainable manufacturing, and engineering
education, all of which are integral to sustainability of advanced manufacturing
in America, an enduringly important sector in the nation's economy. An outcome
of the workshop is to identify needs for research and education in support of
characterizing unit manufacturing processes for sustainability assessment. The
research focus is to investigate modeling of manufacturing processes for system
level sustainability assessment across manufacturing production scales and
methods applied in various fields. The workshop encourages participation of
women and under-represented minorities in discussions on advanced manufacturing
research and education, also important for the nation's prosperity. It
stimulates ideas for future directions in research and career paths. Workshop
outcomes will be documented and disseminated as a workshop report and peer-
reviewed publications.

This award partially supports the participation of graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows, early career faculty, and women and under-represented
minorities in a workshop on representations of manufacturing processes. The
workshop focuses on research in modeling of unit manufacturing processes for
discrete, batch, and continuous methods; and for conventional, nanometer, and
additive manufacturing scales. Methodologies are applicable in fields such as
mechanical, electrical, chemical, nuclear, biochemical, and biological.
Sustainability requires a balance of competing objectives, such as cost, time,
and environmental and social considerations. The use of these models for system-
level sustainability performance is complicated due to uncertain emergent
properties. However, these models are vital to comparing alternative designs of
products and production systems. Acquiring and exchanging information on
manufacturing processes can lead to consistent process characterization and can
help establish a consolidated repository of process models for reuse across
advanced manufacturing domains. Improved process modeling and model integration
ensures more effective communication of computational analytics and sharing of
sustainability performance data. Engaging industrial and academic researchers in
discussing their work, sharing best practices, revealing gaps in research and
practice is important in developing new research directions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.