* 1831193
* SBIR Phase II:  Point of Care Device for High Frequency Stratification of Patient Populations at Risk of Sepsis
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Bobby Reddy, Prenosis, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 09/30/2020
* USD 704,525.00

Sepsis is a poorly understood clinical syndrome and is characterized by a
dysregulation of the immune system?s response to infection. It is the leading
cause of death and is the most expensive condition treated in U.S. hospitals,
exerting a $20.3 billion burden annually, 5.2% of total costs to the healthcare
system nationwide. Sepsis is highly time critical and every 1-hour delay in
antibiotics is associated with a 3-7% increase in the odds of a poor outcome.
There is currently a dire need for a tool that can quickly assess if a patient
is at risk for sepsis. Such a tool would ideally gather any relevant information
very quickly and provide a probability of sepsis directly back to the physician
in less than 30 minutes. If this tool were available, a lot of the uncertainty
revolving around early sepsis screening could be minimized. Outcomes such as
mortality, readmission rate, length of stay, length of ICU stay, hospital cost,
and compliance to Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services Core Measures could
all be improved by such a tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the SBIR Phase
I project was to establish the feasibility of a point of care sensor that can
measure cells and proteins from a drop of blood for the eventual stratification
of sepsis. In Phase II, work will continue with our manufacturing partners to
design, optimize, and test a one-time-use cartridge and a portable reader for
the simultaneous measurement of cells and proteins from a small volume of blood.
The objective will be to develop a scalable technology platform, that can
measure total white blood cell count, CD64 expression on neutrophils, and 2
proteins (IL-6, and PCT), simultaneously from the same drop of blood, and also
be able to measure different proteins by changing the types of beads used in the
assay. The goal is to allow physicians and healthcare providers to perform
frequent measurements at the point of care, and to integrate the clinical and
biological data to predict sepsis and organ dysfunction. The result of this
project will be a fully functional reader and accompanying disposable cartridges
for the measurement of these critical sepsis
biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.