* 1831833
* Dimensions:   Convergent Evolution of Nectarivory and its Association with High-Altitude Adaptation in Hummingbirds and Sunbirds
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Robert Dudley, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,999,978.00

A powerful way to study mechanisms that generate biodiversity is to focus on
instances of convergent evolution. Convergent evolution occurs when the same
trait evolves independently two or more times, providing natural replicates of
adaptive evolution. For example, feeding on nectar and its accompanying
morphological adaptations (e.g., long tapered bills with specialized tongue
structures) have evolved independently in hummingbirds in North and South
America, and in the sunbirds, spiderhunters, and flowerpeckers of Africa, Asia,
and Australasia. This project will study these two groups of birds to better
understand the ecological and genetic factors that lead to convergent evolution
in associated genes and physiology. The research will investigate convergent
evolution in the ability to taste sugar, metabolize alcohol, and live at high
altitudes where there is less oxygen. It will also study convergence in the
microbial communities living in the guts of the birds. This study will reveal
how often the same genetic changes are responsible for the evolution of
functionally similar physiological traits, and will lead to an improved
understanding of adaptation and species diversification. The research will
result in comprehensive evolutionary trees for hummingbirds, sunbirds,
spiderhunters, and flowerpeckers, which will be an important resource for the
conservation of these diverse avian groups that together constitute ~5% of bird
species diversity. This project will train three graduate students and a
postdoctoral fellow in research techniques integrating bioinformatics,
functional physiology, behavioral ecology, genetics, and phylogenetics. It will
also train up to ten undergraduates in sophisticated molecular genetic
techniques and physiological research, which will give them valuable research
experience. This grant will promote public understanding of science through a
collaboration with educators who run the "Understanding Evolution" website, who
will help to develop course materials for teachers that explain evolutionary
concepts like adaptation and convergent evolution in the context of the
diversification of hummingbirds and sunbirds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will study convergence in traits that improve hypoxia resistance, convergence in
traits related to nectarivory, and will investigate how traits related to
nectarivory may converge in high-altitude environments that characterize the
diversification of hummingbirds and sunbirds. On the genetic level, the research
team will study genes related to nectarivory (i.e., sugar taste receptors,
alcohol metabolism genes) and gene pathways that can confer hypoxia resistance
(i.e., hemoglobin, OXPHOS, and hypoxia-inducible factor pathways). In addition,
the researchers will sequence 16S ribosomal RNA genes from gut samples of
nectarivorous birds to study microbial communities. On the functional level, the
research team will test how genetic changes have altered phenotypes important
for both organismal function and subsequent diversification into new ecological
niches. To accomplish this, the team will perform physiological tests to measure
hypoxia resistance, quantify dietary alcohol exposure (in the form of fermented
nectar) from feather samples, predict metabolic functions of gut microbes from
their 16S rRNA sequences, assay functional differences among genetic variants in
the lab (e.g., cell-culture assays that measure responsiveness of different
taste receptor variants), and conduct behavioral tests of taste discrimination
abilities. On the phylogenetic level, the research team will study the
evolutionary history of genes and phenotypes to reveal instances of convergent
evolution within and between the two avian radiations. Finally, the team will
integrate all genetic, functional, and phylogenetic data to evaluate: (1) how
the prevalence of convergent genetic evolution changes with time, and (2) how
suites of traits co-evolve in response to high-altitude
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.