* 1831685
* SCC: I4all (Interests for All): A Smart Socio-Technical Infrastructure to Identify, Cultivate, and Sustain Youth STEAM Interests in a Diverse Midsized American City
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Reed Stevens, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 06/30/2022
* USD 2,500,000.00

This project is a Smart and Connected Communities award. The community is part
of Evanston, Illinois and is composed of the lead partners described
below:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- EvanSTEM which is a in-school/out of school time
(OST) program to improve access and engagement for students in Evanston who have
underperformed or been underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- McGaw
YMCA which consists of 12,000 families serving 20,000 individuals and supporting
technology and makerspace activities (MetaMedia) in a safe community
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;- Office of Community Education Partnerships
(OCEP) at Northwestern University which provides support for the university and
community to collaborate on research, teaching, and service initiatives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This partnership will develop a new approach to learning
enagement through the STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Arts, and
Mathematics) interests of all young people in Evanston. This project is entitled
Interests for All (I4All) and builds upon existing research results of the two
Principal Investigators (PIs) and previous partnerships between the lead
partners (EvanSTEM and MetaMedia had OCEP as a founding partner). I4All also
brings together Evanston school districts, OST prividers, the city, and
Evanston's Northwestern University as participants.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
particular the project builds on PI Pinkard's Cities of Learning project and co-
PI Stevens' FUSE Studios project. Both of these projects have explicit goals to
broaden participation in STEAM pursuits, a goal that is significantly advanced
through I4All. In this project, I4All infrastructure will be evaluated using
quantitative metrics that will tell the researchers whether and to what degree
Evanston youth are finding and developing their STEAM interests and whether the
I4All infrastructure supports a significantly more equitable distribution of
opportunities to youth. The researchers will also conduct in depth qualitative
case studies of youth interest development. These longitudinal studies will
complement the quantitative metrics of participation and give measures that will
be used in informing changes in I4All as part of the PIs Design Based
Implementation Research approach. The artifacts produced in I4All include FUSE
studio projects, software infrastructure to guide the students through OST and
in-school activities and to provide to the students actionable information as to
logistics for participation in I4All activities, and data that will be available
to all stakeholders to evaluate the effectiveness of I4All. Additionally, this
research has the potential to provide for scaling this model to different
communities, leveraging the OST network in one community to begin to offer
professional development more widely throughout the school districts and as an
exemplar for other districts. These research results could also affect
strategies and policies created by local school officials and community
organizations regarding how to work together to create local learning
environments to create an ecosystem where formal and informal learning spaces
support and reinforce STEAM knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.