* 1831288
* SBIR Phase II:  Bio-based polymers for optical applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jagdish Jethmalani, Novol, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2022
* USD 947,146.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this SBIR Phase II project is to
deliver a bio-based and functionally improved optical polymer that can be made
into a lens. The lens product has commercial applications in rapidly growing
mass-markets like Prescription eyewear that is growing significantly due to
onslaught of myopia. Using scientific data, this proposal demonstrates an
improved commercial product for myopia when compared to Polycarbonate, the most
popular eyewear material in US. Work proposed in Phase II focuses on development
of the polymer at large scale and its conversion to lenses using a lower-cost,
one-step molding process that can also reduce current industry wastages by as
much as an estimated 90%. For establishing suitability of the product towards
commercial applications, the Phase II goals include product testing in lab as
well as with real subjects to generate marketable data. Finished prescription
lenses are a ~$30 billion plus market, with ~70% of lens sales serving myopic
patients, who will see a tremendous benefit from using our ultra-clear lens.
Broader impact of this technology proposal is to make eyeglasses exponentially
more affordable in contrast to today's high costs. Price controls exerted by
market monopolies like Luxottica and Essilor on finished lenses pose a huge
barrier to base of pyramid markets. Our easy-to-make lens technology simplifies
the eyewear supply chain for benefit of these unconventional markets and can
lower costs dramatically for billions of people around the world, who are
separated by a pair of glasses from otherwise
blindness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to leverage
properties of sugars to build an optically clear, transparent polymer of good
refractive index, low dispersion and low density. In commercial applications of
this polymer as a prescription lens, it thus represents a state-of-the-art
product that combines the best properties of various incumbent eyewear materials
into one. A key intellectual merit of this SBIR project is to achieve a plastic
with optical properties similar to glass, a gold standard in optical materials.
Our chemistry platform is 90% bio-based, a unique value proposition in
prescription lens industry, where use of extremely toxic and hazardous chemicals
is common. Phase I work has also led to the development of a novel route of
manufacturing lenses which can lower cost barriers for setting up optical labs,
expedite the process for making prescription lenses and cut wastages in current
prescription industry. In Phase II, our goal is to methodically develop the
process for making lenses using Novol's polymers and obtain data to translate
the proposed technology to a commercially preferred lens product with special
benefits to myopic patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.