* 1831287
* SBIR Phase II:  Closed-loop control of MEMS deformable mirror for two-photon microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Christopher Arrasmith, Revibro Optics LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 03/31/2021
* USD 799,608.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will enable
video-rate three-dimensional (3D) imaging within two-photon microscopes (2PMs)
by developing novel deformable membrane mirror (DMM) technology for fast,
precise focus control. As a subset of laser scanning microscopes (LSMs), 2PMs
achieve very high spatial resolution by using a focused, high-power laser beam
to excite fluorescence via the simultaneous absorption of two low-energy
infrared photons to stimulate emission in the visible spectrum. Because of the
increased resolution, and increased penetration of infrared light into tissue
compared with other LSM methods, 2PMs have become widely accepted for use in the
life sciences, specifically for neuroscience. The DMM technology developed for
this project will address the $165 million 2PM market by delivering an
electrically tunable optic capable of simultaneously controlling focus and
aberrations while operating an order of magnitude faster than competitive
technologies. The 3D imaging capabilities enabled by this technology will propel
new research in the field of neuroscience aimed at solving widespread, chronic
medical problems like stroke and Alzheimer's disease. Once the 2PM entry market
is addressed, this technology will be refined to address the much larger $5.8
billion 3D laser printing market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the Phase I
project, new mirror coatings were developed to handle the high-power lasers used
in 2PMs. With the core DMM technology in place, this Phase II project is aimed
primarily at control of mirror actuation and shape for reliable use in 2PMs. The
first objective of this Phase II project will develop electronics for robust
control of mirror actuation and shape. Objective two will center on refining the
core DMM technology and fabrication methods to enable position sensing of the
membrane and improve mirror stroke to satisfy customers in 2PM markets. The
final objective will involve the creation of optical and mechanical assemblies
and modules for incorporating the DMM technology into key microscopes. The
result of this Phase II will be a market-ready DMM product with active focus
control to address the growing 2PM market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.