* 1831255
* SBIR Phase II:  Vacuum Arc Control using Arc Position Sensing and Induced Magnetic Fields
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,09/30/2022
* Paul King, KW Associates LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,332,840.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will provide
commercial validation at scale of feedback-based control of arc behavior within
the vacuum arc remelting (VAR) process. This will improve VAR performance in the
production of specialty metals, resulting in improvements to ingot quality while
reducing electricity consumption. Specialty metals, such as titanium and nickel
alloys, are used in critical high-performance parts in industries such as
aerospace, energy, and medicine, where the failure of these parts may lead to
catastrophic systems failures and potentially life-threatening situations. In a
VAR furnace, extreme temperature gradients from constricted and/or diffuse arcs
sustained between the melting electrode and ingot can cause non-homogeneous
material and inclusion defects, resulting in up to 8% yield loss per ingot,
representing $1.024 billion in losses across the domestic industry. Improved
control over the arc distributions during the melting of these metals is
expected to decrease the frequency of defects in the final product and increase
overall yield from the process. The proposed project is expected to reduce these
loses by up to 50% through the application of active, feedback control of the
arc dynamics. This type of control is expected to increase yield, decrease
energy requirements, and increase safety of the manufacturing process industry-
wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a system capable of
detecting and manipulating the distribution of the arcs utilized during VAR
processing. The Phase I effort showed that it is possible to simultaneously
detect arc locations on the electrode and influence their movements, using
electromagnetic coils, in real time. In Phase II, the arc measurements will be
coupled through feedback to control the arc distribution in an industrial-scale
research VAR, providing proof of concept at industrial scale. In so doing, the
optimal electromagnetic coil geometry, hardware, and materials for driving the
arc motion at scale will be identified and constructed. A series of industrial
experiments are planned to validate the control system. The chemical composition
of the ingots produced during controlled and uncontrolled conditions will be
characterized to correlate defects with observed arc behaviors and to identify
optimal control parameters. Similarly, the measured arc distributions will be
used to validate the computational solidification modeling, which will be used
to identify probable defect regions. The combination of experimental data and
validated simulation results will be used to inform the VAR feedback control
system regarding optimal arc distribution, yielding an improved control strategy
for tailoring the melt process and improving ingot
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.