* 1831080
* SBIR Phase II:  Electrochemical Acoustic Tools for the Analysis of Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Andrew Hsieh, Feasible, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 06/30/2021
* USD 1,449,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be in helping
batteries exceed the quality, performance, and safety demands of mass-market
electric vehicles, renewable energy generation, and next-generation consumer
electronic devices. The need for high-performance batteries is accelerating, and
as batteries grow in energy density, size, and production volumes, so will the
issues that persist with quality. Unless these issues are addressed, they will
continue to have major implications for the performance, safety, and adoption of
these important technologies. The challenge is that outside of R&amp;D labs, the
industry relies on essentially the same basic data as when batteries were first
invented: voltage, current, and temperature. As a result, at commercial scales,
only a small percentage of batteries are inspected in a meaningful way, with
methods that only provide indirect information about physical condition. This
Phase 2 project is focused on developing a new platform for production-level
battery inspection that directly probes the physical condition of batteries with
a high testing throughput. This could lead to better decisions in manufacturing
environments and could decrease system costs, increase capacity and operational
lifetime, and accelerate the scale-up of promising new
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project addresses the need for a physical mode of inspection in battery
production environments that is capable of screening every cell with high
fidelity. Currently, inspection in production-level environments are limited to
electrical measurements and X-rays. Electrical methods provide only indirect and
cell-averaged information about physical condition, and X-rays are not
practically able to detect the distribution of electrolyte within batteries nor
the formation of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer (both of which
strongly affect long-term reliability, performance, and safety of batteries).
This Phase 2 project aims to develop a platform that utilizes sound-based
methods to inspect batteries in production-environments. This will involve
developing a scaled, automated hardware system as well as software and
computational methods for processing and analyzing the acoustic signals. The
Phase 2 project will also include various testing and validation efforts to
assess the ability of acoustic analysis to both directly determine the
performance quality and reliability of cells beyond beginning of life capacity
and resistance, as well as to improve the performance of strings of cells and
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.