* 1831225
* SBIR Phase II:  A Clinical Decision Support System for Fluid Resuscitation of Intensive Care Unit Patients
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Behnood Gholami, Autonomous Healthcare Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 05/31/2023
* USD 962,001.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project involves addressing complexities in fluid
management, one of the most important issues in critical care. Suboptimal fluid
management results in many complications such as pulmonary edema. Studies show
that fluid overload is associated with higher rates of morbidity and mortality.
Recent studies also show that restrictive fluid resuscitation protocols result
in a reduction of mechanical ventilation days and hospital length of stay. The
clinical literature provides ample evidence of optimized fluid therapy benefits
for different patient populations including those with sepsis and post-operative
patients. However, implementation of fluid therapy is highly subjective.
Specifically, the most critical unanswered questions involve the timing and the
volume of fluid infusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project proposes to develop a system which uses continuous
measurements from a standard intensive care unit hemodynamic monitoring device
to provide actionable feedback for clinicians to optimize fluid and vasoactive
drug management. In the proposed Phase II work, we will further develop the
clinical decision support system developed in Phase I. This includes further
development of the underlying technology and also performing preliminary
clinical studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.