* 1831205
* Excellence in Research:  Analyzing the Impact of Landscape Change on the Watershed Dynamics of a Flood-Prone Urban Region
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Shishir Shishodia, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project will analyze the relationship between land-use/land-cover change,
urban flooding, and water pollution. Investigators will consider how increasing
population growth, extensive urban development, and related landscape changes
have altered natural watershed ecosystems, stressing natural resources and
processes, thereby contributing to water pollution. This project will benefit
society by investigating basic scientific processes that have contributed to the
vulnerability of a flood-prone region, so that these can be mitigated. The
project will also develop research capacity at a historically Black university,
and by providing rigorous education, training, and hands-on research experiences
for graduate and undergraduate students from under-represented minority groups,
thereby building scientific human resource capacity. The project promotes direct
collaboration among the various disciplines and will have significant impact in
analyzing long-term data and integrating it with geospatial data while
monitoring natural resources. The geospatial data and models that will be
developed as part of this project will be useful resources for decision-makers
within city and state governments, local communities, and non-profit
organizations to better monitor and manage those resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the project are: (1)
characterizing the landscape level spatiotemporal land use and land cover
changes in the urban watersheds; (2) identifying and analyzing the environmental
footprint of these urban watersheds on ecosystems by developing a comprehensive
geospatial database; and (3) investigating the current and future environmental
trends in urban watersheds using geospatial and system dynamic models. The
project will use an integration of various types of remotely sensed imagery to
characterize land-use/land-cover change, and will use a GIS to integrate
information at different scales. It will also develop integrated hydro-landscape
models that can be used to simulate anticipated scenarios. A spatial
interpolation analysis of nutrient and metal concentrations in the soil and
water will be conducted to identify and map contamination in the urban
watersheds. The project will generate new information on the extent of optimum
watershed development that is necessary for minimal impact on natural resources
and the tangible steps that might be taken to improve the quality of local
watersheds. The research will reveal how landscape analysis using geospatial
data can be used to develop remediation paths for the improved watershed
management. The project will focus on the greater Houston region, a region with
a history of flooding and water pollution challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.