* 1831386
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Differential Recognition of Two Afrodescendent Populations, 1970-2018
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* William Rogers Brubaker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 11,983.00

This project investigates why rights have been enacted and implemented only for
some Afrodescendent populations. In many places, Afrodescendent movements have
been politically visible and culturally resonant since the 1980s and yet they
have been unable to achieve substantive recognition of their rights. To achieve
understanding of why only some places have extended rights to Afrodescendent
populations while others have failed to do so, this study compares the
differential recognition of Afrodescendent populations in two places. Data come
from interviews, archival records in both places, and 12 months of participant
observation. Findings from this research will improve understanding of processes
that enhance recognition of diverse groups and so contribute to national
cohesion and well-being.

This project seeks to explain in comparative perspective why only some places
have extended rights to Afrodescendent populations while others have failed to
do so. Two places with opposite trajectories of political recognition or lack
thereof of Afrodescendent populations are investigated. It is hypothesized that
the differences are due to differences in long-term projects of nation-state
formation, practices of ethno-political organization, and critical junctures of
regime change. A key analytical approach to critical junctures is to disentangle
the analysis of local settings where mobilization processes emerge from the
analysis of national arenas where political claims are recognized.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.