* 1831770
* SCC: Landslide Risk Management in Remote Communities: Integrating Geoscience, Data Science, and Social Science in Local Context
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Robert Lempert, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,531,504.00

Communities worldwide, including many throughout the United States, struggle to
predict and manage significant landslide risk. Landslides prove difficult to
predict because they are infrequent and their occurrence may depend strongly on
the specific soil, rain, and wind conditions in each location. Effective warning
proves hard to disseminate because community members have different risk
perceptions and tolerances, and even the best scientific predictions of
landslide risk are often imprecise. In this project, a team of geo, information,
and social science research institutions, the Sitka Sound Science Center, and
the Sitka Tribe of Alaska, will design a novel landslide risk warning system for
Sitka, Alaska, a small, diverse coastal town of 9,000 pressed against the steep,
landslide-prone slopes of the Tongass National Forest. Working with local
students and other residents acting as citizen scientists, the project will
deploy small, inexpensive, networked moisture sensors on the slopes above Sitka
that, when combined with new methods for integrating diverse data streams, will
improve landslide prediction. The project will map Sitka's social networks and
residents' understanding of risk and will then use this information, along with
new influence maximization methods, which identify well-connected 'key
influencers' in each social network, to design effective dissemination channels
for landslide warning. The project will use decision support tools to facilitate
community deliberations and workshops with government officials on the
appropriate design of the physical and social components of a warning system
that will best balance timely warning with reduced incidence of disruptive false
alarms. While focused on Sitka, this project's results should be widely
applicable worldwide, especially in other small or remote towns or communities
with landslide risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance geoscience,
social science, information science, and risk management through innovative
incorporation of multiple data streams from sources such as historical records
and imagery, hydrologic sensors, and social networks. The project will advance
information science by showing how diverse sources of data (of disparate time
scales, dimensionalities, and levels of noise) can be integrated to improve
decision-making and policy-making in highly uncertain environments. These
diverse streams of data will allow us to utilize both existing machine learning
methodologies, as well as novel influence maximization models for communicating
natural hazard risk. The project will advance geoscience by improving predictive
models through direct measurement of landslide triggering conditions and region-
specific threshold calibration, and by testing how a vast increase in the number
of in-situ sensors affects the design, implementation, and performance of
landslide early warning systems. The project will advance social science through
an improved understanding of risk perception and communication in social and
cultural contexts. It will be among the first to study how network influence
maximization can improve community education and natural hazard response. By
linking an understanding of social networks and cultural frames of risk
perception with a participatory, quantitative decision support system, this
project will improve understanding of how data can be used to facilitate a fair,
accountable, integrative, and transparent risk management
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.