* 1831206
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Affinity Cyclodextrin Polymers for Point-of-Use Filtration Products
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Gokhan Barin, CycloPure, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,420,797.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide a solution to the problem of drinking
water contamination by developing an advanced adsorbent for point-of-use/home
filtration applications. Micropollutants, pharmaceutical residues, pesticides,
industrial chemicals and other organic compounds present in water resources at
trace concentrations of one part per billion and less, are recognized as a major
factor of contamination. Consumers around the world no longer trust the safety
of their drinking water due to the presence of micropollutants and other
contaminants. These compounds are pervasive and can present toxicity at trace
concentrations. As a result, consumers have significantly increased the non-
sustainable use of plastic bottled water, now a $260 billion market. Current
point-of-use filtration products are primarily designed to improve taste and
odor, and are generally ineffective in removing micropollutants. CycloPure's
technology has been developed specifically to target and remove micropollutants
from water. This project focuses on the further development of the company's
cyclodextrin adsorbent to improve the effectiveness of point-of-use filters.
This material can be used as a drop-in replacement without changes in filter
design. CycloPure's materials will allow households to safely use readily
available tap water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to
identify strategies to develop a suitable form factor to incorporate CycloPure's
high-affinity cyclodextrin adsorbent into point-of-use filters. The company's
adsorbent is formed by reacting cyclodextrins, which are derived from corn
starch, with readily available monomers in a single step process. During the
Phase I period of this project, scalable reaction conditions were identified for
production of the adsorbent in powder form. Flow-through applications, such as
gravity filters, frequently require granular particles to achieve desired flow
rates. Early activities will focus on the preparation of the adsorbent in
granular form to demonstrate scalability and retention of removal performance
similar to powder form. Thereafter, column studies will be performed in order to
assess the removal performance of granular media under flow-through conditions
at environmentally relevant micropollutant concentrations. Following
identification of adsorption characteristics and appropriate flow conditions, a
prototype point-of-use filter will be constructed and tested for the removal of
micropollutants from tap water using advanced analytical techniques, including a
combination of target and non-target screening
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.