* 1831347
* SCC: Data-Informed Scenario Planning for Mobility Decision Making in Resource Constrained Communities
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Pascal Van Hentenryck, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,670,961.00

The rapid emergence of new information and sensing technologies is empowering
the formation of smart and connected communities (S&amp;CC). This project aims
to advance the use of smart and connected technologies to empower new modes of
community-based decision making to identify and implement transformative
solutions to community challenges. The project focuses on resource-constrained
communities. The team will offer the community of Benton Harbor, Michigan, tools
needed to explore new mobility solutions that provide greater access to
employment, education, and healthcare. The project deploys sensing technologies
to collect data needed to create analytical models of resident mobility
preferences and mobility service performance. A community-based decision making
framework will be created using scenario planning methods; in this framework,
stakeholders are provided tools to explore mobility solutions with predicted
outcomes visualized. Included in the team is the Twin Cities Area Transportation
Authority (TCATA), which will iteratively implement mobility solutions
originating from the scenario planning process with solutions quantitatively
assessed. A partnership with Lake Michigan College further enhances the
project's broader impacts by engaging community college students in the research
and offering them experiences in the smart city field of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To explore the fundamental question of how
resourced-constrained communities can utilize smart and connected technologies
to implement novel but lean solutions to mobility challenges, the project will
define a cost-effective data collection strategy that can assess the performance
of existing solutions, track the mobility patterns of residents, and acquire
resident perceptions of their mobility. GPS tracking using cell phones apps and
computer vision on city buses will be used to generate the data needed to model
the performance of current mobility configurations. Surveys of residents will
augment these data sources. The project will map mobility data to an analytical
framework that can predict both resident demand for mobility services and the
performance of these services given changes in user demand. Activity-based
models will be created with special emphasis on fine-grain estimation of travel
demand in small communities. Predictive models will be developed to predict the
quality of transit services provided by configurations of the mobility network.
A key advancement will be the creation of scalable computational methods that
optimize the mix of fixed route service with on-demand shuttling. This project
will enable community-based decision making by visualizing mobility data and
predictive outputs during a participatory planning process. The team will also
provide TCATA with the ability to track and iteratively shape public
transportation in order to enhance access to employment, healthcare, and
education outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.