* 1831161
* SBIR Phase II: Orchestration of Multiple Robotic Subsystems into a Commercially Viable Robotic Strawberry Harvesting System
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Robert Pitzer, Harvest CROO, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,249,719.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes development of
berry post-picking screening and handling that will provide a safe and efficient
way to remove contaminated berries from the processing stream of an automated
harvester. The project will advance machine vision technology for robotic
harvesting and will be a key enabling technology leading to acceptance of
automated harvesting as safe and effective. The market sector addressed by this
project is strawberry farmers, though the technology will be applicable to other
types of fruit and vegetable farming as well. The automated harvesting
technology advanced by this project will alleviate chronic and worsening labor
shortages faced by strawberry farmers and will ensure that strawberries remain
affordable and available to consumers. Filling the need created by farming labor
shortages is a $1 billion business opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop new vision
processing and inspection methods vital to enabling use of an automated, robotic
strawberry harvester. Acceptance of automated harvesting technology by
strawberry farmers hinges on the ability of the harvester to remove bad berries
from the plant without allowing the undesirable berries from entering the
harvester packaging stream and potentially contaminating large quantities of
berries. To achieve this, it will be necessary for the harvester to identify and
eliminate diseased, rotten, damaged, or infested berries at multiple stages in
the stream from automated picking to final packaging. The classification method
that identifies the berries to be eliminated will be extremely accurate, with a
very high detection rate and a low false alarm rate. The methods developed will
be suitable for installation on a farming machine that is subject to a harsh
outdoor environment as well as the shock and vibration environment found on a
robotic harvesting device. New handling processes will be developed that will
allow automated inspection of the entire berry without damaging the fruit or
creating a risk of cross contamination from infected berries, significantly
advancing the state of the art for automated strawberry
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.