* 1831493
* Dimensions: Eco-Evolutionary Drivers of Diversity in Toxic Algal Blooms
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Regis Ferriere, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,033,408.00

Ecology and evolution are two significant biological processes that are often
studied independently. Yet, it is likely that interactions between ecology and
evolution are key to generating biological diversity. This project will study
toxic algal blooms to understand how links between ecological and evolutionary
processes shape biodiversity. The last decade has seen amazing advances in
genome sequencing technology and biological data analysis. There is now an
opportunity to apply this new technology to the study of algae. Algae are
important for several reasons. Algae are the primary producers in most ocean and
freshwater environments. Algae produce numerous substances including antibiotics
and other potential human drugs. Algae also produce toxins that endanger human
health and water quality. These toxic algal blooms are increasing in both
frequency and severity across the globe. The resources developed as a result of
this project will help better predict toxic algal blooms. This project will
train undergraduate students in genomics and phylogenetic approaches. Outreach
materials focused on the algae in aquarium habitats will also be developed for
the Biosphere 2 facility in Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to study a type of toxic alga called Prymnesium. Prymnesium is
abundant in aquatic communities in Texas. The project will focus on study sites
in Texas. The project will test the hypothesis that changes in toxicity shape
the genetic diversity of Prymnesium populations. To do so, the project will
first characterize the diversity of toxic algal blooms through whole genome
sequencing of over 100 diverse Prymnesium strains. This will be the largest
survey of genomic variation within a natural algal population to date. Second,
the project will identify the molecular mechanisms of toxicity using RNA
sequencing and network analysis. This approach will overcome the challenge of
rapid, accurate identification of genes underlying functional traits. Third, the
researchers will integrate the empirical data into mathematical models of eco-
evolutionary feedbacks to predict all three dimensions (genetic, phylogenetic,
and function) of biodiversity within toxic algal
blooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.