* 1831213
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Magmatic, Crustal, and Conduit Conditions Required for Mafic, Plinian Volcanism
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Manga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2022
* USD 34,984.00

Low-silica 'mafic' magmas are the most common magmas to erupt on Earth. Because
their viscosity is low, they usually form lava flows or weak explosive
eruptions. However, mafic-composition volcanoes can produce much stronger,
Plinian-style eruptions capable of dispersing ash fall over thousands of square
kilometers, and producing deadly, landscape-altering ash flows that travel tens
of kilometers from source. Despite their potential impact, the mechanisms
responsible for generating mafic, Plinian eruptions are not understood. This
project will benefit society by constraining the causes and consequences of such
eruptions, which has global implications for the millions of people living at
risk from mafic volcanic centers including the currently active Kilauea volcano
in the USA. Two Boise State University (BSU) PhD students will be trained by the
five participating scientists on the team, advancing discovery and understanding
while promoting teaching, training, and learning. Undergraduate geoscience
students from the Universidad de Concepcion (Chile) will be included in the
field work and research, broadening participation of under-represented groups.
The results and experience of the research team will be shared on the BSU
magmatic and volcanic studies group Facebook page through a series of blog post
and short videos of our field work that document the key elements of discovery
associated with the project. Finally, the investigators and students will
incorporate samples, stories, images and videos from the work in Chile into
local and regional outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets
the 13.4_ka (~12 km3 DRE) and ~12.6 ka (&lt;1 km3 DRE) mafic eruptions at Volcan
Llaima, Chile, which produced extensive ash flow deposits found radially around
the volcano. The difference in eruption sizes permits investigation of processes
that promote large-volume, caldera forming mafic eruptions versus smaller volume
Plinian mafic eruptions. A full suite of diverse but complimentary methods,
including petrology, geochemistry, physical volcanology, decompression
experiments, and rheology experiments, allows the research team to address the
broad, fundamental research question of what magmatic and crustal conditions
promote and trigger mafic, Plinian eruptions. More specifically, spatially and
stratigraphically constrained petrologic and geochemical studies will allow us
to investigate magmatic conditions during and prior to eruption, such as
compositional variability of the magma and changes in chamber temperatures,
pressures, and gas content. Establishing variability in these conditions will
permit reconstruction of the magma plumbing system. A combination of all methods
are used to constrain conduit conditions that promote high explosivity for mafic
melts, including the interplay between ascent rate and degassing of the magma,
as well as changes in magma rheology that prevent gas loss, promoting higher
explosivity. The results of this work will have implications for understanding
explosive mafic eruptive processes that extend to mafic centers worldwide,
including both large-volume and small-volume mafic, Plinian
eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.