* 1831259
* SBIR Phase II:  Long Range 2-way Communications for the Remote IOT
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2021
* robert stevenson, Rurisond, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 02/28/2021
* USD 795,388.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will allow highly cost effective, 2-way
communications to be delivered to machinery and 'Things' over extremely long and
non-line-of-sight distances using underutilized frequencies and new hardware and
software techniques. The resulting technologies will provide 2-way connectivity
where cellular does not exist and where other techniques (Satellite) are too
expensive. This will result in near universal availability of the Internet-of-
Things at costs superior to legacy approaches and which are appropriate for
applications typically seen in Internet-of-Things applications. Further, the
work will have broad impact in allowing more balanced utilization of the radio
spectrum which cannot be addressed (either economically or at all) with legacy
wireless techniques.

The proposed project will create a new system of hardware, software, frequency
and operating techniques which will allow underutilized spectrum to be used to
deliver 2-way communications to very remote machines and things. The work will
build on our Phase I accomplishments to create production-ready designs of two
new wireless systems, signal processing software to allow use of challenging
spectrum while avoiding existing users, create the first instance of a cloud
based infrastructure for automated control and coordination of our architecture,
and, the creation of a basic set of deployment tools and techniques to support
field operations. We expect to continue building a significant base of
Intellectual Property as we pursue the work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.