* 1831257
* SBIR Phase II:  Modernizing the diagnosis, monitoring, and treating of substance use disorders via an integrated technology platform
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,01/31/2023
* Patrik Schmidle, Mentor on the Go LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 01/31/2023
* USD 798,220.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will transform how alcohol use disorders (AUDs)
are diagnosed, monitored, and treated by the further development of a micro-
biosensor system for health care providers. An implantable micro-biosensor that
reliably detects, monitors, and tracks alcohol consumption allows for more
accurate diagnosis so the appropriate treatment solution can be prescribed and
tracked. Our system integrates an implantable micro-biosensor with smartphone
technology to continuously detect and monitor, collect, transmit, store, and
analyze relevant biodata, pushing resulting behavior change instructions to the
user. This creates a revolutionary approach to the diagnosis and treatment of
alcohol use disorders by reporting outcome data more accurately and reliably
than current, self-reporting methods. Our system potentially yields multiple
societal benefits, including lower treatment costs and increased treatment
accessibility. Additionally, it could reduce both economic and social costs
through the identification of people at risk thereby increasing the number of
people who seek and receive treatment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will focus on refining the design
and functionalization of an injectable alcohol micro-biosensor, developing a
wearable device, and testing the alcohol micro-biosensor in animals. Once fully
developed, our system for detecting, monitoring, and treating alcohol use
disorders will consist of three components: 1) a multi-plex micro-biosensor,
small enough to be directly injected under the skin. The sensor is customizable
to continuously monitor and measure alcohol; 2) a wearable sensor device that
provides power to the injected micro-biosensor while collecting the measured
data to transmit to a nearby smartphone or other data aggregator; and 3) a
mobile smartphone application developed by our company that uses evidence-based
psychotherapy techniques to encourage behavior modification. The anticipated
technical results include an implantable micro-biosensor for the continuous
monitoring and measuring of alcohol consumption. Additionally, an unobtrusive
wearable device that can power the biosensor and store and transmit the data
collected is anticipated. Both of these components will have been tested in
animals and be ready to move on to testing in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.