* 1831140
* SCC: Leveraging Autonomous Shared Vehicles for Greater Community Health, Equity, Livability, and Prosperity (HELP)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Zhi-Li Zhang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,750,856.00

This Smart &amp; Connected Communities (SCC) grant supports fundamental research
on a critical challenge facing many cities and communities: how to leverage the
emerging autonomous vehicles (AVs) to re-think and re-design future
transportation services and enable smart and connected communities where
everyone benefits. The research envisages an ambitious "smart cloud commuting
system" (SCCS) based on giant pools of shared AVs. The envisaged SCCS has the
potential to bring about far-reaching societal changes. It will provide
inexpensive mobility services to all people especially people with socio-
economic disadvantages, help build stronger family and community ties, and boost
economic productivity and equity by mitigating or removing mobility constraints.
The research will be carried out in conjunction with five community engagement
pilot projects, directly contributing to US prosperity and well-being. The
research involves multiple disciplines, including transportation, computer
science, data science, operations research, urban design, and public policy. The
multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of underrepresented
groups in research, and enrich students' educational experience across science,
engineering, urban design, and public policy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the project is two-fold: (1) to study the feasibility, economic viability,
architectural and operational designs of the envisaged SCCS; and (2) to analyze
the socioeconomic challenges in realizing the envisaged SCCS to serve
communities with diverse socioeconomic backgrounds. In support of these goals,
the project will leverage new and emerging data on travel demand, user
preferences, and activity-travel constraints to quantify system efficiency gains
that can be attained from time-sharing and intelligent control of AVs as well as
from ride-sharing and smart trip scheduling of users. The research will also
develop optimization models and algorithms that account for essential tradeoffs,
including cost, quality of service, and congestion in deciding how best to
deploy AVs geographically and temporally, leading to the identification of
optimal AV fleet architectures and optimal operational policies. The research
will also investigate, using micro-economic/game-theoretic analysis of the
incentives of both users and service providers, likely scenarios of vehicle
ownership and market structures and study the impact of each scenario on traffic
measures including vehicle ownership and traffic volumes as well as societal
measures including community health, equity, livability, and prosperity. This
research will generate fundamental knowledge on the socioeconomic opportunities
and impacts of the envisaged SCCS with shared AVs, and develop guidelines for
adapting the design, deployment, and operation of AVs for future smart
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.