* 1831842
* Dimensions:  Collaborative Research:  The Role of Microbial Biodiversity in Controlling Nitrous Oxide Emissions from Soils
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Robert Sanford, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 691,453.00

Despite the vast amount of microbial biodiversity on Earth, the links among the
number of microbial species, their genetic diversity, and ecosystem function
remain poorly understood. Soils play an important role in sustaining human
health. Therefore, it is particularly important to understand the function of
the large number of bacterial species in the soil. To provide new insights into
the relationship between microbial species and soil function, this project will
focus on the reduction of a potent greenhouse gas called nitrous oxide. The
reduction of nitrous oxide is a key function of soil microbes. This reduction
step determines how much of this greenhouse gas is emitted to the atmosphere
from the soil. The recent discovery of a new set of genes, organisms, and
pathways that reduce nitrous oxide provides an opportunity to make progress on
understanding this function. This project will train undergraduate students and
graduate students, including individuals from under-represented groups from
Puerto Rico. The training would include workshops, research opportunities, and a
Research Experience for Undergraduates program at three institutions. The
project also provides outreach opportunities to the general public through
established K to Gray programs. Finally, the research from this study will
provide society benefits in two ways. First, it will provide a mechanistic
understanding of the controls on the production of an important greenhouse gas
(nitrous oxide). Second, it will help understand an important loss pathway of
nitrogen, the single most limiting nutrient on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will test the hypothesis that the amount of taxonomic and genetic
diversity in the nitrous oxide reductase gene is necessary for specialization
due to different substrate and environmental conditions in the soil. The
ultimate goal is to predict both nitrous oxide reduction rates and nitrous oxide
emissions from the genetic and phylogenetic diversity of soil microbes. The
proposal will focus on two study sites- one in Illinois and one in Puerto Rico-
and measure the abundances and activities of nitrous oxide-reducing taxa and
genes in the soils. Simultaneous measurements of nitrous oxide emission rates in
a variety of environmental conditions such as temperature, moisture, and
nutrient levels, will allow the biotic and abiotic drivers of this reaction to
be separated. The predicted rates of nitrous oxide consumption from a
multivariate statistical analysis will be tested with independently measured
rates by isotope-based methodology. This will allow assessment of the robust
model of the microbial and environmental controls of the fate of nitrous
oxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.