* 1831220
* STTR Phase II:  Corrosion Inhibition of Stainless Steel Alloys in High Temperature Chloride Salts for Concentrated Solar Power Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Sreya Dutta, Dynalene Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2021
* USD 737,213.00

This STTR Phase II project will focus on the development of cost effective, high
temperature molten salt heat transfer fluids for third generation concentrated
solar power (CSP) plants with operating temperatures &gt;700?C. In the Phase I
of this research, an additive package was developed that formed an adherent
ceramic oxide coating on 316/316L stainless steel at the temperatures &gt;700?C
when added to specific chloride salt blends and inhibit corrosion. The
utilization of the inhibitor package strategy will enable the utilization of
economical stainless-steel alloys in the CSP plants and would reduce the infra-
structure cost. Such solutions will have a direct impact on the renewable energy
market which would help to lower the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE) for thermal
solar from the current cost of 12?/kwh to the target 3?/kwh by 2030. The
scientific and technological insight gained in this project could be beneficial
to many other applications, such as molten carbonate fuel cells, thermal energy
storage systems, nuclear molten fluoride/chloride reactors, and other high-
temperature systems that are susceptible to aggressive corrosion. Incorporation
of the inhibited molten chloride salt in the CSP plants will also provide
sustainable green energy, reduce water usage, create more jobs and offer U.S.
energy independence and security. On a societal level, impact will be achieved
by the continued delivery and development of educational activities based on the
research topics embodied by this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
innovation in this proposed program is the development of a chemical mixture, an
additive package that would minimize the corrosion of stainless steel induced by
molten chloride salts at temperatures &gt;700?C. The additive package reacts
with the stainless steel and forms a corrosion inhibiting ceramic oxide coating
in-situ when added to the molten chlorides at operating temperatures&gt;700?C.
The chloride salts are proposed to be the heat transfer fluids for third
generation CSP plants. The feasibility of the inhibitor package strategy in a
real world CSP plant will be critically assessed in this proposed research. A
prototype bench scale molten test loop will be designed and built to mimic the
flow conditions in a CSP plant. The effect of prolonged exposure to high
temperature molten salts on the mechanical properties of the base metal under
dynamic conditions will be studied with attention to the molten salt induced
degradation of strength and toughness at elevated temperatures. The degradation
behavior of the salt with the inhibitor package will be studied as well.
Additional research will be performed to gain fundamental insight on the
nucleation and growth of the ceramic oxide coating and its thermal and
mechanical stability in dynamic flow conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.