* 1831427
* SCC STEMports: Community Workforce Development through Augmented Reality STEM Learning Experiences
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Sue Allen, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,495,976.00

This Smart and Connected Community (SCC) project will partner with two rural
communities to develop STEMports, an innovative Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) learning game for workforce development. The game's
activities will take players on localized Augmented Reality (AR) missions to
both engage in STEM learning challenges and discover emerging STEM careers in
their community, specifically highlighting innovations in the fields of
sustainable agriculture and aquaculture, forest products, and renewable energy.
Community Advisory Teams (CATs) and co-design teams, including youth,
representatives from the targeted emerging STEM economies, and decision-makers
will partner with project staff to co-design STEMports that reflect the
interests, cultural contexts, and envisioned STEM industries of the future for
each community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: (a) design and pilot an
AR game for community STEM workforce development; (b) develop and adapt a
community engagement process that optimizes community networking for co-
designing the gaming application and online community; and (c) advance a
scalable process for wider applications of STEMports. This project is a
collaboration between the Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance and the Field
Day Lab at the University of Wisconsin-Madison to both build and research the
co-designing of a SCC based within an AR environment. The project will
contribute knowledge to the informal STEM learning, community development, and
education technology fields in four major ways:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deepening
the understanding of how innovative technological tools support rural community
STEM knowledge building as well as STEM identity and workforce
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying design principles for co-designing
the STEMports community related to the technological design
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing social network approaches and analytics
to better understand the social dimensions and community connections fostered by
the STEMport community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how participants'
online and offline interactions with individuals and experiences builds networks
and knowledge within a SCC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the scaling of use by an
ever-growing community of players, STEMports will provide a new AR-based genre
of public participation in STEM and collective decision making. The research
findings will add to the emerging literature on community-wide education,
innovative education technologies, informal STEM learning (especially place-
based learning and STEM ecosystems), and participatory design
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.