* 1831937
* LTER: Environmental drivers and ecological consequences of kelp forest dynamics (SBV IV)
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2024
* Daniel Reed, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 11/30/2024
* USD 5,862,318.00

The goods and services provided by coastal marine ecosystems greatly benefit
society, but their sustainability is uncertain due to increasing threats from
coastal development, pollution, fishing, and changing climate. Long-term
ecological studies of these important ecosystems are necessary for understanding
the consequences of such threats and how to mitigate them. Focusing on key
"foundation species" that create habitat and affect environmental conditions
around them improves our understanding of the ecosystem as a whole. The Santa
Barbara Coastal Long Term Ecological Research program (SBC LTER) demonstrates
the value of long-term studies for understanding foundation species through its
focus on kelp forest ecosystems. The giant kelp Macrocystis pyrifera, the
largest seaweed and one of the fastest growing species in the world, creates
extremely productive ocean forests that harbor hundreds of other species and are
highly valued in coastal temperate regions worldwide. Giant kelp forests are
dynamic, characterized by frequent disturbance from storms, grazing, and other
natural and human-induced phenomena that remove kelp, followed by rapid
regeneration and recovery. This makes kelp forests ideal for investigating the
effects of environmental change and human actions on a myriad of ecological
processes that require centuries to address in other ecosystems, including
forests on land. Understanding the nature of such processes that apply to all
ecosystems is a key element of SBC LTER research. Broader impacts of the project
are enhanced by integrating the research with a diverse array of education and
outreach programs that target K-12 education, teacher professional development,
undergraduate and graduate student training, and stakeholder
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SBC LTER's research builds substantially upon
its prior results to: (1) advance a predictive understanding of how natural
disturbance, climate variation and human actions (i.e., fishing and coastal
development) alter the ecological structure and function of kelp forest
ecosystems, and (2) identify the mechanisms that underlie these processes. Kelp
forests are connected to one another and to the surrounding coastal ocean and
adjacent intertidal beaches via the exchange of living and non-living materials.
Thus predicting the causes and consequences of kelp forest responses to
environmental change requires integrated studies of a wide range of physical,
chemical and biological processes occurring on the seafloor and in the water
column within and outside of the kelp forest to fully capture the dynamics of
material exchange. Integration of these studies is accomplished by research that
is organized spatially in a dynamic setting of changing climate and oceanography
from the scale of a local kelp forest community and the ecological interactions
and ecosystem processes occurring within it to a much larger landscape of
interacting kelp forests and adjacent waters and beaches. Synthesis of the
project's findings across different levels of biological organization and
different spatial and temporal scales is achieved through statistical,
analytical and numerical models that combine long-term ecological and
environmental time-series data with relationships, mechanisms and processes
obtained from shorter-term, but more intensive
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.