* 1831185
* SBIR Phase II: Establishing a Synthetic Niche to Reliably Colonize the Human Gut with Engineered Bacterial Therapeutics
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,11/30/2021
* Weston Whitaker, Novome Biotechnologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 11/30/2021
* USD 1,300,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to advance the use of engineered cell-
based therapeutics in the human gut through the development of technologies for
the reliable and reversible colonization of the gut with therapeutic bacterial
strains. Engineered cellular therapeutics are poised to become the next major
driver of pharmaceutical innovation due to their potential for sophisticated
behavior and modular design. The gut is an ideal entry point for deploying
engineered therapeutic cells, as it serves as our body's natural interface with
foreign genetic material. A key impediment to bacterial drug development for the
gut is the lack of strategies for achieving predictable colonization across the
wide range of gut environments that patients can harbor. Furthermore, tools for
on-demand clearance of therapeutic strains to ensure safety do not currently
exist. The proposed innovation will overcome these challenges and allow the
potential of engineered bacterial cells as therapies to be fully
realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will develop the
technologies necessary to achieve predictable colonization of, and targeted
clearance from, the human gut by engineered bacterial strains. Predictable
colonization will be achieved through the use of a therapeutic strain that has
been modified to consume a privileged prebiotic substrate that can be dosed
alongside the strain to precisely control its abundance by giving it a
competitive advantage. To ensure containment and enable targeted clearance, the
therapeutic strain will be further modified such that it only can grow in
environments where the prebiotic is present. This will allow for the generation
of a robust synthetic niche within the gut that can be manipulated solely
through the administration of this prebiotic control molecule. In addition, to
enable the commercial deployment of these novel technologies, manufacturing
protocols will be developed to ensure that a fully integrated therapeutic strain
can be produced in sufficient quantities and stably
formulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.