* 1831191
* SBIR Phase II: Adaptive Charging Network for EV and Energy Services
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Cheng Jin, PowerFlex Systems
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 08/31/2020
* USD 744,018.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will address two
societal needs. It will enable mass charging infrastructure for electric
vehicles (EVs) at minimal cost, and will enable the provisioning of energy
services to help integrate renewable energy&lt;br/&gt;sources. This is critical
as electricity generation and transportation together consume close to two-
thirds of all US energy and emit more than half of all US greenhouse gases. To
drastically reduce greenhouse gases will therefore require electrification of
our&lt;br/&gt;transportation and renewable generation of our electricity.
California (CA) has a mandate to have 1.5 million zero-emission vehicles by 2025
and, currently, half of the nation's EVs are in CA. If the project is
successful, the proposed technology, when deployed at scale,&lt;br/&gt;can
potentially save CA $144M annually in operating costs and $1.1B in capital cost
when CA reaches its ambitious goal by 2025. This can help reduce greenhouse
gases annually in CA by 5.5 million metric tons. This project will therefore
make an impact in both clean&lt;br/&gt;transportation and clean
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase 2 project will develop an adaptive EV charging system that can implement a
number of innovations that are not currently available in the EV charging
industry. It will offer a site host a solution to recover
costs,&lt;br/&gt;jointly optimize onsite distributed energy resources such as
solar panels and battery banks, minimize operating cost for site host and
charging cost for drivers, and optimally trade off preferences and constraints
of different drivers and of the site host, subject to&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure
capacity constraints. These technologies will be based on unique real-time
sensing, communications, and control capabilities, as well as advanced
optimization and learning algorithms. These technologies will provide a target
charging capacity at minimal infrastructure and operating costs, as well as a
platform for energy services to the grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.