* 1831964
* Excellence in Research: Evaluating the Use of Virtual Mentoring for HBCU Undergraduates in Computer Science
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Tonya Davis, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,208,853.00

Morehouse College and Alabama A&amp;M University proposes a collaborative
research project to explore the use of avatars, formally known as embodied
conversational agents, to provide career mentoring for undergraduate computer
science majors who are considering pursuing a graduate degree in computing. The
study will include participating students from ten different Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). African Americans with terminal degrees in
computer science are scarce, however HBCUs have a strong history of producing
African American students who go on to get advanced degrees in computing.
Research in this field will enable effective mentors in computer science to
scale their best practices to a larger percentage of undergraduate students at
HBCUs. This project will also fund the development of formal collaboration
between Morehouse College and the Online Masters in Computer Science Program at
the Georgia Institute of Technology. This groundbreaking program will allow the
Principal Investigator to serve as the thesis advisor for Masters students at
Georgia Tech while they are trained as researchers at Morehouse
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the barriers faced
by African American students when deciding on pursuing advanced degrees in
computing as well as how intelligent virtual mentors affect their decision. It
will examine what is the most effective way for an embodied conversational agent
to interact with these specific group of students. Once completed, the findings
from this study will be used to expand to other underrepresented groups to
provide career mentoring for an assortment of science careers. Additionally, the
findings from this research will help to build the research capacity at two
HBCUs, Morehouse College and Alabama A&amp;M
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.