* 1831075
* IRES Track III - International Research Engagement for Graduate Level Professional Development: Limnology and Oceanography Research Exchange (LOREX)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Linda Duguay, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,104,122.00

Sea level rise, ocean acidification, sea ice melting, hurricanes and tsunamis,
declining fisheries, eroding coastlines, human derived pollution of aquatic
systems, offshore wind energy and oil and gas activities, these are just a few
of the current threats facing aquatic systems and the populations that depend on
them. These problems are increasingly global in nature and transcend political
boundaries. The only effective way to solve these global challenges is for
scientists to engage in international collaborations to find solutions; however,
doing this is not a trivial task. How can we find and contact collaborators from
foreign countries? Where do we obtain the resources to support international
projects? How can communication with foreign scientist be productive despite
language and culture barriers? Few graduate academic programs provide guidance
or training in conducting international research. The Association for the
Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO) has developed the Limnology and
Oceanography Research Exchange (LOREX) program to address this deficiency. Over
the next 3 years ASLO will offer an international research engagement program
for graduate level professional development in limnology and oceanography. This
program will provide all graduate student society members training in designing
and coordinating international collaborative research through seminars,
workshops and web-based materials. In addition, thirty student members will be
selected each year to apply this knowledge and carry out research projects that
they design in collaboration with scientists from one of several collaborating
limnologic and marine institutes overseas (Australia, Sweden, Israel and Canada)
which represent different aquatic systems and related challenges. Through this
experience ASLO will train future scientists to become productive and engaged
global scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Limnology and Oceanography Research
Exchange (LOREX) is a formal training and professional development program in
international research collaboration in the aquatic sciences offered by the
Association for the Sciences of Limnology and Oceanography (ASLO). The goal of
this program is to catalyze the development of globally engaged U.S. aquatic
scientists by providing a multi-stage, high-quality training and research
program for graduate students. The program supports students in initiating and
carrying out international research from the stage of formulating creative ideas
and research proposals with the international community, networking and
communicating with peers at home and abroad, through the execution of original
collaborative research projects at four international institutes with diverse
expertise in both marine and freshwater sciences. Professional development will
be facilitated through workshops highlighting communication and collaboration
training, webinars addressing various challenges and opportunities in
international collaboration as well as non-academic industries; dedicated
sessions at ASLO conferences featuring student and international collaborator
research; and additional online resources. Each year, up to thirty students will
be selected to participate in the research exchange experience at one of four
international locations (Australia, Sweden, Israel and Canada). This experience
will prepare future scientists to conduct collaborative work, serve to expand
networks, and improve science through collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.