* 1831150
* SBIR Phase II:  Rapid Blood Cleansing Device to Combat Infection
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Sinead Miller, PATH EX
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,294,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be the development of a fluidic platform
for selective bacterial and endotoxin removal from blood. This technology can
potentially serve as a novel blood cleansing therapeutic for diseases such as
sepsis. Sepsis is a life-threatening complication caused by infection. In the
U.S., sepsis afflicts over 1.6 million annually and has an associated mortality
rate ranging from 25-50%. Realization of this fluidic platform technology will
address the broader societal needs of inhibiting sepsis progression and
developing more specific and effective therapeutics for the treatment of human
disease. Commercialization and implementation of the proposed innovation may
reduce the hospital length of stay associated with sepsis, decrease sepsis
morbidity and mortality rates, and potentially reduce the annual U.S.
expenditure for sepsis. Scientific and technological understanding generated by
this work has additional applications for other blood-borne diseases, such as
HIV, leukemia, and Lyme disease. Ultimately, this technology will revolutionize
life science research through inertial-based fluidic platform use, enabling new
discoveries in cell/particle focusing phenomena and interactions that have
profound implications for elucidating inertial focusing mechanisms and for the
development of novel platform technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project proposes a novel approach
to address the problem of sepsis through the direct removal of pathogens and
associated toxins from circulation. Sepsis is the leading cause of death of the
critically ill in the United States, costing over $24 Billion in treatment
annually. The primary treatment for sepsis is system antibiotic administration,
which is failing due to the rise of drug resistance and new, emerging pathogens.
The research objectives of this project will result in an easy to use,
efficient, and cost-effective fluidic platform for separation and removal of
bacteria and associated toxins from circulation. This will facilitate the broad
use of inertial-based fluidic platforms as research tools and for clinical
applications, such as sepsis. The proposed research will 1) optimize fluidic
platform design for clinical application, economical use, and workflow
efficiency, 2) demonstrate efficient fluidic platform-mediated bacteria and
endotoxin capture, and 3) confirm the biological benefits of the fluidic
platform technology using a validated animal model of sepsis. Successful
completion of these studies will demonstrate the positive biological
consequences of direct pathogen and toxin removal from circulation and establish
the commercial viability of the fluidic platform
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.