* 1831294
* SBIR Phase II:  Meaningful Sketching and Meaningful Struggle in STEM Education
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Lelli VanDenEinde, eGrove Education, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 02/28/2021
* USD 961,260.00

This SBIR Phase II project will develop a personalized learning environment for
guiding students in effective use of educational sketching in Science Technology
Engineering and Math (STEM). There is an estimated need for 1 million more STEM
professionals in the U.S. over the next decade. However, the dropout rate for
students in STEM majors ranges from 48% to 69%. Recent reform in mathematics
education in the U.S. has focused on sketching and modeling so that students
have a better understanding of the problems they are solving rather than rote
memorization. Sketching is also important for improving the ability to visualize
three dimensional shapes in engineering, medicine, and science. Teaching
sketching has been shown to increase retention in STEM by over 50% among
students entering college with low spatial visualization skills, especially
among women and other underrepresented minorities. However, the traditional
method of sketching on paper requires teaching expertise and classroom time,
which has limited its use. Our touchscreen software will improve upon sketching
on paper, by providing immediate feedback and intelligent hints when students
are stuck. A key advantage of our approach is that it can reward persistence by
having students retry a sketching assignment until they get it right, as opposed
to multiple-choice questions that can only be tried once. Impact will include
improved conceptual understanding in K-6 mathematics and STEM education at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an intelligent
learning environment where students can freehand sketch on a touchscreen phone,
tablet, or computer. They will receive personalized feedback based on the
sketches they draw to improve their conceptual understanding and promote
persistence. The software algorithms developed will automatically grade student
sketches and provide hints that are just enough to keep the student engaged but
not so much as to give away the solution. An expert teacher knows that
developing skill and increasing persistence requires that students struggle a
bit as they overcome obstacles to learn new concepts. The algorithm for
interpreting student sketches and providing hints will mimic an expert teacher
looking over the shoulder of the student. By interpreting student intent in
their sketches, the algorithm will be able to distinguish between intentional
marks and unintentional ones that are due to poor coordination or sloppiness.
Subject areas include elementary school mathematics, spatial visualization for
7-12th grade technical education, post-secondary vocational and engineering
programs, and eventually physics, geology, medicine and other STEM areas. This
project will replace sketching on paper and pencil with widely available
touchscreens, and make educational sketching more effective and
engaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.