* 1831178
* STTR Phase II: Connected low-power wearable technology that provides personalized thermal comfort in offices
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Matthew Smith, embr labs inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,449,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to make significant contributions to the
future of thermal environmental conditioning in buildings throughout the world.
The connected, low power, wearable personal comfort systems can provide relief
for the thermally-underserved of America's workforce (who are disproportionately
female or part of the aging population), thereby improving their workplace
wellbeing, satisfaction, and productivity. The personal comfort system could
increase worker productivity by 2-3%, unlocking $17B economic output that is
currently lost due to thermal discomfort in the United States, and could reduce
the cost of space heating/cooling buildings by 20-30% when integrated into smart
building systems. As roughly 10% of the world's energy is spent heating and
cooling the interiors of commercial buildings, this technology can make an
impactful contribution to the preservation of our planet and the wellbeing of
future generations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will support the
development and demonstration of a connected, low-power wearable personal
comfort system that provides personalized thermal comfort to building occupants.
Americans spend over 90% of their time indoors, buildings are responsible for
about 40% of our total energy consumption, and yet over 40% of people in office
buildings are dissatisfied with their thermal environments. The proposed project
has the potential to correct this imbalance, improving occupant comfort and
productivity while reducing the energy consumed by buildings. In Phase I, we
demonstrated a connected, wearable personal comfort system that can improve the
perceived environmental temperature by over +/-6 degF using only 1-2 W of power.
In order to harness this enormous technological potential, this Phase II R&amp;D
will address remaining technical challenges around ergonomics and thermal
management, intensively validate the efficacy of the devices in a laboratory
setting, and culminate in deploying this technology in smart buildings and
quantifying the effect on both the building and the building
occupants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.