* 1831918
* SCC: UNITE: Smart, Connected, and Coordinated Maternal Care for Underserved Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Amir Rahmani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,099,382.00

This project presents UNITE (UNderserved communITiEs): a community engagement
model that is smart, deploying ubiquitous monitoring and lifelogging; connected,
bringing together a diverse cast of community members including mothers,
families, care providers, and outreach resources; and coordinated, using
technology to proactively reach out to the community and use personalized
intervention and education for improved self-management by the women. The UNITE
project champions a model that is scalable in size, portable across different
ethnic communities, and promises improved outcomes through better self-
management and community enhanced motivational factors. The UNITE project will
perform a controlled study using a community of underserved Orange County
mothers together with non-profit agencies, hospitals, and local support
organizations to evaluate the efficacy of this new community-enhanced self-
management approach, and its impact on community building. The project will
build larger communities of healthcare providers, insurance providers, and
governmental agencies that can work in concert to enhance the well-being and
lifestyles of mothers and families across a diverse spectrum of socio-
economically disadvantaged groups. The UNITE project will also train the next
generation of healthcare providers to deploy socio-economically relevant
Internet-of-Things (IoT) technology in a cost-effective and user-friendly
manner. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The UNITE project will exploit wearable IoT
devices, lifelogging, context recognition, and health monitoring to build
holistic digital phenotypes of the maternal care community using multi-modal
data capture via two technical thrusts. The first technical thrust will develop
a community-enhanced personalized monitoring and recommendation system. The
system will leverage advanced signal processing and stochastic control
techniques coupled with recent advances in matrix completion and graph signal
processing to close the loop between observations, data processing and model
building. By exploiting the additional dimension provided by the community
surrounding the individual mothers, the project will design smart mining
algorithms for cause assessment through personalized models in the context of
the larger community. The second technical thrust will enable self-management
via a Registered Nurse (RN)-in-the-loop smart monitoring-intervention system
that will continuously monitor maternal-related physiological signs as well as
behavioral information and social lifestyle of mothers using a wearable IoT-
based body area network, offering personalized feedback (e.g., notification,
warning, recommendation) on the mother's physical and mental health status as
well as detailed data for health professionals. The self-management in the
second thrust will be improved and incentivized through the first thrust's
personalized community-enhanced recommendation system, and will result in
technology-enhanced community care coordination and education. Through these
technical thrusts, the UNITE system will exploit ubiquitous monitoring and
develop a recommendation system capable of dynamically supporting a healthy
lifestyle of a mother during pregnancy. The leading design principle is that the
community surrounding the individual mother enhances monitoring and
interventions, enabling more personalized recommendations that motivate better
self-management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.