* 1831039
* SBIR Phase II:  An interactive digital textbook that supports earth science learning
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Kelly Puzio, Squid Books, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2021
* USD 757,342.00

This SBIR Phase I project will produce an innovative reading application and
administrative portal to support science learning. Although the science textbook
is a central curricular resource, this resource is often inaccessible and
difficult to read. Science textbooks are syntactically (grammatically) and
semantically (word meaning) complex. Specifically, elementary and secondary
science texts are often written 3 to 5 years beyond what is developmentally
appropriate. Because of these complexities, science textbooks often overwhelm
students' working memory, preventing them from constructing accurate mental
representations of the target concepts. Thus, this project will develop and test
a multiplatform, personalizable e-reader with embedded reading and language
support. The intellectual merit of the effort resides in its ability to improve
science comprehension through personalized and adaptive content. This project
will produce content and assessments targeting the Next Generation Science
Standards associated with Earth and Space Science. The customizable features
will make fundamental science knowledge more accessible and interesting to
students -- and thus the Public. Given these benefits, it has strong potential
to support future generations of STEM professionals and a more scientifically
literate citizenry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce a
multiplatform reading application to support science learning. The key
innovation will be to make science content adaptable and adjustable for
learners. This Phase II project has five technical goals: (a) develop and test
the e-reader to work via tablet and mobile web; (b) develop and test enhanced
reading features; (c) develop and test administrative and payment portals; (d)
develop and curate NGSS-aligned content and assessments; (e) conduct user
testing with students and teachers. During Phase II, the project team will
address some technological challenges in bringing this innovation to market. The
key features of the interactive reading application create a potential for
unnecessary memory load. This technological challenge will be overcome by
architecting the program to be highly preprocessed and modular. A second
challenge is providing secure access to multi-tiered users. This technical
challenge will be overcome by architecting the program to allow for secure,
multiple group membership, ensuring data visibility and security. A diverse
SquidBooks team, with expertise in business, software design and engineering,
educational research and measurement, science education, writing, and science
will achieve these goals of this Phase II project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.