* 1831988
* EiR:  Functional Study of the Rapidly Evolving Interferon Complex in Amphibians
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Louise Rollins-Smith, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 878,572.00

Current amphibian decline due to infections is devastating for biodiversity and
ecosystem health. Interferons (IFNs) are key immune genes that are important
mediators of antitumor and antiviral responses. Understanding the function of
amphibian IFNs is fundamental to directly addressing infections that are causing
current amphibian declines. This project seeks to understand the signature role
of amphibian IFNs in IFN evolution and functional diversification in
vertebrates. IFNs originated in jawed fish from the multi-exon progenitors.
Recent research by the principal investigator detected the unexpected emergence
and expansion of intronless IFN genes in amphibians. This discovery revises the
established model of IFN evolution and highlights that amphibians are critical
for studying IFN biology in vertebrates. This project will examine the role of
the intronless IFNs during frog development and protection against viral
infection. Completion of this project will provide a unique and previously
unknown platform to address immune evolution, functional capacity, and
especially amphibian defense against viral infections. This award will promote
collaboration between major research universities and a Historically Black
College and University (HBCU). It will provide research training and strengthen
biology education at the HBCU. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Knowledge regarding the
molecular origin and functional diversification of IFN genes in vertebrates is
fragmentary. In particular, little is known about amphibian IFNs. Previous
studies have discovered only several intron-containing IFN progenitors in
amphibians and have underestimated IFN-mediated immune responses in amphibians
and the actual role of amphibians in IFN evolution. As a key node in immune
evolution, functional understanding of amphibian IFN complex and its reaction to
pathogenic infections is fundamental to the study of immunobiology in
vertebrates. Using laboratory Xenopus models, the proposed research will (1)
comparatively profile the expression of intron-containing and intronless IFN
subgroups during frog development and infection, (2) determine the functional
capacity and evolutionary superiority of newly evolved intronless IFNs against
the viral infection, (3) determine the dependence of amphibian IFN ligands on
canonical IFN signaling pathways to induce effector genes and induce antiviral
activity. These complimentary contributions will functionally characterize the
IFN complex in amphibians, and ultimately fill a knowledge gap in IFN evolution.
In addition, the proposed research will integrate collaborative efforts of the
PI/Co-PIs at Tennessee State University (TSU), Vanderbilt University, and the
University of Rochester to accomplish the objectives. It will train HBCU
research personnel at two prominent research institutes and enhance research
excellence and broaden STEM education at the minority-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.