* 1831018
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE VR 2018 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Aleshia Hayes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/28/2019
* USD 29,506.00

This is funding to support participation by approximately 10 promising graduate
students from educational institutions in the United States, along with about 7
senior members of the academic and industrial research communities as mentors,
in a Doctoral Consortium (DC) workshop to be held in conjunction with the IEEE
Virtual Reality (VR) 2018 conference that will take place March 18-22 in
Reutlingen, Germany, in cooperation with the German Association for Electrical,
Electronic and Information Technologies (VDE), and which is collocated since
2006 with the IEEE Symposium on 3D User Interfaces (3DUI). Virtual reality is a
multidisciplinary field involving human-centered computer simulations that seek
to imitate or augment real world senses (usually sight, sound, and touch) and
experiences. VR research includes the development and assessment of methods and
systems, and facilitating and understanding user perceptions, beliefs, and
behaviors. First organized by the IEEE Computer Society in 1993 and held
annually since 1995, IEEE Virtual Reality is the premier international
conference and exhibition in this field and includes technical paper
presentations, workshops, tutorials, research demonstrations, and exhibits from
industry. More information about the conference may be found online at
http://www.ieeevr.org/2018. The goal of the Doctoral Consortium is to provide a
unique venue for interactive, supportive, and prestigious mentoring for mid-
level graduate students in virtual reality, to afford these students a valuable
opportunity to get independent perspectives on their research from senior
individuals with a wide collective breadth and depth of knowledge, and to build
a cohort of young researchers within the VR community. Due to this year's timing
constraints, the 18 DC student participants (including 10 from US educational
institutions and 8 from non-US institutions) have already been selected. Special
efforts were made to recruit participants from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the field of computer science, including women, persons of
color, and people with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This year's IEEE VR
Doctoral Consortium builds on the successful format of the previous such events,
which were also supported by NSF. The main activities of the DC will take place
on Sunday, March 18, in parallel with the first day of IEEE 3DUI. The workshop
will include morning and afternoon sessions in which each student presents
his/her work to the other student participants and a panel of senior VR
researchers, with sufficient time set aside after each talk for discussion and
constructive feedback that addresses the strengths of the work, challenges and
issues that may arise, and implications of the results. A group working lunch
attended by all the students and mentors will be particularly valuable for
unifying the individual goals and projects presented within the group as part of
a "big picture" envisioning of the future of the field over the next 10-20
years. The VR conference will begin the evening of Monday, March 19, with a
welcome reception, where DC participants will network with what they have
learned during the full day event. DC attendees will also take part in a poster
session, which will give them more opportunities to network and discuss their
research. Additional smaller activities, including a lunch with key leaders in
the VR research community, will take place at scattered times over the rest of
the week; in particular, small groups of 2-3 students will meet for mentoring
lunches and/or other networking events with senior members of the VR community.
The conference organizers will generously provide as much financial support as
possible to the DC through the conference's budget, including meeting space,
audio-visual rental, and food and beverage during breaks for
free.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.