* 1831087
* SBIR Phase II:  Liquefied Gas Electrolytes for High Energy Density Energy Storage Devices
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Cyrus Rustomji, South 8 Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,447,890.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project is focused on
the development of a lithium metal battery using a novel Liquefied Gas
Electrolyte. While there is an intense global effort to advance electrolyte
chemistry for next-generation lithium batteries, these efforts focus almost
entirely on liquid and solid-state electrolytes. In contrast, this project aims
to further develop the use of a novel class of electrolytes which use solvents
that are typically gaseous at room temperature and liquefied under moderate
pressures. Phase I work demonstrated world-record cycling lithium metal with an
average plating/stripping coulombic efficiency of &gt;99.5% over 400 cycles with
(0.5 mA/cm2 and 0.5 mAh/cm2 each cycle) with smooth and highly dense lithium
deposition as observed through cryogenic focused-ion-beam characterization.
Further, a world-record low temperature electrolytic conductivity of 3 mS/cm at
-80 ?C for lithium-based electrolytes was obtained, far exceeding the state-of-
art. Lastly, a reversible high temperature shut-down at +40 ?C, due to a
decrease in electrolyte conductivity from salt precipitation, was demonstrated.
This high temperature shut-down essentially eliminates thermal runaway reaction
from occurring, making for a significantly safer
battery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further development of these electrolytes through
this NSF Phase II grant will enable further work to increase battery specific
energy to 450 Wh/kg, expand operating temperatures from -60 to +60 ?C, and
increased safety with no thermal runaway while maintaining power and cycle life
comparable to conventional Li-ion. This will be accomplished with further
development of the electrolyte chemistry to improve lithium metal coulombic
efficiency to &gt;99.8% over 1000 cycles, increase the high temperature shut-
down to +60~70 ?C, increasing cathode performance to higher voltages and cycle
life, and the development of a high throughput R&amp;D line which will offer
high precision addition of electrolyte components to fine tune the chemistry.
Because the electrolyte chemistry may use several common materials and
manufacturing methods, there should be low cost barrier to entry and it is
expected there will be significant cost reduction in volume production down to
the goal of $100/kWh. The developed technology will be especially well suited
for low temperature applications such as high-atmosphere, defense, and aerospace
which frequently endure extreme temperatures and require high specific energy.
Because of the superior performance at low temperatures compared to the
incumbent, South 8 Technologies will first focus on developing the technology in
these areas. As the technology matures, an eventual move into grid storage and
transportation markets will follow, leading to a substantial decrease in
emissions and reliance on imported fuels. The underlying fundamental chemistry
with these new materials is a relatively new field and may potentially lead to
significant advances in next-generation energy storage devices and broader
technologies, leading to new industries, job growth and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.