* 1831615
* RIDIR: Scalable Geospatial Analytics for Social Science Research
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Sergio Rey, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project develops a new body of spatial analytic methods for data intensive
research in the social and behavioral sciences. Through an interdisciplinary
team of geographic information scientists, public policy scholars, and computer
scientists, this project provides researchers with the next generation of
scalable, high performance spatial analytical techniques. The research targets
existing challenges that have hindered the more extensive and intensive
utilization of geospatial data from the US Census, American Community Survey,
and social media through a combination of new computational algorithms for
regionalization, new approaches to computational inference, and use of scalable
spatial and spatiotemporal data management techniques. Research advances from
this project will be integrated into new courses in data science, computer
science, and public policy. Project results and materials will be disseminated
in several ways including open source spatial analysis software repositories,
tutorials and workshops for social scientists, and publications in scientific
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's goals are to enhance the open source
spatial analysis library PySAL in four main directions. The first innovation
concerns new methods for the treatment of uncertainty in the American Community
Survey data. Second, a new framework for statistical inference in the space-time
analysis of segregation will be developed. Third, scalable algorithms for
regionalization and spatially explicit aggregation of areal units will be
produced. Finally, the project will develop a new scalable spatio-temporal data
management layer to support the application of these three sets of analytics to
large datasets. The software developed here will be included in enhanced (and
new) modules in PySAL. This will afford the development of new types of
applications using different interfaces from plug-ins for desktop GIS, both open
source and proprietary, to the development of software as service systems and
the ability of installations where on-premise requirements are binding (Census
Research Data Centers). This portfolio of use cases will support a wide range of
scientific disciplines and will provide direct benefits to society through new
geospatial tools that will improve the state of the art in urban planning,
economic development, and spatial public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.