* 1831949
* STTR Phase II:  Novel Analysis Tools for Production of Higher Indican Yielding Plants for Bio-based Indigo
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Noah Fahlgren, Stony Creek Colors, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,449,999.00

This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II project will develop a
new tool for the analysis of in situ indican precursor in indigo plants, which
when combined with genomic analysis and genetic linkage mapping in selectively
bred indigo crops, will lead to high indican yielding breeding parental lines
and ultimately competitively price natural indigo dye. Additionally,
characterization of genetic markers will accelerate further crop improvement by
understanding and harnessing the genes crucial to indican synthesis and other
aspects of significance to overall indigo yield. These advancements will benefit
customers, denim mills, by leading to a more reliable, lower cost plant-derived
indigo supply. The success of this multiphase STTR project will enable a cost-
competitive, cleaner, and more sustainable denim dyeing process, while greatly
expanding the market for domestically produced natural indigo. Commercialization
of a more consistent and higher yielding US-grown indigo plant that produces
high purity indigo powder can replace the current standard of synthetic,
imported indigo powder. While in demand by the marketplace today, plant-derived
indigo is currently only used in premium denim products due to the high cost per
pound resulting from low yields per plant per acre. The direct result of this
research will be to open new market segments and expand existing market
penetration for US-grown and manufactured biobased indigo for the textile
industry, an addressable market of $1.86B. The methods and technology developed
through this project have a direct path to the commercial marketplace and the
industry is ready to support biobased textile dyes such as plant-derived
indigo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this project, reference genome resources
will be constructed for indigo feedstock crops, F1 mapping populations will be
constructed for P. tinctoria, I. tinctoria, and I. suffruticosa varieties, and
design of the handheld rapid assay device will be validated through laboratory
analysis. The reference genome for I. suffruticosa will be built using Pacific
Biosciences SMRT sequencing and assembly. In addition to this reference genome,
whole-genome resequencing will be performed on available I. suffruticosa and I.
tinctoria varieties. Nucleotide variation and variant effect prediction will be
made between the Indigofera-based indigo varieties. This variation will be used
to develop markers to evaluate intervarietal crosses. Controlled greenhouse
crosses of three species will be made to create F1 mapping populations for use
in constructing a genetic map and linkage mapping, in combination with the
resources developed. Intraspecies varieties exhibiting distinct phenotypic
traits of commercial interest or notable dye yield differences will be selected
for crossing to generate the F1 populations. Results from laboratory-based
fluorometry equipment will be evaluated for efficacy and then compared against
extractive indigo dye analysis from the leaf biomass. A final prototype will be
constructed based on these findings and validated through use in the laboratory
and in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.