* 1831958
* Excellence in Research: Genome Evolution of Amoebozoa: Resolving the deep phylogeny of Amoebozoa through genomic and proteomic features.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Yonas Tekle, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 07/31/2023
* USD 595,500.00

Microscopic organisms have played an instrumental role in our understanding of
many cellular processes. They constitute the majority of all living organisms,
yet little is known about their diversity, behavior and genomics. This project
focuses on amoeboid organisms belonging to the supergroup Amoebozoa. They exist
in diverse natural habitats including marine, freshwater, and soil environments,
and as symbionts or parasites affecting livestock and humans. Amoebozoans have
long been considered simple and primitive, but recent studies have shown that
they are more complex than previously thought. Despite their evolutionary and
ecological significance, the biodiversity and evolution of Amoebozoans is not
well understood. This project uses a combination of methods including whole
genome analysis and advanced microscopy to resolve their phylogeny (how they are
related to each other). The project will also examine key evolutionary features
such as genome size and complexity as well as mechanisms of amoeboid movement.
Knowledge of amoeboid movement has broad implications beyond Amoebozoans. It
will give insights into groups that employ similar locomotive mechanisms, such
as mammalian cells including macrophages and cancer cells. This project will
also provide interdisciplinary training for women of African American origin and
a postdoctoral fellow in advanced microscopy, genomics, proteomics,
phylogenomics and microbial diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
molecular studies made significant progress in our understanding of Amoebozoan
diversity and evolution. However, the deep relationships among Amoebozoan
subgroups are largely unresolved and some key lineages remain unplaced in the
tree of Amoebozoa. The supergroup Amoebozoa is an old lineage, estimated to have
evolved from a common ancestor over a billion years ago. Resolving ancient
relationships is a difficult endeavor due to limited data and other historic and
algorithmic challenges. This project will use a combination of approaches
including cellular proteomic and whole genome sequencing to resolve the tree of
Amoebozoa. Genome sequencing will provide not only large amounts of genetic data
helpful for resolving the tree of Amoebozoa but also additional genomic
architectural data that can be used to study the evolution of the group. Given
that Amoebozoa holds a key evolutionary position in the tree of life, resolving
the tree of Amoebozoa will elucidate many fundamental evolutionary questions
including the origin and evolution of life cycles, multicellularity, host-
parasite interactions, amoeboid movement, and horizontal gene transfer (HGT)
across domains. In addition to this, study of Amoebozoan genomes and their
complexity will give insights on how genome size impacts behavior and adaptation
to various ecological niches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.