* 1831406
* A combined theory-experiment study of electronic, magnetic and thermal properties of complex oxide nano-structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Robert Klie, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 645,212.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Transition metal ceramics exhibit a wide range of
properties and functionalities, making them the ideal materials for many next
generation electronic devices and sensors. However, the response of many
transition metal ceramics to external stimuli, such as heat or electro-magnetic
fields remains unknown. This is especially true when the size of device
structures is approaching the nanometer scale and the response of the material
differs from that observed in the bulk. In this project, a novel approach is
explored for measuring, at the nanometer scale, the response of transition metal
ceramics to changes in temperature or applied electric or magnetic fields. The
combined experimental/theoretical approach is then used to quantify and control
the magnetic, electronic and thermal transport properties at interfaces in
nanoscale transition metal ceramic materials. The project's research activities
center around education and training of science and engineering undergraduate
and graduate students. Recruitment and training focuses on the next generation
of researchers, in particular involving students from underrepresented groups
and minorities through the National Name Exchange program and partnership with
local high schools. The participation of undergraduate students in active
research projects is fostered through the PI's Journal of Undergraduate Research
at the University of Illinois at Chicago. Graduates typically find employment in
academia, National Laboratories or industry, including semiconductor companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The objectives of this research project
are to develop a fundamental understanding of the atomic-scale mechanisms that
govern the electronic, magnetic and thermal properties of transition metal
perovskite oxide hetero-structures. Two transition ceramic systems are studied,
one exhibiting novel magnetic and transport properties below a specific film
thickness and the other showing ferroelectric properties and the potential
existence of a 2-dimensional electron gas. A combination of in-situ scanning
transmission electron microscopy and first-principles density functional theory
(DFT) calculations is used together with thin-film and nano-particle synthesis.
The project consists of two tasks: 1) Utilizing a novel approach towards
measuring the thermal expansion coefficient with nanometer resolution and
exploring whether this approach can be utilized to quantify the thermal
expansion and transport across substrate/film interfaces. This approach is based
on measuring the plasmon peak shift as a function of temperature combined with
ab-initio modeling of the materials' dielectric response. 2) Understanding the
magnetic and electric transport properties of perovskite oxide thin films. The
transport anomalies in ultra-thin cobalt-oxide epitaxial films are examined and
compared to films grown on different substrates. The effects of interfacial
charges on the electronic structure and ferroelectric polarization of Ti-oxides
on compound semiconductor substrates are examined. The integration of research
and education through the training of undergraduate and graduate students in
state-of-the-art in-situ scanning transmission electron microscopy and
theoretical materials physics is an integral feature of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.