* 1831184
* SBIR Phase II: Stateless - Taking from the Lab to a Production Environment
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Murad Kablan, Stateless, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,449,777.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project results from the fact that it builds on the
trend to make IT infrastructure consumable as a service and unlocks this
potential for network functions. In deploying the Stateless Network Functions as
a Service solution, cloud providers, enterprises, and internet service providers
are able to launch network functions, such as firewalls and load balancers, on
demand, and the Stateless platform automates the management of these functions.
With cloud traffic expected to quadruple over the next several years (according
to Cisco), a rapid growth in number of devices (with the Internet of Things
emerging), and an ever-increasing complexity and scale of security threats, this
project will provide operators with the agility to quickly and easily deploy
infrastructure to keep up with these trends and threats. In doing so, society
will experience more reliable networked applications with reduced data
breaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project provides the research and development needed to realize the
vision of a network function operating system. Whereas the Phase I project
established technical feasibility by demonstrating the technology that decouples
network functions state from processing can be turned into a product and
integrated into a production environment, the Phase II project will approach
three new research directions that will support a complete platform. (i) Network
service chaining: While not a new concept, it is one that has proven to be
challenging with virtual appliances. This project will add support to the
Stateless platform to connect network functions into chains, elastically scale
chains, and provide quality of service of the whole chain. (ii) Observability:
This project will introduce the ability to abstract away the details when
appropriate or peel away the layers of abstraction as needed, providing
operators with a simple solution they have full control over. (iii) Software
development kit: This project will introduce both the application programming
interfaces as well as the isolation mechanisms to allow third parties, whether
other vendors or data center operators, to introduce new network functionality
based on the Stateless platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.