* 1831755
* SCC: Smart and Connected Churches for Promoting Health in Disadvantaged Populations
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Timothy Bickmore, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,092,670.00

This project brings together researchers from several disciplines with community
partners to develop a range of novel sensing, monitoring, and messaging
technologies to create a Virtual Safety Net (VSN) system for community members
in an underserved urban community. In this effort, researchers will collaborate
with members of the Black Ministerial Alliance and Health Ministry leaders of
member churches, along with volunteers who provide health promotion outreach,
the church leadership and a community liaison affiliated with a hospital to
improve the overall health of this predominately African American community. The
VSN is a research infrastructure for development of crowdsourced health
interventions, in which community members author or culturally tailor
intervention rules and messages. The VSN will empower the community to
collectively solve health-relevant problems it identifies as important and
provide preventive and health interventions that leverage support and messaging
delivered individually via smartphone apps or during group meetings. The VSN
will also be used to help the community identify and address social determinants
of health, including food insecurity, homelessness, and health literacy. This
research will have immediate impact for the 20,000 members of the 30 churches in
the Black Ministerial Alliance of Boston. The technologies implemented can be
rapidly disseminated to other church communities, businesses and social
organizations in the US.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SCC project aims to develop
a research infrastructure that will be used to co-design and evaluate
technologies in collaboration with community partners. The project will leverage
the deep social support networks already existing in the Boston area. Key
technologies developed in this effort include crowdsourced health interventions,
in which community members author or culturally tailor intervention rules and
messages. This will include developing methods to identify the range of
modifications that laypersons can meaningfully make to expert-authored
intervention dialogue and designing user interfaces to enable these
modifications. It also includes advances in artificial intelligence-based
indexing of community-authored narrative text for just-in-time messaging to
motivate change in longitudinal, multi-behavior interventions. Advances in the
automated generation of persuasive arguments for behavior change will also be
developed. Dialogue-based interfaces to generate explainable artificial
intelligence-learned models will be made to enable community members to
understand and potentially modify how these models
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.