* 1831226
* SBIR Phase II:  Genetic improvement of loblolly pine for increased wood density and improved wood quality
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Michael Harrington, Genoverde Biosciences, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 08/31/2021
* USD 954,458.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to engineer loblolly pine to increase wood
density (yield) by 20% with no additional land, water, or fertilizer use
requirements. With global demand for wood products expected to rise 60% by 2060,
managed pine plantations will play a key role in helping to meet this need. By
identifying and studying the genes that control plant development, particularly
as they relate to cellulose (wood) production in the cell wall, the tree's
natural ability to capture and utilize carbon dioxide (CO2) for more wood growth
has been enhanced through genetic engineering. This technology will strengthen
the United States' position as the leading producer and exporter of commercial
wood products, i.e., pulpwood for paper, sawtimber for lumber, and wood pellets
for fuel. Additionally, with advancements in the understanding of the pine
genome, the work proposed here will stimulate the development of novel
innovations in the field of forest genetics while the proposed genetically
engineered seedlings help to address growing industry needs for commercial wood
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project will develop a more
efficient approach to engineering high wood density loblolly pine varieties. In
contrast to traditional breeding, which has seen a modest 6% increase in wood
density improvements over the past 20 years, this work proposes to increase wood
density in pine by 20% through application of a directed, "gene trait" method to
genetically engineer loblolly pine by altering secondary cell wall gene
regulation. The proposed research will utilize a newly improved pine
transformation protocol to scale up prototype production of tree seedlings
designed with patent-pending, cell wall gene platform technologies. Also, this
work establishes a pine engineering pipeline using germplasm adapted to
different selective environments. This will streamline the production process
while allowing for faster testing and development of technologies that improve
growth traits in multiple growing regions. Specifically, plants engineered with
this method will be tested for their long-term wood quality characteristics in
both greenhouse and field trials. The goal of this project is to establish a
commercial scale production program for loblolly pine engineered seedlings, and
prepare for field testing and ultimately commercial sales of the cell wall
platform technologies that have been developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.