* 1831060
* SBIR Phase II:  A Co-creation, Cross-curricular, Standard Aligned Computer Science, Engineering, and Cybersecurity Education Technology Platform
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Rahul Thawal, Codecraft Works, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,347,685.00

This SBIR Phase II project aims to transform the lives and future economic
opportunities of young people and their communities through democratized access
to cross-curricular computer science, engineering, and cybersecurity education.
Daily life, economies, innovation, and national security all depend on having a
strong and skilled STEM workforce. For this workforce to exist, our schools must
provide the necessary education and experience to prepare students for such
careers. Unfortunately, a vast majority of K-12 educators today are not equipped
with the resources to do so successfully. The importance of solving this problem
cannot be overstated; developing a plentitude of competent STEM professionals is
critical to ensure economic and security stability. These project goals are
aligned with NSF?s mission to promote the progress of science; to advance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare; and to secure the national defense.
The resulting technology innovation is of potential service to more than 50
million primary and secondary school students and 3.5 million educators
nationally, with an ability to impact their course of study, improve STEM
outcomes, increase hands-on project-based experience, and improve future
economic opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This technology
innovation emerges at the intersection of cloud-based software technology, real-
time collaboration tools, and learning management systems. This reimagined
technology tool easily connects, attracts, and fosters delivery of cross-
curricular, educational computing literacy resources aligned with national and
state educational standards. The project aims to empower and support educators
and students in tackling the many new opportunities and growing number of
resources in computer science (CS) and engineering education at home, in
classrooms, and in community centers. As the CS education landscape evolves with
new and exciting technical curriculum, this innovation analyzes the willingness
of educators to create or adopt new computer science education, the
effectiveness of real-time collaboration tools on CS education outcomes, and
measures student awareness and feelings about computer science and engineering
disciplines. This technology innovation promotes customer participation and a
unique ability to provide support at the ground level in real-time. There are
solutions that provide massive online CS courses and curricula; however, none
targeting K-12 classrooms or educators which support and integrate cross-
curricular computer science, engineering, and cybersecurity education. Offering
cloud-based, synchronous technology tools this technology enables real-time,
expert mentoring and pair-programming in a K12 virtual learning environment on a
massive scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.