* 1831838
* Dimensions:  The roles of phylogeny, genome content, and functional performance traits in the evolution and assembly of a diverse Methylobacterium community
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jessica Lee, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,777,713.00

Advances in sequencing DNA have led to an unprecedented increase in our
understanding of microbial diversity, yet we lack a clear picture of how
functional traits relate to organismal diversity, or to the gene content found
in their genomes. Because of this, it is not clear how similar in DNA sequence
two organisms need to be for us to call them the same thing. This has important
consequences when making ecological inferences. The researchers have developed a
novel way to rapidly determine which microbes grow well under different
environmental conditions by following the frequency of unique "barcodes" that
have been genetically inserted into a panel of 96 natural isolates of bacteria
that naturally grow on plant leaves. The researchers will also be able to track
how different strains of microbes assemble into communities, which will
illuminate which ones can stably coexist. The work will ultimately shed light on
the phylogenetic conservation of traits, association of those traits to changes
in the genome, and how much these traits influence genetic exchange across
microbes. Outreach to K-12 students will result in a greater appreciation by the
public of microbial genetic and functional
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will focus on the genus
Methylobacterium, a collection of &gt;50 named species well known for use of
plant-derived methanol as one of their growth substrates. This team recently
uncovered that Methylobacterium stimulates growth of soybeans when lanthanides
are present; thus, there is opportunity to connect community diversity with an
important ecosystem function. The team's novel barcoding system will accomplish
two things not possible with traditional 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing:
elimination of PCR bias, and the ability to track dozens of isolates
simultaneously in any mixture, even if they have identical 16S rRNA. This
proposal leverages data to develop a picture of the genus Methylobacterium at
unprecedented depth and efficiency to examine the phylogenetic conservation of
traits, associate traits to changes in genome content, and ask how much these
traits influence genetic exchange across the genus. Ultimately, this can
establish whether an abundant group of strains with identical 16S rRNA sequences
represents a single cloud of successful genomes that are ecologically neutral
with regard to each other, or a panel of ecologically diverse strains that have
evolved distinct traits that permit coexistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.