* 1831090
* SBIR Phase II:  Engineered Nanoporous Ceramic Membranes that Enable High-Performance and Low-Cost Flow Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Gregory Newbloom, Membrion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2020
* USD 1,330,134.00

This SBIR Phase II project seeks to develop a novel low-cost molecular filter
for use in harsh environments. This is accomplished using commodity silica gel,
commonly found as a desiccant in food packing, whose pores can be made to be
only a few molecules wide. Accurate tuning of the size and shape of the silica
gel pores enables certain molecules to pass through while others are blocked
from passing. One promising application for these molecular filters is their use
in grid-scale energy storage. Flow batteries could store city-sized quantities
of renewable energy. However, they require the use of expensive molecular
filters that are not easily replaced due to the harsh battery environments. The
low-cost filters developed during this SBIR Phase II project have the potential
to reduce the cost of flow batteries by as much as 15%, making them less
expensive than grid-scale lithium ion batteries. Lower cost grid-scale storage
means that more renewable energy generation (e.g., solar &amp; wind) can be
added without overwhelming the grid. Low cost molecular filter also has
commercial upside with the potential to capture a significant fraction of the
$2.7 billion-dollar market. Because of this, this project could generate nearly
15 jobs and $39 million dollars in tax revenue over the next 5
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II Project is developing
a molecularly selective sol-gel ceramic membrane that does not require
calcination or high polymer loading but also does not fracture during
compression in stack applications (e.g., fuel cells and flow batteries). This is
accomplished by decoupling the selective region from the region of the membrane
being compressed by the stack. These membranes will be utilized to improve the
performance and reduce the costs of all-vanadium redox flow batteries (VRFB).
VRFB membranes require selective transport of hydronium ions but not vanadium
ions. Size and charge exclusion membranes must therefore have tight control over
the pore size, shape and network structure to selectively transport ions.
Towards this end, sol-gel processing and surface charge modification will be
utilized to maximize proton conductivity and limit vanadium ion permeability.
Optimized membrane formulations must also have excellent chemical and mechanical
stability; showing no degradation after hundreds of VRFB cycles. Finally,
membranes must be scaled from lab size (50 cm2) to commercial size (&gt; 500cm2)
while maintaining performance uniformity. The low-cost membranes developed
during this SBIR Phase I project have the potential to reduce the cost of VRFBs
by as much as 15%. Lower cost grid-scale storage means that more renewable
energy generation (e.g., solar &amp; wind) can be added without overwhelming the
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.