* 1831538
* SBIR Phase II:  Scalable insect farming for agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Virginia Emery, Beta Hatch Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,304,454.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project are foundations for an emerging industry: insects in
agriculture. Beta Hatch is pioneering the production of new animal feed
ingredients, developing technology to mass produce insects, and creating STEM
jobs. The proposed work will allow scaling insects as a sustainable protein-rich
feed ingredient. With predictable year-round production, this will contribute to
a more robust and secure agricultural system. The Beta Hatch insect ranch, which
will be designed through integration of the results from this project, is an on-
site solution to convert organic by- products into valuable feed ingredients and
fertilizer. These ranches are being designed as conversions of underutilized
spaces (warehouses and poultry barns), to bring jobs to rural and HUBZone areas.
We work closely with farmers, our main customers, to establish the performance
and economic value of our products. Insects provide nutrition and make animals
healthier. Our frass (insect manure), is an organic fertilizer that stimulates
healthy soils, and has no nitrates (no runoff). The proposed work will allow us
to establish insects as the world?s most sustainable animal feed ingredient, and
to disrupt the $400B animal feed market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
II project proposes to cost effectively scale insect production for agricultural
markets. Of the millions of insect species that exist, only a handful have been
successfully reared under controlled conditions and even fewer have been mass
produced. And yet insects have the potential to fill essential roles in
agricultural supply chains by biodegrading wastes, removing or recycling toxins,
and providing nutrition for animals. In order to meet the scale, quality and
cost requirements for agricultural markets, significant R&amp;D must solve some
core challenges in insect mass production. We propose to integrate biological
and engineering approaches to develop novel oviposition substrates, identify and
mitigate causes of mortality, design automated and flexible diet handling
systems, optimize rearing trays (the basic unit of production), and maximize
yields with automated water and diet delivery. The proposed work will cut over
80% of our costs, produce several patents, and inform the design of a scalable
insect ranching facility. As a natural part of animal diets, insects are a
predictable protein-rich alternative feed ingredient, with year-round controlled
production. In Phase 1 of this project, we established an insect breeding
program, explored novel inorganic diets, and identified the core production
challenges for scaling insects-as-feed. For this NSF SBIR Phase 2 project, we
develop solutions that will reduce the cost of production and control the cost
of future facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.