* 1831625
* Engaging Faculty and Students in Learning with OOI Data Explorations
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Janice McDonnell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,225,928.00

Using high volumes of data for research and education increases both
opportunities and challenges to analyze and synthesize scientific understanding.
A growing number of research programs collect high volumes of data, especially
oceanography programs where the use of advanced technologies, including cabled
systems, autonomous gliders, and sophisticated buoy sensor systems generate huge
data sets. For example, the National Science Foundation's Ocean Observatories
Initiative (OOI) has constructed observational and computer infrastructure that
provides sustained ocean measurements to study climate variability, ocean
circulation, ecosystem dynamics, air-sea exchange, seafloor processes, and
plate-scale geodynamics for the coming decades. This ocean observing system is
already advancing our ability to understand the natural world by accumulating
large quantities of data to address questions about complex oceanographic
processes. This expanded access to data also provides professors in the
geosciences with unprecedented opportunities to engage undergraduate students in
data experiences using real-world data sets, models, and simulations of
geoscience processes using web-based technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning directly from data has been shown to be
advantageous as it challenges learners to construct meaning and develop a deeper
understanding of a topic or phenomenon, encourages student inquiry, and develops
skills with the practices of science. Using real world data has also been shown
to help develop interest in, motivation for, and identity with respect to
science. Moreover, analyzing data and identifying patterns have become core
workforce skills in the workplace and for civic engagement in the 21st century.
The OOI offers an opportunity to bring professionally collected, real-time and
near-real-time data, images, and video of the Earth's oceans into both formal
and informal learning environments. This project builds on prior efforts to
create cyberinfrastructure that helps make OOI data available to educators. In
order to correctly focus development of educational tools, two front-end
evaluation studies on the practices and teaching needs of the oceanographic
community were conducted. While 73% of undergraduate professors said they use
data in their classroom, only a small subset use real-time data with their
students. Most importantly, it was determined that there is a need for further
exploration into how to effectively integrate data into teaching and how to
create data visualization tools that help undergraduate professors meet the
demands of teaching 21st century science skills and practices. In order to meet
the challenges posed by teaching with authentic data and to encourage the use of
OOI data in undergraduate classrooms, this project will design and implement
professional development workshops and a mini grant program to expand the use of
OOI data in undergraduate teaching.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project further
develops, scales up, and implements ways to improve undergraduate student
engagement in the geosciences through classroom experiences focused on analyzing
oceanographic data. The PIs will engage approximately 150 faculty in workshops
focused on teaching with OOI data and data visualizations. Faculty from
community colleges, Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs), Minority-
Serving Institutions (MSIs), Historically Black Colleges &amp; Universities will
be recruited, as well as faculty from research laboratories, larger research
universities, and a team of pedagogical experts. The goal of this project is to
expand the community of professors effectively utilizing OOI data in their
classrooms, eventually creating an OOI focused Community of Practice for
teaching with data. The project will support a variety of activities and
workshops that will increase the involvement of faculty members from a wide
range of institutions in the OOI user community. The faculty will be able to use
OOI data products to engage students in oceanography via online data activities
and improve the training of undergraduate students in data interpretation and
analysis. Data explorations will be developed by collaborating undergraduate
professors and made available for all educators to use. The project will assess
and evaluate the effectiveness of various methods for introducing data into the
classroom and for training faculty members in the new
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses NSF priorities as stated in
the NSF Strategic Plan for 2018-2022, "Strategic Objective 2.2 - STEM Workforce:
Foster the growth of a more capable and diverse research workforce and advance
the scientific and innovation skills of the Nation."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.