* 1831013
* HBCU-Excellence in Research: Radiative Effects of Biomass Burning Aerosols Laboratory and Field Measurements and Modeling of Climate and Health Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Vernon Morris, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,092,085.00

This project aims to improve understanding of the emissions of biomass burning
and how this impacts air quality and climate. The work will focus on burning of
fuels under a range of relative humidities. Further experiments will probe the
light-absorbing properties of particles in these emissions and how those
properties change when particles come in contact with mineral dust or when they
undergo reactions as they age in the atmosphere. Finally, the research will
investigate the impact that these particles have on cloud formation. All of this
information will be useful for improving the ability to model the composition of
the atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also enhance the
atmospheric chemistry and physics research and training capacity at two
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), North Carolina A&amp;T
State University (NCAT) and Howard University (HU) - two of only four HBCUs with
a program in Atmospheric Sciences - by developing sustainable research
collaborations with Colorado State University (CSU), a leading institution in
Atmospheric Science. The specific research activities focus on understanding
radiative properties of biomass burning aerosols and modeling their impacts on
climate and health through involvement in laboratory and field campaigns. This
effort will strengthen connections with multiple universities, national
laboratories, and private companies while providing opportunities for a new
generation of scientists to build cross-cultural relationships. The activities
will enable underrepresented minorities to participate in large field
measurement activities, to attend classes at a leading atmospheric science
institution (CSU), and to work on aircraft based measurement
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of the project are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1. study the role of relative humidity in determining the optical
properties of aerosols produced from biomass burning, &lt;br/&gt;2. determine
whether the mineral dust or biomass burning components influence the optical
properties of internally mixed particles more,&lt;br/&gt;3. investigate the
potential importance of particulate emissions from biomass burning,&lt;br/&gt;4.
quantify radiative and health impacts of biomass burning aerosols using the
GEOS-Chem chemical transport model, and &lt;br/&gt;5. provide students the
opportunity to participate in preparation for and analysis of data from biomass
burning field campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to training several
graduate students, this project will increase the research capacity at both NCAT
and HU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.