* 1831168
* SBIR Phase II: A Spectroscopic THz Sensor for Mixed Gas Analysis and Air Pollution Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Joseph Demers, Bakman Technologies LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 05/31/2021
* USD 930,019.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to create an economical,
light&amp;#8208;weight, high performance Terahertz (THz) spectrometer to allow
testing of air and fossil fuels for the presence of harmful compounds. A
frequency domain THz spectrometer is capable of characterizing the different
molecules and chemicals in a gas sample. Historically these spectrometers have
been relegated to the laboratory because of their size and complexity but recent
technical advancements have made it possible to build a spectroscopic THz sensor
small enough and light enough to be flown on a consumer drone. The reductions in
size and cost have opened the door to using THz sensors for emissions testing of
ships entering U.S. waters or contaminant testing of fossil fuels at petroleum
processing facilities. This is significant because the ability to analyze
samples locally removes the time and expense of collecting and shipping
potentially dangerous compounds (i.e. flammable compounds or pollutants) to a
laboratory for analysis. It also allows detection and classification to occur on
short notice and without the need to subject personnel to the local environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will produce the first article of a
compact, battery operated, autonomously operating spectroscopic THz sensor
capable of mixed gas analysis to parts per million sensitivities. It will be
constructed predominantly from economical off&amp;#8208;the&amp;#8208;shelf
fiber optic components in a novel highly compact, light&amp;#8208;weight form
factor. In order to achieve the high sensitivities, the spectroscopic THz sensor
will incorporate: high fidelity lasers from the telecommunications industry,
custom designed and fabricated high efficiency, hermetically sealed photomixers,
a folded, light&amp;#8208;weight, carbon fiber sample cell incorporating
patented 3D printed mirror technology and a patented optical
phase&amp;#8208;modulation technique that removes the effects of coherent
detection. The instrument will first be employed for laboratory based
measurements of sulfur-containing contaminants in gas flows. Upon the successful
demonstration of the capabilities of the instrument, a first article will be
used in initial testing and collaborative field work. Sales of a larger
laboratory instrument based on the same technology will begin
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.