* 1831164
* Dimensions: The causes and consequences of leaf trait evolution for hidden life on the phyllosphere: Phylogeny, function, and the genome
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Marjorie Weber, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,127,067.00

Plant enemies, such as herbivores that eat leaves, or diseases that invade and
destroy plant tissue, are repelled by a suite of leaf traits that have evolved
for plant defense. One of the most well-established forms of natural plant
defenses are traits that recruit animals to defend the plant against its enemies
in return for food and/or shelter. These reward traits can substantially reduce
plant damage, but the benefits they confer can vary over different conditions,
and some plant species have even evolved to lose reward-traits over time. This
research focuses on understanding the dynamics of reward trait evolution using
mite domatia (small structures on plant leaves that house beneficial mites). In
the right context, mites housed in domatia protect the plant by cleaning the
leaf surface of microbial pathogens and small herbivores. Mite domatia appear in
~24% the world's flowering plant families, and are found in many economically
important groups, including coffee, cherries, and grapes. Grapes (genus Vitis),
are especially interesting, as some species have mite-containing domatia that
defend the leaves, while other species, including many of the most economically
important grape species, do not. This research leverages the natural variation
in domatia seen in wild grape species to understand how plant traits affect leaf
communities. The genetic and environmental contexts in which plants successfully
use beneficial mite populations to naturally defend themselves against pathogens
and herbivores will be identified. The research will lead to a better understand
of the interactions among grapes, their herbivores, beneficial arthropods, and
the leaf microbiome. Data will be disseminated freely to the public and will
have the potential to enhance grape agriculture and breeding, and potentially
other important crop species. The project will also train a post-doctoral
researcher and graduate student in diverse field and laboratory methods and
analyses, and develop tools to better integrate research products in
undergraduate biology classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine
how leaf micro-structure impacts multi-trophic phyllosphere communities within
and across Vitis species, and will investigate how phyllosphere dynamics can
feedback to impact plant fitness. The presence/absence of domatia and related
leaf-trait variation will be linked to abiotic conditions, genetic variation,
consequences for leaf microbial and arthropod communities, and plant fitness.
The investigators will integrate phylogenetic comparative modeling, niche and
range reconstruction, comparative genomics, and large-scale field experiments to
understand the historical, ecological, and genetic causes and consequences of
leaf domatia trait variation in the diversification of Vitis
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.