* 1831484
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Perception of Social Mobility and Attitudes Related to Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Michael Hout, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 05/31/2019
* USD 11,507.00

This project examines how individual perceptions of social mobility affect
attitudes toward inequality and resource redistribution. Survey data have shown
that compared to individuals in other countries, Americans display higher
tolerance toward outcome inequality and more aversion to redistributive
policies. One influential explanation for this phenomenon is that Americans tend
to believe they have been living in a mobile society in which individual success
is only modestly determined by family background. However, considerable research
shows that such perceptions of social mobility are not aligned with reality.
This project will test whether correcting misperceptions of social mobility can
alter attitudes toward inequality and redistribution. By receiving accurate
information about social mobility in the United States, individuals who turn out
to have overestimated (underestimated) mobility will become less (more) tolerant
of economic inequality and demand more (less) redistribution. Findings of this
project will contribute to our understanding about social mobility and
inequality by highlighting the importance of individual subjective perceptions,
and provide input into social policies regarding redistribution.

The project will test hypotheses using an online survey experiment. Recruited
subjects will first answer a series of survey questions regarding their
perceptions of social mobility in the United States relative to some other
developed countries. Subjects in the treatment group, but not in the control
group, will immediately receive correct answers to these questions. All
subjects, regardless of treatment status, will be asked to report their
attitudes toward inequality and redistribution. Hypotheses suggest there will be
attitudinal shifts when individual misperceptions are corrected. Six hundred
subjects will be recruited via Amazon Mechanical Turk. Another 1,000 subjects
will be recruited via a Qualtrics Online Sample, which will resurvey
participants after one week of the initial contact to evaluate if the treatment
effects persist. This research design allows causal inferences because the
experiment randomly assigns subjects to conditions, which improves upon prior
studies on similar topics using correlational designs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.