* 1831078
* SBIR Phase II:  Electrolytic Generation of Low-Cost, High-Density Carbon Nanotubes for High-Performance Lithium-Ion Batteries
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Benjamin Rush, Saratoga Energy Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,058,951.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is multilayered. First, there is the potential for
creation of a carbon nanotubes manufacturing industry in the United States that
will create hundreds of high-paying domestic manufacturing jobs advance U.S.
leadership and knowledge in industrial electrochemistry. Secondly, Saratoga
Energy's technology has the potential to benefit the United States economy by
increasing the cost-competitiveness and performance of lithium-ion batteries,
paving the way to the broader adoption of electric vehicles and grid/renewable
energy storage. In turn, this will help reduce the strategic importance of oil,
the cost of securing global oil supplies, as well as greenhouse gas emission.
While lithium-ion batteries are the focus of this body of work, carbon nanotubes
(CNTs) are also used in a variety of other applications - advanced composite
materials, nanotechnology, catalyst supports, water filtration, and other areas
of commercial impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes
to 1) electrochemically characterize carbon nanotubes as a cathode conductive
additive for high-performance lithium-ion battery applications and 2) construct
a small pilot-scale carbon nanotube manufacturing unit capable of producing 1 kg
of product per day for retail distribution. Saratoga Energy Research Partners,
LLC (Saratoga Energy), has developed a high-selectivity electrochemical process
to convert carbon dioxide into carbon nanotubes. In the work conducted thus far,
Saratoga Energy has established that its carbon nanotubes can be manufactured at
a cost ~50X cheaper than the market price for state-of-the-art battery-grade
carbon nanotubes. Battery manufacturers use carbon nanotubes to enable the
reduction of conductive additive content in the cathode, thus improving specific
and volumetric energy density. Carbon nanotubes also act as a reinforcing agent
in the electrodes improving their mechanical properties. This is important for
the battery assembly process but also for battery life performance, as the
carbon nanotube network maintains a high level of cohesion of the electrodes
upon repeated charge-discharge cycles. However, today, the high price of
commercial carbon nanotubes limits their use, which will be addressed by our
lower cost CNTs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.