* 1831273
* SBIR Phase II:  Zulip threaded group chat
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,09/30/2021
* Timothy Abbott, KANDRA LABS INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2021
* USD 750,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will result from group chat technology that
enables knowledge workers to collaborate more effectively than ever before. It
is the first tool built that empowers users to efficiently carry out both real-
time and asynchronous conversations in the same system, with each user reading
only those conversations that are important to him or her. In particular, the
technology empowers teams to make decisions in virtual meetings that take place
asynchronously over periods of hours or days. This is in contrast with existing
group chat technology, where conversations usually end as soon as someone starts
talking about something else. This ability to conduct long running, virtual
meetings is invaluable for large teams that need to coordinate work across
different locations and time zones. Large, distributed teams are fast becoming
the norm for how organizations operate, as instant communication and
globalization make such teams the workforce of the future. Coordinating the
efforts of such teams is a huge pain point for companies, and this technology is
a leap in the state of the art in this space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project has three major research
objectives: scaling the technology to teams of 10,000+ people; faithfully
translating the user experience to mobile devices; and developing techniques for
serving the needs of diverse deployments large and small. For scalability, one
major area is "presence", telling each user who else is currently online.
Presence data naturally grows with the number of pairs of users, therefore much
faster than the number of users, and the company will need to develop algorithms
to focus presence on significant connections between users. Among the unique
challenges on mobile, the often-limited Internet connectivity demands algorithms
that remember data previously fetched from the server to avoid asking for it
again, carefully balanced with getting needed updates to never show out-of-date
information to the user; the immediacy required for a great chat experience
makes both horns of this dilemma especially sharp. Serving diverse deployments
demands techniques for making software updates routine and seamless, a practice
recently popularized in browsers and mobile apps but rarely accomplished to date
in distributing server applications such as that described
here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.