* 1831730
* Dimensions:  Ordering the microbial world into natural genetic, ecological, and functional units
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Mark Kirkpatrick, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,994,027.00

The vast majority of our planet's biological diversity is microbial, and this
diversity is being discovered at unprecedented rates due to advances in DNA
sequencing technologies. Understanding the roles of these organisms, however,
has been greatly hindered by our ignorance of the extent of microbial diversity,
how it is generated, maintained, and shaped by evolution, and how it functions
in the Earth's ecosystems. Understanding these aspects of the microbial world
are fundamental to several questions critical to society, such as "Are emerging
diseases new species, or variants of existing ones?", and "How will microbial
populations respond to changing climates?". This project has the ambitious goals
of developing methods that will for the first time allow all microbial species
to be classified in a biologically meaningful way, and it will reveal the
factors that give rise to new species. The research is a collaboration between
four laboratories that have complementary scientific strengths in microbial
biology, genome analysis, evolutionary genetics, and statistics. In addition to
advancing scientists' fundamental understanding of microbes, the project will
provide an important platform for training undergraduates, graduate students,
and the postdoctoral scholars that will soon become independent scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program itself involves three major aims.
The first major aim is to identify bacterial species under the framework
provided by the Biological Species Concept (BSC), which defines species as
genetically and reproductively isolated units. Applying this framework will
unify the phylogenetic organization of bacteria with that of eukaryotes, and
allow the researchers to determine the functional and ecological differences
among species, and to quantify the rates and amounts of genetic exchange between
them. The second major aim is to distinguish "ecotypes" that represent
ecologically, functionally, or geographically isolated populations within
species. This aim will be based on a genetic framework called "coalescence" that
is well-established in eukaryotic phylogenetics. This work will both uncover new
dimensions of microbial diversity and develop new statistical tools for other
scientists to use. The third major aim is to determine how the process of
bacterial speciation occurs and whether it mimics the patterns observed in
eukaryotes. This aim will be accomplished by examining the patterns of gene
exchange in the genomes of bacteria that have co-diversified with their host
species (including humans), and the results will provide the first measurement
of the amount of time required for the emergence of new bacterial
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.