* 1831969
* Excellence in Research: Human Factors Approach to Facilitate Ambient Assisted Living Accessible and Usable to People with Visual Impairments: Loneliness Self-Monitoring System
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Hyung Nam Kim, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2023
* USD 519,007.00

Excellence in Research awards provide support for faculty at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities to strengthen their research capacity. The award to
North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State University has potential
broader impact in a number of scientific and societal areas. The project will
utilize a user-centered design methodology to conduct research that analyzes the
unique gait characteristics of visually impaired individuals in the home, with
consideration for the use of assistive devices or service dogs. This gait
analysis and human factors research will facilitate an understanding of
subjective factors, emotional status and aloneness for these visually impaired
individuals. Finally, the research outcomes will support self monitoring such
that the end users can be informed about the loneliness detection and assessment
results through the use of accessible formats (e.g., voice user interfaces).
This research benefits the visually impaired, supports educational opportunities
for students and advances knowledge in the use of human centered design research
to address unique needs of those individuals with disabilities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an ergonomics/human factors study that
utilizes health informatics and data analytics to focus on advancing knowledge,
technology, and human factors engineering principles to accurately assess human
behavioral data in a natural environment (i.e. the home). The focus is on
analytical modules specifically designed for the inclusion of persons with
disabilities (i.e. visual impairments). The project objectives include
conducting a user-centered contextual inquiry in a natural environment,
developing the data collection, analysis, and report modules for the system
using an iterative user-centered design approach, and finally, assessing the
validity, reliability, and usability of the proposed system in an individual's
natural environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.