* 1831231
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Urea Mixer to Enable Low Temperature Reduction of Diesel Exhaust Nitrogen Compounds
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Mansour Masoudi, Emissol LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2023
* USD 796,466.00

The broader impact/ commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project includes reducing emission of Diesel engines' toxic
nitrogen oxides (NOx) in challengingly low temperature exhaust operations, while
eliminating damaging urea deposits saving warranty costs for vehicle
manufacturers, saving fuel, reducing greenhouse gases CO2 and N2O as well as
particulate matter, while potentially enabling downsizing the complex and costly
diesel emission control systems. The novel technology developed in this SBIR
project may be configured for retrofitting existing diesel platforms. Nitrogen
oxides pose risks to human respiratory and pulmonary systems, are associated
with forming ground level ozone, photochemical oxidants, acid rain and fine
particles, amongst a variety of their detriments, and their emission is
therefore regulated. Our concept, when successful, will therefore make available
a broad value proposition to the society, the environment and to the mobility
industry. Finally, the insights developed into its gas phase reactions may have
applications in other branches of science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project proposes to resolve
a currently unmet need in mitigating emission of toxic nitrogen oxides (NOx)
from diesel engines, especially in low exhaust temperatures such as when the
vehicle operates in stop-and-go, in local delivery or when idles its engine. The
goal of this project is to develop a low cost, easy-to-fit and simple-to-
integrate novel technology enabling low temperature Diesel NOx reduction.
Continuing our successful Phase I research results, in this Phase II project
more advanced prototypes will be developed and tested in low-temperature exhaust
conditions, demonstrating rapid reduction of NOx on a commercially-available
Selective Catalytic Reduction (SCR) catalyst, while evaluating the impact on
lowering greenhouse gases CO2 and N2O. High fidelity computer simulations will
be heavily utilized to further our understanding of underlying mechanisms such
as the gas-phase reactions as well as to accelerate the development path. The
project outcome is expected to alleviate a remaining challenge in Diesel
emission control and to be rapidly welcome by the Diesel engine and vehicle
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.