* 1831979
* Excellence in Research: Constraining the symmetry energy in nuclear equation of state for neutron rich systems: A study of Isovector Giant Quadrupole Resonance by Compton Scatterin
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Benjamin Crowe, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,272.00

This award supports a novel approach of making targeted measurements of the
excited states or resonances of heavy neutron-rich nuclei to better understand
the properties and behavior of neutron stars. This is because the pressure that
pushes neutrons across the nucleus to form a thick neutron skin is the same
pressure which supports a neutron star collapsing against the pull of gravity.
Furthermore, at boundaries between the liquid core and solid crust of a neutron
star, quantities such as the transition density and the pressure depend on the
properties of the neutron rich matter. The collaborative environment supported
by this award will enable recruitment and retention of African American students
to STEM education by providing opportunities in mentored research experiences.
The skills acquired during the training will prepare these students for advanced
degrees and experience appropriate for careers to mitigate the scarcity of
underrepresented minorities in national laboratory STEM professions and will
contribute positively to the production of an overall diverse and competitive
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent theoretical studies show that
resonance parameters can be used to establish the necessary constraints on
symmetry-energy terms in the Equation of State (EoS). One of the big challenges
is relating properties of the EoS to nuclear observables. Promising nuclear
observables include the measurement of neutron-skin thickness and properties of
nuclear excitations arising from collective motion of protons and neutrons, for
example, the Isovector Giant Quadrupole Resonance (IVGQR). The IVGQR is a
collective mode of the nucleus characterized by the out-of-phase oscillation of
protons against neutrons. The restoring force is due to the symmetry energy term
which appears in the nuclear EoS. Therefore, the systematic determination of the
IVGQR parameters supported by this award will provide important constraints on
the symmetry energy term in the EoS. The supported activities will produce
polarization asymmetry data with uncertainties of 1% or better for the Sn-112
and Sn-114 isotopes. These data will allow extraction of the mass dependencies
of the IVGQR energy, the resonance width, and the depletion of the energy-
weighted sum rule with uncertainties considerably lower than any previous
measurement. These resonance parameters will improve theoretical models with
further constraints on the symmetry energy in the equation of state for neutron
rich matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.