* 1831766
* Acquisition of a laser-ablation system for trace element mapping and large-N geochronology by inductively-coupled-plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Michael Harrower, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/2019
* USD 216,504.00

This grant provides funding for a laser to connect to an existing device at
Johns Hopkins University that measures chemical compositions of samples. The
laser system will support creative Geosciences research on tiny samples that
contain information about the formation of the Earth. The laser will help to
start new research partnerships among early-career Geoscientists from
universities in the Baltimore area. This research will support numerous graduate
and undergraduate students. The laser system will be included in undergraduate
courses at many Baltimore-area universities. It will bring advanced technology
and ideas to young minds and broaden their exposure to modern research and
instrumentation in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A laser ablation (LA)
system is requested to link to an existing triple-quadrupole inductively-
coupled-plasma mass spectrometer (ICP-MS) at Johns Hopkins University. The LA
system will enable high-spatial-resolution, in situ analysis of geomaterials.
The Hopkins LA-ICP-MS Facility will focus on fine-scale trace element mapping,
and large-N U/Pb geochronology. It will also offer capacity for very sensitive
trace and rare earth element analysis of solid samples. An updated Hopkins LA-
ICP-MS Facility is important for the research programs of multiple early-career
geoscientists based in the Baltimore area, and will serve the broader Mid-
Atlantic region. Existing projects proposed to utilize the Hopkins LA-ICP-MS
Facility span multiple disciplines, from the biogeosciences to meteoritics,
petrology, plate tectonics and archaeology. The Hopkins LA-ICP-MS Facility will
offer graduate and undergraduate research students valuable training in modern
geosciences research and will be incorporated into undergraduate courses at
multiple universities in the Baltimore area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.