* 1831214
* STTR Phase II:  Self-Health Management Informatics Platform: Improving Patient Engagement in Care Delivery
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Bon Sy, SIPPA Solutions LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2022
* USD 927,189.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is a patient-centric engagement process that
offers the best chance for enabling a scalable approach towards achieving the
triple aim of improving care quality and outcomes, controlling health care costs
and utilization, and increasing patient satisfaction. Currently the national
healthcare cost is estimated at $3.2 trillion. Until patients could be engaged
to take ownership of their health, advancement in pharmacological interventions
through medications will not be able to achieve optimal care outcomes, and the
healthcare cost and utilization will remain high. Engaging patients in self-
management activities that are in alignment with the motivation indicators not
only improves patient experience and satisfaction, but contributes to collecting
big data for linking motivation to behavioral therapy --- resulting in an effect
essential to improving population health and advancing personalized precision.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase II
project is a patient-centric engagement process MISA (Measure-Integrate-Share-
Act). While well-established behavior models such as the Theory of Planned
Behavior (TPB) and Information-Motivation-Behavioral Skill (IMB) have been
reported to show clinical efficacy, the novelty of this research is the
application of Structure Equation Modeling to develop a quantitative behavior
model. Quantitative behavior modeling is significant because it allows a
rigorous assessment of the model in terms of goodness of fit and statistical
power. Furthermore, such model provides the patented SIPPA analytic engine a
basis to predict the software services that are in alignment with the motivation
indicators of a patient users in order to effectively engage them in self-health
management of chronic conditions, and to promote behavioral change for healthy
lifestyle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.