* 1831280
* SBIR Phase II:  Scalable Collaborative Analytical Modeling
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Stephen Brady, Fact Labs Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 877,102.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project is to enable organizations - whether businesses,
governments, or non-profits - to make more informed, more data-driven decisions.
All organizations must decide how to allocate limited resources and do so in the
context of meeting a set of objectives, such as profit, social wellbeing, or
health. Modeling as a process and models as artifacts of that process allow
decision makers to understand data through the lens of objectives and to then
make decisions; data alone, no matter how much, cannot make decisions. As more
aspects of the world are instrumented and captured digitally, the breadth and
quantity of data will out of necessity require larger, more complex models to be
built. Organizations will need a modeling workflow and supporting tools that
scale with these demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project addresses the challenge of many users
collaboratively building and maintaining analytical models that are consistent
and reproducible while allowing for divergent and convergent change. This
project will address the resource management challenges identified in
development and the interactivity gaps identified in user testing of the Phase I
prototype. The result will be a commercial software application for building
models that manages code, data, and the evolution of both over time by many
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.