* 1831547
* SCC: Integrating Heterogeneous Wide-Area Networks and Advanced Data Science to Bridge the Digital Divide in Rural Emergency Preparedness and Response
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Jose Ramon Gil-Garcia, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,510,765.00

This Smart and Connected Communities (SCC) project will conduct innovative
research in network architectures and protocols to allow emergency responders in
rural areas to use TV white space, WiFi and pocket-switching for communications
in areas where mobile broadband are scarce to non-existent. With this new
knowledge, this project can develop and implement a framework for information
exchange for emergency responders in rural communities. This scientific research
contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and
to advance our national welfare with benefits that contribute to the safety and
social and economic revitalization of rural communities. Generalizability of
results is expected in relation to other rural contexts and policy domains
(e.g., law enforcement and health). Research components and key results will be
incorporated in existing and new undergraduate and graduate courses,
demonstrating the positive impact of interdisciplinary research and promoting
the core disciplines to diverse groups of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop, implement, and systematically analyze a
comprehensive framework and a multi-layer platform for timely information
collection, integration, exchange and dissemination to support EPR in rural
communities. This goal will be met through three primary activities. First, the
project will develop a heterogeneous network architecture and corresponding
protocols that leverage wide-area wireless backhaul over TV white spaces, WiFi
and pocket-switching to provide (i) continuous communication to first responders
and (ii) delay-tolerant information access to residents. In addition, the
project will design a smartphone app which will support the collection of
information from different sources and its exchange among first responders,
government agencies and residents. Second, the mobility patterns and network
availability collected will enable the development of a dynamic probabilistic
community network model. Novel graph-theoretic algorithms will identify
information-depleted sub-communities and inform optimal information
dissemination strategies. Finally, the project will assess adoption and use of
the technologies by various community members to maximize the benefits
associated with timely, rich and high-quality information, disseminated through
technological devices. Continuous community engagement activities for data
provisioning, app design, impact co-evaluation and path to sustainability of the
project are key factors for success. The framework will be co-designed and
piloted in collaboration with the Town of Thurman, NY. Transferability to the
broader rural context will be assessed by engaging two additional rural
communities in coordination with Microsoft's Airband
initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.