* 1831482
* Conference: Compound Semiconductor Week Conference ISCS/IPRM, May 29 - June 1, 2018, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Tomas Palacios, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 10/31/2018
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support for students and early career
researchers, as well as selected invited speakers who will attend the Compound
Semiconductor Week Conference ISCS/IPRM to be held May 29 - June 1, 2018 at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Boston, MA, The Conference will allow to
promote science by providing a forum for exchange of knowledge among scientists
and engineers working in the field of addresses III-V and II-VI compound
semiconductors as well as SiGe, SiC, and related alloys. It also addresses novel
materials such as oxide semiconductors, organic semiconductors and aspects of
heterogeneous integration, e.g. of compound semiconductors with Si-based
technology.

The conference is expected to be attended by approximately 300 attendees. All
types of research institutions (academia, government research institutes and
industrial laboratories) will be represented. The conference will also feature
for the first time a focused session on the important topic of Ga2O3.

The 2018 Compound Semiconductor Week Conference ISCS/IPRM will allow
participants to gain exposure to the new advances in semiconductor growth,
fabrication technology, device physics, and entrepreneurship in electronics and
optoelectronics. The timing of the conference is ideal for the new generation of
students in science and engineering to learn about semiconductor technology
development. The outcome of the conference will be widely accessible through the
electronic and printed Conference Program, the workshop website, as well as a
special Journal Proceedings Volume.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.