* 1831805
* SBIR Phase II:  Passive Radiative Composite Material
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Alex Heltzel, PC Krause and Associates, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2021
* USD 797,765.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be observed through a direct reduction in
the energy consumption required by large industrial facilities, commercial
buildings, campuses, and homes. Due to reduced cooling demands as a result of
carefully designed radiative properties, the sustainability of federal and
industry facilities will be significantly improved with the installation of
passive radiative composite (PRC) roofing material for building energy
management. The market demand for cool roofing materials has exceeded $1
Billion, annually, and is expected to grow with increasing need and return on
investment. PRC roofing material can expect to compete in a growing industry due
to non-trivial improvement over state-of-the-art options in commercial cool
roofing products and the economic fabrication method identified in the PRC
conceptual design stage. Opportunities extend beyond structural thermal
management to a variety of cooling needs including refrigerated transportation
and storage. The development of PRC roofing will advance understanding and use
of spectrally-selective materials designed for intelligent control of thermal
radiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide critical
design, testing, and experimental validation needed to transition PRC technology
into the commercial sector. Designs based on electromagnetic and thermal
modeling include composite material options capable of providing passive
radiative flux of over 100 Watts per square meter of installed material. This
passive cooling advantage, relative to current commercial cool roofing
materials, is expected to create significant long-term cost savings and
reduction in fossil fuel usage for climate controlled structures. PRC material
properties designed to be spectrally selective offer the opportunity for
intelligent thermal management through reflection of solar and near-infrared
portions of the radiative spectrum, while emitting strongly in the 8-13 micron
atmospheric transmission window. A primary objective of the SBIR project is to
optimize PRC designs considering full spectrum properties with three criteria in
mind: thermal efficiency improvement, durability, and large batch manufacturing
economy. Demonstration of PRC-based roofing materials on full-scale test
structures will quantify passive cooling power and robustness to weathering,
positioning PRC-based roofing for introduction by a commercial manufacturing
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.