* 1831698
* SCC: PuebloConnect: Expanding Internet Access and Content Relevance in Tribal Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ellen Zegura, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

Our research addresses the dual goals of improving Internet access in
economically marginalized communities while also building local capacity towards
regular digital content creation. We focus on Native American reservation
communities, which have among the lowest Internet availability rates in the
nation. Our work will develop new network technologies to enable reservation
residents to meaningfully participate in the Internet, as both consumers and
producers of Internet content, in order to create new opportunities for economic
development. To ensure the success of our technical work, we will engage
community members in the planning, implementation, and dissemination of our
research. Our team is partnered with non-profit, Native-serving, and community
organizations that are actively working to solve digital
inequities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To create a more usable Internet, we
comprehensively rethink middle- and last-mile network technologies to offer
adaptive, smart connectivity. Our fundamental contributions include: the
disaggregation of control and data planes and a new content upload and download
platform that bridges the gap between the network core and end system devices
via a smart middle mile; Television (TV) spectrum white space pilot link
deployments and network management solution and to study usability in rural
regions; and collaboration with community partners through a participatory
action research protocol to identify digital information needs and develop a
framework for Web-design training to increase the Internet presence of Native-
owned organizations. Because Native American reservations share many
geographical and population density characteristics with other rural regions,
many aspects of our work will be applicable to extending the reach and usability
of the Internet to other, non-Native communities within the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.