* 1831166
* STTR Phase II: HI-LIGHT - Solar Thermal Chemical Reactor Technology for Converting CO2 to Hydrocarbons
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,07/31/2022
* David Erickson, Dimensional Energy Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2022
* USD 1,049,517.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this STTR Phase II project will
result in significant economic activity through the utilization of waste carbon
dioxide. The photo-catalytic reactors funded in the project will lead to novel
methods to chemically store energy from the sun. Each year, human activity
releases 38 billion tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. Dimensional
Energy envisions a future in which we can utilize this carbon dioxide as a
feedstock for industrial production of hydrocarbon fuels and chemical
intermediaries by harnessing the power of the sun. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
STTR Phase II project proposes to develop HI-Light - a photo-thermo-catalytic
reactor platform technology that enables the conversion of CO2 and water to
synthesis gas at a rate significantly greater than the state of the art. The
unique feature of the technology is that it uses embedded optical waveguides to
evenly distribute light within the reactor, increasing the efficacy of the
catalyst and ultimately the productivity of the system. In Phase I a fully
functional integrated prototype reactor was constructed, demonstrating
continuous operation, and showing productivity in terms of the grams of
hydrocarbon produced per gram of catalyst per hour more than 10x greater than
the state of the art. The approach solves the two major roadblocks in photo-
conversion of CO2: (1) the semiconductor catalysts can only use photons with
energies greater than their bandgap, which is a small fraction of those present
in sunlight and (2) a large fraction of the catalyst material in these reactors
is under-utilized due to sub-optimal light and reactant delivery. Our unique
reactor uses a patented, multi-scale approach to enhance light and reagent
transport directly to the reaction site and makes use of traditionally unused
photons to provide heat and enhance reaction
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.