* 1831412
* AstroCom NYC: A Partnership between Astronomers in New York City
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Mordecai-Mark Mac Low, CUNY York College
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,097,405.00

AstroCom NYC is designed to improve access by urban minority students to
opportunities in astrophysical research by enhancing and solidifying
partnerships between research astronomers in New York City. The partners are
minority-serving institutions of the City University of New York (CUNY), and the
astrophysics research departments of the American Museum of Natural History
(AMNH), and the Center for Computational Astrophysics (CCA) at the Flatiron
Institute. All CUNY astronomers form a supportive and collaborative network and
hold resident associate positions at AMNH. Continuing a program developed with
support from NSF's Partnerships in Astronomy and Astrophysics Research and
Education (PAARE) program, the team will transition into a sustainable
enterprise to provide centralized, personalized mentoring as well as financial
and academic support to CUNY undergraduates. This has proven to be an effective
model to improve recruitment, retention, and professional success for students
from groups that are traditionally underrepresented in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partners in
AstroCom NYC are uniquely qualified for the task of improving minority access to
astrophysics research because of their strong working relationships, expertise
in mentoring students with diverse backgrounds, and the ready pool of candidates
from within CUNY. AstroCom NYC serves as a model to urban areas with large and
diverse minority populations. Their specific objectives are to (1) create an
inclusive program to promote student recruitment and retention in astrophysics
by supporting students throughout their studies and research with structured
mentoring, fellowships, and additional academic preparation for research; (2)
improve student retention and graduation in STEM, particularly physics; (3)
create an innovative community of diverse, urban astrophysicists in New York
City to concentrate and support otherwise dispersed CUNY students and faculty;
and(4) build CUNY students' sense of belonging in astrophysics by creating
opportunities for them to work within this unique community of research
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.