* 1831733
* WORKSHOP: The Third TMS Summit on Diversity in the Minerals, Metals, and Materials Professions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Justin Scott, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 05/31/2019
* USD 29,160.00

It is well recognized that a diverse workforce can lead to gains in
productivity, competitiveness, and creativity. However, the rich diversity of
the full U.S. population is often underutilized among the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) professions. To address this issue, The
Minerals, Metals &amp; Materials Society (TMS) is organizing a follow-up event
to its previous two summits on diversity and inclusion. The third TMS summit on
Diversity in the Minerals, Metals, and Materials Professions (DMMM3) will take
place on the campus of the University of California, Santa Barbara from July
23-24, 2018. While previous summits opened the conversation and identified the
challenges to a more diverse and inclusive professional community, DMMM3 will
focus on establishing a clear path to meaningful engagement and tangible
action.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The third TMS summit on Diversity in the Minerals,
Metals, and Materials Professions will primarily focus on three themes: (1)
Engaging participants on the most recent social-science findings in the areas of
diversity and inclusion while exploring current issues and potential solutions;
(2) Measuring progress and ensuring positive outcomes for all through the
establishment of well-informed and proactive measures and metrics; and (3)
Transforming the professional community by implementing changes in workplace
cultures and policies. To help equip attendees with their own toolbox of
knowledge and skills to address diversity and inclusion in their workplace, the
summit will include interactive discussions, panels, and several opportunities
for professional development. The audience will include nearly 150 attendees who
will have the opportunity to hear from more than 30 invited speakers from across
industry, academia, and government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.