* 1832822
* Meeting: Multifunctional structures and multistructural functions: Functional coupling and integration in the evolution of biomechanical systems, January 3-7, 2019 in Tampa Florida
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Luz Patricia Hernandez, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 14,904.00

This award will support participants in a symposium at the annual meeting of the
Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology in January 2019. This symposium
will bring together a diverse group of biologists that study the evolution of
morphology and its function. In particular, the speakers will discuss the study
of behaviors that require coordination of many structures (e.g., feeding and
locomotion) and organisms that use the same structures across multiple
behaviors. This multi-component coordination (referred to as integration) is
common in organisms but, due to limitations in data acquisition and analytical
tools, is typically not addressed. This symposium will foster improved
understanding of how integration influences the ecology and evolution of
organisms by promoting discussion among speakers who are at the forefront of
addressing hypotheses of integration, leveraging new tools in evolutionary
statistics and biomechanical analysis. The speakers are diverse in terms of
research topic, career stage, gender, ethnicity, and type of institution. Each
speaker will publish an article in Integrative and Comparative Biology to
provide a resource for future researchers interested in these ideas. This issue
will also highlight complimentary presentations submitted by students and early
career researchers. Open dialogue among participants, including a panel
discussion, has been built into the program, and student social media
representatives will convey ideas and questions to those who are unable to
attend the symposium, including the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As increasing
use of genomic tools informs scientists about genetic control of phenotype,
understanding of patterns and processes driving evolution of complex phenotypes,
such as those inherent in many biomechanical systems, lags behind. Functional
morphologists and organismal biologists strive to understand how organisms
persist and flourish in a given environment. However, the parts of an organism
often interact in complex ways to affect function, survival, and evolution. For
example, some structural elements can be redundant relative to function,
organisms may use such elements differently across contexts, or organisms may
use the same anatomical element to perform multiple functions. These
interactions are typically considered constraints on the ability to adapt and
evolve, but they may also facilitate evolution if they allow multiple parts to
change simultaneously in a way that favors survival. These emergent properties
of form-function relationships should be of considerable interest to comparative
biologists, but the field has been constrained by the broad scope of these
questions that require potentially complex methodologies. This symposium aims to
reconcile and unify this integrative organismal perspective, provide inspiration
for new methodological approaches, and generate new hypotheses that can
stimulate future studies of structural and functional
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.