* 1832959
* RII Track-4: Next Generation Climate Modeling of Winter Climate in the United States
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Elizabeth Burakowski, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 03/31/2023
* USD 147,292.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across most of the contiguous
United States, winter is warming faster than summer, and the warming is more
pronounced in seasonally snow-covered regions. Accompanying the winter warming
trends are fewer days with snow cover, reductions in snow water equivalent, an
increased proportion of winter precipitation falling as rain instead of snow,
and more frequent mid-winter thaw events. The rapid pace of winter climate
change is hypothesized to have large impacts on the natural functioning of
ecosystems and corresponding ecosystem services. The vision of the proposed
project is to directly address the need for high-resolution, comprehensive
historical and future climate model simulations to investigate future winter
climate under higher and lower emissions scenarios across the United States. The
PI will collaborate with scientists at the National Center of Atmospheric
Research (NCAR) in Boulder, Colorado, a premier, internationally recognized
center for climate modeling. The project outcomes will provide high quality,
foundational climate model simulations to advance understanding of winter
climate impacts on ecosystem services, engage external partners in the winter
tourism industry, and support competitive research at the University of New
Hampshire, including in the areas of crop and hydrological modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
hypothesis of this project is that changes in winter climate will have profound
impacts on a suite of ecosystem services across the contiguous United States as
climate responds to increasing concentrations of greenhouse gases. The proposed
project will directly address this hypothesis through a next-generation climate
modeling effort to investigate future winter climate under a range of shared
socioeconomic pathways across the United States. The foundational high-
resolution dataset with the Variable Resolution Community Earth System Model
(VR-CESM) will add value to future projections of winter snow conditions in the
United States at a fraction of computational cost of uniform high-resolution
global simulations. In addition, they will permit detailed investigation of the
influence of major teleconnections on future snow projections over complex
topography in future projects. The proposed work will support competitive
research at the University of New Hampshire, including agricultural,
hydrological and infrastructure modeling efforts. Results will be shared with
three key audiences: K-12 classrooms, institutes of higher education, and the
stakeholders in the winter tourism industry. The project complements ongoing
outreach efforts through community engagement with the winter sports community
and a citizen science snow measurement network. The work will be broadly
disseminated through public and school presentations, in addition to traditional
channels at academic workshops and meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.