* 1832817
* Fragile-to-Strong Transitions in Phase-Change Materials for Next-Generation Memory Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Pierre Lucas, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 562,757.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: With the exponential growth of information
technologies, the ability to store huge amounts of data is becoming a major
societal need. Phase-change materials are some of the most promising materials
for future data-storage applications. They are the key component enabling high
density optical data storage such as rewritable DVD (digital versatile disc) and
nonvolatile computer memories (phase-change random access memory (PC-RAM)).
However, they currently suffer from aging issues that lead to degradation over
time and eventually to data loss. This research aims at developing a new
generation of phase-change materials that are immune to this data-loss
phenomenon. Moreover, such materials can enable emerging technologies (high
density multilevel memories and ultrafast, artificial neuron-like processors)
that rely on highly stable phase-change materials. Through the process of
conducting this research, graduate students are being trained in the field of
materials science and engineering. Materials expertise is in high demand in high
technology sectors such as the microelectronic
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The discovery of phase-change
materials exhibiting a pronounced fragile-to-strong transition is key to the
development of memory devices that are immune to the data-loss phenomenon
currently plaguing memory technologies. The discovery of these new materials is
achieved by characterizing the thermodynamic and structural behavior of families
of phase change materials. The goal is to identify materials that are immune to
structural relaxation. These materials are key in enabling emerging technologies
that rely on fractional changes in physical properties and are particularly
sensitive to drift. This research therefore supports the development of
transformational new technologies such as artificial neural-network processor
for ultra-fast computing. From a fundamental point of view, this research
provides key insight into the origin of fragile-to-strong transitions and
answers outstanding related questions in glass science such as the origin of
beta-relaxation and polyamorphism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.