* 1832278
* Conference: The 49th Annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium; Syracuse, New York; October 2018
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Peng Gao, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Vadjunec
* 02/29/2020
* USD 42,785.00

This award will help conduct the 49th annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium
(BGS), an annual gathering of scholars from geography, geology, and other
disciplines who focus their attention on the dynamic processes the produce and
modify landforms on the surface of the Earth. The BGS will provide a forum that
enables scholars from a broad range of universities and other organizations in
the U.S. and other nations to collectively examine the current state of
knowledge, explore new lines of inquiry and approaches, and facilitate
interaction across generations of scholars ranging from long-established experts
to early-career researchers and graduate students. The symposium's focus on
specific topics over a three-day time period will permit deeper consideration of
issues than normally is possible at large scholarly gatherings, and it will
facilitate establishment and enhancement of new collaborative links. The funds
provided by NSF will be used largely to facilitate the involvement and
interaction of at least 25 graduate students in symposium discussions and
activities. Special efforts will be made to involve female students, thereby
helping to broaden future workforce diversity in this traditionally male-
dominated realm. Presentations and other products from the symposium will be
made available online, with papers based on noteworthy presentations published
in "Geomorphology," a leading scholarly journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 49th
annual Binghamton Geomorphology Symposium will be conducted in Syracuse, New
York, in October 2018. This symposium will focus on the complex processes that
control sediment initiation, transport, and deposition in watersheds across
space and over time. Attention will be given to different modes for collecting
and analyzing data with different levels of detail, including a variety of
field, experimental, and modeling approaches combined with advanced technologies
such as sediment tracing and dating and the use of unmanned aerial vehicle and
other remote sensors. The symposium's core substantive themes will be (1)
complex processes of sediment dynamics over relatively short time scales; (2)
complex patterns and trends of sediment dynamics over relatively long time
scales; and (3) complex sediment dynamics across multiple geographic scales.
Participants will address both biophysical and human-related factors that
influence the complex process of sediment dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.