* 1832791
* A Professional Development Workshop Series for STEM Faculty
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Carmen Rivera, GPRA Strategic Management, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bernice Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 811,490.00

The Committee on Equal Opportunities in Sciences and Engineering has urged the
National Science Foundation to utilize its convening power to impact its
broadening participation portfolio through workshops and online resources. The
planned STEM professional development workshop series led by the Fielding
Graduate University in partnership with Historically Black Colleges and
Universities will address two broadening participation challenges: the lack of
diverse STEM faculty in leadership positions and the dearth of culturally
relevant leadership development opportunities and resources that can support
women faculty of color. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to implement a
state-of-the-art professional development approach through convenings that
integrate leadership development, scholarship, coalition building and
professional/personal wellness to have a systemic impact on broadening
participation. The workshop series will consist of three major
convenings:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. Leadership Academy, designed to increase
leadership self-efficacy of STEM women faculty of color through cutting-edge in-
person and virtual culturally-responsive leadership development opportunities,
&lt;br/&gt;2. Author Development Institute, designed as a four-day intensive,
in-person training with year-long follow-up support to increase the scholarly
contributions of STEM women faculty of color to the STEM reform discourse, and
&lt;br/&gt;3. Leader Wellness Workshop, designed as a two-day capstone
experience that prioritizes well-being as an essential component for effective
leadership development and advancement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work of this
project holds great promise for addressing the persisting disparities related to
women of color in academic leadership positions in STEM. This project will offer
a postgraduate certificate in leadership studies and enrich opportunities for
increasing the submission and success rates of STEM leadership/reform
publications by women of color. This project will develop a cadre of academic
STEM leaders who have been empowered to lead broadening participation efforts
and address diversity challenges at a national level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the Directorate of Biological Sciences (BIO), the
Directorate of Geosciences (GEO), the Office of Integrative Activities (OIA),
and the Directorate of Education and Human Resources (EHR) with significant
support from the NSF's Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program,
which targets increasing the number of historically underrepresented minority
faculty in STEM disciplines and the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), which enhances STEM education and
research at HBCUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.