* 1832888
* RII Track-4: A Multi-omic Approach Towards an Understanding of the Environmental Implications of Antibiotics on Soil Processes
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Michael Strickland, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2021
* USD 215,522.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Soil microbial communities are vital to life on
earth because they mediate many processes linked to human and environmental
health. However, understanding the exact link between soil microbial communities
and these processes is not always clear. Gaining this understanding is of
particular importance in a changing world. One change likely to influence soil
microbial communities, and the processes they regulate, are inputs of
agricultural antibiotics. Overuse of antibiotics has been a topic of recent
public and scientific concern because of its potential to increase antibiotic
resistance in environmental microbial communities and transfer resistance genes
to pathogenic organisms. While this emphasis is important to public health it
overlooks the impact, antibiotics may have on soil microbial communities.
Through this fellowship the PI will examine the effect of antibiotics on soil
microbial communities and the processes that they regulate. This understanding
will improve understanding of the response of soil microbial communities to
perturbations and may ultimately enable us to better understand the critical
role played by these communities in the environment. Furthermore, this
fellowship will build research capacity at the University of Idaho and improve
the training of faculty, research personnel, and graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The
overuse of antibiotics has been a topic of recent public and scientific concern
because of its potential to increase antibiotic resistance in environmental
microbial communities and transfer resistance genes to pathogenic organisms.
While this emphasis is important for public health, it overlooks the broader
impacts of antibiotic overuse on soil microbial communities. Given the potential
that as much as 14 million kilograms of antibiotics could be entering soils
annually through livestock manure, there could be widespread implications for
soil microbial communities. This is especially concerning because soil microbial
communities are central to the critical functioning of terrestrial ecosystems.
Research is beginning to indicate that antibiotic inputs can alter microbial-
mediated biogeochemical cycles, but the specific changes in the microbial
community that lead to these alterations are unclear. The research will clarify
the specific changes in microbial community structure via a multi-omic approach.
This approach includes the integration of multiple forms of -omic data (e.g.,
metagenomes, transcriptomes, and metabolomes) to give a clearer picture of the
response of microbial community structure to antibiotics and the ensuing impact
on ecosystem function. Training in multi-omic techniques will occur in
collaboration with Pacific Northwest National Lab (PNNL). Through this
fellowship, collaborations between PNNL and the University of Idaho will be
strengthened allowing for the application of multi-omic techniques across
multiple disciplines, from infectious disease to veterinary
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.