* 1832255
* 2018 Microbiology of the Built Environment GRC
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Jordan Peccia, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 14,000.00

Americans spend more than 90% of their time in buildings, where the majority of
hazardous and beneficial microbial exposures occur, and better information of
how this impacts human health is needed. This proposal requests support to help
defray costs of 14 junior scientists and engineers to participate in the
inaugural Gordon Research Conference on the Microbiology of the Built
Environment at the University of New England in Biddeford, ME. The requested
funds will provide a diverse mix of research levels, expertise, and experience
to achieve specific objectives to foster and grow the emerging scientific,
engineering and medical community that has assembled to study microbes and human
health in buildings. This proposal benefits society by facilitating
communication of scientific progress towards the protection of human wellbeing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of building microbiology seeks to understand how
building design, occupancy, and operation impact human exposure to microbes and
ultimately how these microbial exposures impact wellbeing. Environmental
engineers, architects, microbial ecologists, immunologists, physicians, and
epidemiologists populate this emerging field. A single conference venue is
needed to exchange research results, build collaborations from researchers in
disparate fields, and to foster this interdisciplinary community of researchers.
Towards this, the proposal has the overall objective of bringing together
researchers on the frontiers of microbiology, building engineering, and health
to extend, foster, and grow the emerging scientific, engineering and medical
communities to study microbes and human health in buildings. The major
innovation of this conference is the focus on integrating the built environment
research with microbial assessment and human health. In recent years, microbial
ecology, enabled by high throughput DNA sequencing has dominated much of the
field. At least 50% of all invited talks will address some aspect of health in
the built environment, with the remainder addressing novel&lt;br/&gt;topics on
ecology and building engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.