* 1832882
* RII TRACK-4: Multiple Global Change Factors Control Forest Nitrogen Cycling - Remote Sensing and Machine Learning Identify Forest Function Across Developed Landscapes
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Tara Trammell, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 09/30/2023
* USD 203,346.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen (N), an essential element
required by all life, moves through our environment in a very tight cycle. Human
activity has more than doubled the amount of nitrogen that cycles through our
environment, and yet our understanding of the global nitrogen cycle is about 50
years behind our understanding of the global carbon cycle. While large intact
forests have the capacity to store excess N in substantial quantities, the
majority of temperate deciduous forests in the U.S. are small forest patches due
to expanding urban and suburban development. Small forests are more susceptible
to consequences from human activities, such as excess N inputs and non-native
invasive plant spread. This research seeks to understand the N sink potential of
small forests embedded across developed landscapes that receive excess N from
human activities and that experience altered N availability from non-native
plant invasion. The fellowship makes new collaborations possible between the
early-career PI at the University of Delaware and a senior scientist at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison to utilize novel remote sensing techniques that
enable large-scale study of forest N dynamics in the face of multiple global
change factors, such as excess N inputs and non-native plant invasion. The
outcome of this work will provide novel understanding of the source/sink
potential of an important air/water pollutant (nitrogen).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global
nitrogen (N) cycle has changed dramatically over the last century through
increases in reactive N worldwide due to anthropogenic activities. Temperate
deciduous forests are an important sink for reactive N deposition unless N
inputs exceed N demand and forests become an N source. Multiple facets of global
change, such as invasive species spread and altered nutrient cycling can
interact and feedback to alter forest structure and function, ultimately
determining the ability of forests to act as an N sink. This project seeks to
ascertain how multiple, co-occurring global changes alter N cycling in forests
by utilizing innovative remote sensing and machine learning techniques to
integrate forest canopy chemistry and hyperspectral imaging to determine forest
health and nutrient status across heterogeneous landscapes. The research will
leverage remote sensing techniques to assess how urbanization and invasion
impact forest canopy N content and resorption, which are indicators of forest N
availability. Forest canopy N dynamics will be evaluated across an urbanization
gradient to determine N available for tree uptake in high N-deposition
environments. Additionally, forest canopy N will be compared in invaded and
uninvaded forests to determine whether plant invaders outcompete native trees
for soil N. We will extend beyond the results of this work to forests in
different regions across the US using a macroecology approach. The research from
this fellowship will enhance our capability to estimate the N source vs sink
potential of temperate deciduous forests, and will improve our predictive
ability on the fate of global reactive N in forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.