* 1832184
* PDB Management by The Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Stephen Burley, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Cooperative Agreement
* Steven Ellis
* 02/29/2024
* USD 14,982,060.00

The mission of the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics (RCSB)
Protein Data Bank (PDB) is to sustain a unique Findable-Accessible-
Interoperable-Reusable (FAIR) living data resource of three-dimensional (3D)
biomolecular structure information. PDB structures are the molecules of life.
Knowledge of 3D structures (shapes) of biological macromolecules, how they
evolved with time, and their functions are essential for understanding critical
areas of science, including fundamental biology; health and disease of humans,
animals, and plants; food and energy production; and other topics of concern to
global prosperity and environmental sustainability. Structure data are equally
important for biopharmaceutical and biotechnology companies, driving discovery
of new therapeutics, biomaterials, and medical devices. RCSB PDB services span
the entire PDB data lifecycle. Archive Management/Access services safeguard this
single global archive of over 137,000 3D structures of biological
macromolecules, with an estimated replacement cost of nearly $14 billion.
Deposition/Biocuration and Data Exploration services support over 30,000 data
contributors and over 1 million data users worldwide. The PDB has a 19-year
history of scientific and technical leadership in sustaining an open-access
global data resource that has become central to research and education in
biology and medicine, by curating, integrating, and disseminating biomolecular
structure information in the context of biological function, biochemical
pathways, cellular processes, disease states, and molecular evolution. RCSB PDB
websites supporting research (rcsb.org) and education (pdb101.rcsb.org) foster a
molecular understanding of fundament biology, biomedicine, and energy in three-
dimensions at the atomic level. Access to PDB data and RCSB PDB services will
continue to drive patent applications, drug discovery and development,
publication of innovative research, in scientific disciplines ranging from
Agriculture to Zoology, development of life-changing biopharmaceutical products
and formation of new US companies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RCSB PDB outreach,
education, and training efforts leverage PDB data and RCSB PDB staff expertise.
More than 620,000 researchers, educators, students, and members of the public
use the Outreach/Education services. Online materials supporting exploration of
fundamental biology; biomedicine; energy; biotechnology drug discovery; and
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) education, are consumed
by researchers, educators, students, and the public. RCSB PDB educational
resources are designed for global reuse in homes and classrooms, requiring only
modest desktop computers, smartphones, or digital printers to experience the
full impact of the project's online offerings. These free-of-charge materials
are hosted at pdb101.rcsb.org, including the popular Molecule of the Month
series that highlights the structure and function of molecules, and the Guide to
Understanding PDB Data that introduces structural biology tools to a broad
audience. RCSB PDB also produces and distributes online curricular materials for
high school and college educators and students, explaining how molecular
structures inform fundamental biology, medicine, energy, biotechnology, and drug
discovery, with a focus on global public health
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.