* 1832389
* Student Travel to the 2018 Annual Meeting of The Clay Minerals Society: Champaign, IL - June 9-14, 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Yuji Arai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 10/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support 15 students from universities in the United States to
attend the 55th Annual Meeting of The Clay Minerals Society at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign during June 8th-June 14th, 2018. The travel grants
will target graduate students who will benefit from attending this conference,
including the workshop on Medicinal Applications of Clay Minerals and field
trips. Priority will be given to first-time attendees, and students from under-
represented groups (female, minorities and students with disabilities).

The annual Clay Mineral Society conference is a premier international conference
in clay science, held annually. The conference will attract participants from
many different scientific disciplines, from agriculture to materials science and
engineering, and from many different countries. The program generally consists
of a workshop and four-day technical sessions. Each technical session starts
with an Award Lecture that will be followed by thematic sessions, which cover a
broad range of clay sciences: clay mineralogy, crystallography, petrology,
material science, nanoscience, medical and medicinal clay, environmental
engineering, soil science, biogeochemistry, industrial technology, isotope
geochemistry, cosmogeochemistry, advanced spectroscopies, and education. It is a
unique opportunity for graduate students to participate and interact with
international colleagues and leading researchers. The interaction during and
post technical sessions will further enhance the research and education in clay
sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.