* 1832713
* CRISP 2.0 Type 1: Interdependent Water Infrastructure in a Potable Reuse System
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Ranita Ray, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 12/31/2022
* USD 747,026.00

The overall objective of this Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure
Systems and Processes (CRISP) research is to characterize the interdependence
and resilience of flood control, wastewater, and drinking water infrastructure,
and, in particular, the impact on water quality of unsheltered homeless
encampments with insufficient sanitation facilities and management. Homelessness
is one of the most significant issues affecting human health, well-being, and
ecosystem services in the United States. The problem is particularly evident in
Las Vegas where 67 percent of the homeless population is unsheltered. This
raises concerns related to the public and environmental health implications of
human fecal contamination of local water systems, specifically flood control
infrastructure. Similar to many cities throughout the US, Las Vegas also
discharges treated wastewater effluent upstream of its drinking water intakes.
Therefore, if the wastewater and drinking water infrastructure are not
sufficiently resilient, the added stress from flood control infrastructure may
create a positive feedback loop leading to greater exposure to contaminants of
emerging concern and more frequent outbreaks of waterborne disease. This
research targets two long-term outcomes related to these issues: (1) generation
of data and models that can be used to increase understanding of the broader
public health implications of homelessness and (2) development of tools and
products to effectively disseminate this knowledge to contribute to more
effective measures to address homelessness and mitigate related impacts on
public and environmental health. Although this research focuses on Las Vegas,
concerns related to the nexus of homelessness and water quality exist in
numerous cities throughout the country, thereby offering ample opportunity for
replication in other regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research employs a
transdisciplinary systems-level approach to characterize the interdependence and
resilience of flood control, wastewater, and drinking water infrastructure in
the context of potable reuse. The overall objective of the research is to fully
characterize the nexus of water quality and public health implications of
unsheltered homeless encampments. This research addresses the following
environmental engineering and social science hypotheses. (1) Inadequate
sanitation practices within the unsheltered homeless population result in
significant deterioration of surface ater quality. These impacts are
characterized using advanced chemical methods (gas chromatography/mass
spectroscopy and liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy) for the detection of
pharmaceuticals, illicit drugs, and other indicator trace organic compounds. The
chemical data are complemented by advanced microbiological methods [16S rRNA
gene sequencing, quantitative polymerase chain reaction, and microbial source
tracking] for the detection of fecal indicators, human-specific markers, and
pathogens. (2) Flood control and wastewater infrastructure contribute pathogen
and disinfection byproduct (DBP) precursor loadings that may lead to adverse
public health impacts in drinking water infrastructure systems. Pathogen
monitoring data are integrated into a system dynamics model in a quantitative
microbial risk assessment (QMRA) framework. The relative contributions of DBP
precursors from surface water, wastewater, and flood control infrastructure are
based on trihalomethane (THM), haloacetic acid (HAA), and nitrosamine formation
potentials using free chlorine, chloramines, and ozone as the target
disinfectants. (3) Advanced treatment with ozone-biofiltration can be optimized
to improve the resiliency of drinking water infrastructure as a DBP barrier by
increasing the removal of N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA)which typically is
elevated during and after rainstorms in urban areas. This effort is best
informed by quantitative stable isotope probing to identify the microbial taxa
responsible for NDMA biodegradation. The research team also uses ethnographic
methods to characterize the homeless experience and their decision making
processes, thereby allowing for the development of targeted outputs that can
inform stakeholders and decision makers. Finally, through collaboration with the
UNLV Department of Film, the research team also produces a short documentary on
the nexus of homelessness and water quality in Southern Nevada. In addition to
exposing film students to modern issues in engineering and social science, the
documentary serves as the foundation of future outreach and education activities
aimed at raising awareness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.