* 1832771
* EAGER: Behavior under Open List Proportional Representation Systems
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Carolina Tchintian, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2022
* USD 12,378.00

This research has implications on the functioning of democracy not only for the
Honduran case but for all the region. Most of Latin American countries share
some of the feature present in Honduras: multiparty systems, low
institutionalization of political parties, weak programmatic links between
parties and voters, which makes the vote choices very volatile and hence the
information available at the time of the election has a prominent role. This is
all against a backdrop of eroded confidence in the electoral system, which is to
a certain extent shared across the region. Deepening the understanding of the
electoral process through individual-level data is key to better understand
voter behavior and how this impacts and shapes representation, influences
parties? decisions and legislative outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ideological
identification, candidate issue position and party identification (Campbell et
al 1960) can help voters make their voting choice. However, when voters have to
choose among parties and candidates within them (i.e. open list systems with
panachage), party ideology or issue position may not provide enough information
to the voter. In this context, some voters may rely on information cues such as
name recognition, incumbency, gender and race among others, while others will
simply deploy satisficing strategies to deal with voter fatigue phenomena. In
addition to this, ballots may not be presenting all alternatives equally or may
demand a different amount of resources for the choices available. Or some
candidates can be favored given their placement in the ballot, or by physical
attributes visible thought the picture in the ballot. Although it is reasonable
to assume all these factors can affect voter behavior, we know very little about
voters? decision under these set of rules. In this project we use a stratified
sample of actual votes cast randomly selected out of the more than 18.103 ballot
boxes across the Honduras, where six million Hondurans were registered to vote.
Analyzing actual votes cast in open list systems may provide the means to
deepening our understanding of the electoral process and how voters use the
provisions offered by the electoral rules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.