* 1832214
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research Food-Water-Energy Nexus: The Moveable Nexus: Design-led urban food, water and energy management innovation in new boundary conditions of change
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Ming Xu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 03/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

Many cities across the globe are facing difficult challenges managing their
food, water and energy systems. The challenges stem from the fact that the
issues of food, water and energy are often tightly connected with each other,
not only locally but also globally. This is known as the Food-Water-Energy (FWE)
nexus. An effective solution to a local water problem may cause new local
problems with food or energy, or cause new water problems at the global level.
On a local scale, it is difficult to anticipate whether solutions to one issue
in the nexus are sustainable across food, water and energy systems, both at the
local and the global scale. Innovative solutions that encompass the nexus are
particularly important to enable cities to better manage their food, water and
energy systems and understand the benefits and tradeoffs for different
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a 29-country initiative
through the joint Belmont Forum- Joint Programming Initiative (JPI) Urban
Europe. The Sustainable Urbanization Global Initiative (SUGI)/Food-Water-Energy
Nexus is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that
bring together the fragmented research and expertise across the globe to find
innovative solutions to the Food-Water-Energy Nexus challenge. The call seeks to
develop more resilient, applied urban solutions to benefit a much wider range of
stakeholders. The rapid urbanization of the world's population underscores the
importance of this focus. International partners were invited to develop
solutions for this challenge. The funds requested will be used to support U.S.
participants to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries and that bring together natural scientists,
social scientists and research users (e.g., civil society, NGOs, and industry).
Participants from other countries are funded through their national funding
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects seeks to develop a FEW system
incorporating the localized production of healthy food. The production and
consumption of healthy food is constrained by both future climate change and
current diets: the project aims to mitigate these by designing strategies for
the localization of healthy food production and test these within the context of
far-future climate impacts. The scale at which this production is localized
differs in each location, spanning scales from a single rooftop to an entire
metropolitan region. The design outputs will be used as cornerstones of the
entire field of possible solutions and are used to inspire other places to
engage with these issues. Integrated within the program of stakeholder workshops
is the development of an analytical decision-support tool, the M-NEX. Each
successive workshop adds complexity and detail to the tool which aims to support
decision-making in the planning and integration of local food production. The
project uses a research-based design approach to develop inspiring urban
solutions in six differing regions across the world. The new knowledge generated
in each of these projects will be used incrementally to develop an analytical
decision support tool that will help integrate FEW solutions in future urban
designs and developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.