* 1832468
* Building Capacity: A Collaborative Undergraduate STEM Program in Resilient and Sustainable Infrastructure
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Oscar Suarez, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,111,530.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project will advance the aims of
the HSI Program by increasing the number of students who complete baccalaureate
degrees in engineering or related degrees in resilient and sustainable
infrastructure. This collaborative project between the University of Puerto Rico
(UPR) Mayaguez, UPR Rio Piedras and UPR Ponce will develop an interdisciplinary
Resilient Infrastructure and Sustainability Program to educate undergraduate
STEM students in engineering and related skills needed to respond to natural
disasters. After a natural disaster, many different organizations and STEM
fields must work together to rebuild the local infrastructure. This project aims
to develop an interdisciplinary, shared curriculum that links students enrolled
in associate degree programs to baccalaureate degree programs. The project aims
to foster student interest and learning by developing a database of case studies
based on real events such as the recent devastation caused by Hurricanes Irma
and Maria. The project will also facilitate student placement in internship
programs and research opportunities with state and federal agency partners,
including the US Army Engineer Research and Development Center and the US
Department of Homeland Security Coastal Resilience Center of Excellence. These
field placements will offer students important experiential learning
opportunities, including exposure to real-world problems and the dynamics of the
professional work setting. This project expects that these activities will
increase the number of students who pursue and complete a baccalaureate degree
in STEM related to infrastructure and sustainability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop an interdisciplinary curriculum on resilient and
sustainable infrastructure that is grounded in the Depth of Knowledge framework.
It will investigate the impact of this curriculum on students' higher-order
thinking skills, approaches to analysis, and interdisciplinary problem-solving
skills. The project will compare students who participate in program with those
who do not participate. In addition, retention and graduation rates for
participating students will be compared to their peers who do not participate in
the program. The project seeks to generate evidence needed to understand factors
that motivate students, including underrepresented students, to pursue
baccalaureate STEM degrees. An external evaluator will assess the project's
development and activities to facilitate project effectiveness and impact. The
project will develop case studies on infrastructure damages caused by Hurricanes
Irma and Maria will be shared with other institutions as well as STEM
professionals continuing their education. This project has the potential to
provide students opportunities to aid in current recovery efforts in Puerto Rico
as well as prepare students to be able to use STEM to address future
infrastructure disruptions. The curriculum itself may provide a model to other
institutions seeking to develop STEM curricular programs with deep articulation
between associate degree granting and baccalaureate degree granting
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.