* 1832837
* Collaborative Research: The Holocene and Anthropocene as windows into the future of marine systems
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Dorothy Pak, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,555.00

Paleoceanographic records provide a unique opportunity to understand how
ecosystems have responded to rapid environmental change in the past, a topic of
significant societal and scientific interest. This project will document
ecological changes in nearshore environments over the past several thousand
years in Southern California, including investigation of impacts of both past
and modern climate change. This work is of particular importance because these
coastal ecosystems play critical roles in carbon sequestration, marine
fisheries, coastal economies, and cycling of nutrients. As part of an integrated
effort, the California Academy of Sciences (CAS) will catalog, digitize and
identify fossil samples collected along the California margin. These materials
will be combined with samples from available sediment cores to develop a public
online digital database through which the research community may access project
data and results. Two graduate students per year from the University of
California Davis (UCD) will work closely with CAS staff to receive training in
core curation and database development. In addition, this project supports the
training of two Ph.D. students, and undergraduate research interns at UC Davis
and UC Santa Barbara. The project also supports intensive field and laboratory
based coursework and mentored research at Bodega Marine Laboratory for two
undergraduates per year who are pursuing careers in K-12 STEM teaching. A
research blog will be generated to develop scientific communication and writing
skills in undergraduate, graduate students and technicians involved in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To complete this research, the research team will
use sediment records from along the California margin to address two key
questions: 1) How did the development of the modern oxygen minimum zone during
the Holocene influence marine ecosystems, including multiple stages of
perturbation and recovery? 2) Can we identify the marine ecological impacts of
the Anthropocene, against a background of decadal-centennial scale variability?
The team will utilize recent marine sediments to reconstruct marine microfossil
response to both natural and anthropogenic environmental perturbation. This
research will utilize a suite of available sedimentary archives (over 20 piston,
box and multi cores), with moderately high sedimentation rates and available
geochemical records, to identify and interpret metazoan and protistan
assemblages. Microfossil assemblages will provide a framework to understand
past, modern and future climate and oceanographic processes along the California
margin. These results can be directly compared to modern instrumental records,
and utilized to better predict future impacts of environmental change in this
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.