* 1832446
* Building Capacity: Engaging Stem Transformative Experiences for Early Momentum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Mohammed Yahdi, Hartnell College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,762,226.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at Hartnell College will
advance the aims of the HSI Program by creating transformative early experiences
in STEM research that will help equip students to overcome obstacles to success
in STEM programs. To this end, it will develop short research experiences that
are structured in a workshop format. These experiences, called "Stepping
Stones," will be designed to support broad student participation. It is
predicted that the Stepping Stones research experiences will provide similar
benefits as those that have been documented for longer research experiences. The
project will directly affect the higher education experience of more than 1,000
community college students. Anticipated student outcomes include increased
degree completion at Hartnell College and increased transfer to a baccalaureate
STEM degree program. The project is a collaboration with Biological Sciences
Curriculum Study (BSCS) Science Learning, a non-profit organization that aims to
transform science education through research-driven innovation. Beyond its
impact on developing and researching the Stepping Stone approach, this
partnership has the potential to strengthen the research capacity at Hartnell
College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to enhance interest,
persistence, confidence, preparation, and success of students in STEM. The
Stepping Stone approach is designed to provide students with access to STEM
research early in their college education. Each Stepping Stone uses a
collaborative inquiry approach to engage groups of students in the investigation
of an authentic STEM research project. Each Stepping Stone has a short duration
and a flexible schedule, and enables students to apply design heuristics and to
produce meaningful, visible products. The partnership with BSCS Science Learning
will leverage experts and practitioners in the development of and research on
evidence-based methods to broaden participation of STEM students. The project
will investigate the impact of the Stepping Stones, including whether their
systematic implementation within the STEM program improves student outcomes. The
project will also analyze how collaborative faculty workshops influence the
design of the Stepping Stones and how the design heuristics manifest in the
Stepping Stones to improve student engagement and success. Both qualitative and
quantitative data will be collected and analyzed to determine the impact of the
project. This project seeks to develop a model that provides authentic research
experiences for large numbers of undergraduate students. If successful, this
model may be implemented at other colleges that have a diverse student body, and
that seek to increase student engagement, persistence, confidence, retention,
and success in STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.