* 1832320
* EAGER: Modeling DNA Manufacturing Processes Using Extensible Attribute Grammars
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2020
* Jean Peccoud, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 287,916.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project supports the
NSF mission of advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare by
increasing the capabilities, accessibility and affordability of manufacturing
services in support of America's leadership in the life sciences. The execution
of many complex DNA manufacturing projects essential for life sciences research
requires the combination of existing DNA fragments derived from biological
samples with new DNA fragments chemically synthesized by commercial operators.
Most life science laboratories lack the essential computational resources needed
to plan and execute the complex manufacturing workflows required on their own,
while commercial services are unwilling to perform the expensive, small batch
and highly customized syntheses that are needed. As a result, the demands of
many life science laboratories are outrunning the current capabilities of
commercial operators. This project will explore the potential for creating a
cybermanufacturing system that can make custom DNA fabrication accessible to
end-users. Advances from the research will ultimately be incorporated into
highly advanced commercial operations to serve the needs of the nation's life
sciences research community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project creatively
presents DNA manufacturing as a compelling domain for developing the conceptual
framework needed to enable cybermanufacturing. The project will model DNA
manufacturing processes using extensible attribute grammars that capture the
relationships between the structure and performance of synthesis processes. The
power of this conceptual breakthrough will be demonstrated by specifying a
domain-specific programming language that will allow end-users to define,
analyze, and execute complex DNA manufacturing projects. The language will
initially accommodate three classes of projects that represent a broad range of
DNA synthesis needs: 1) insertion of a synthetic DNA fragment into an existing
plasmid, 2) producing a library of plasmids that represents the combinatorial
assembly of a given set of DNA building blocks and 3) editing the genome of
yeast strains; an example of whole genome engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.