* 1832348
* Building Capacity: An Intervention to Improve Success of Biology Majors in Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Parvaneh Mohammadian, Los Angeles Mission College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,325,260.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project at Los Angeles Mission
College will advance the aims of the HSI Program by developing a student-
centered intervention to support the success of undergraduate biology students.
The project aims to increase the success of biology majors in their courses at
Los Angeles Mission College and in transfer to four-year universities. This
project plans to achieve these aims through weekly academic success workshops
that help biology majors pass college algebra and trigonometry courses. This
intervention is expected to stimulate student engagement in biology through
mathematics, which will increase student success and retention in gateway
mathematics courses and persistence in the major. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this project are to increase the persistence, success, retention rates,
and transfer rates of biology majors, with a focus on those in college algebra
and trigonometry courses. By making the quantitative aspects of biology more
engaging and relevant via academic success workshops, the project aims to
increase student success and retention rates in college algebra and
trigonometry. The academic success workshops will facilitate student peer
learning that are designed to increase a sense of community among students.
Faculty from Los Angeles Mission College and the University of California, Los
Angeles, will develop the supplemental materials and refine them via feedback
provided through implementation of academic success workshops at Los Angeles
Mission College. This project will also hold workshops for faculty from other
institutions seeking to enhance the quantitative experience of their biology
majors. The project will investigate the impact of supplemental materials used
in academic success workshops on student success in college algebra and
trigonometry, persistence to calculus, and successful transfer to four-year
universities. The project will analyze performance of students who attended the
academic success workshops to students who did not. The project will develop a
model that targets a diverse student population in the biological sciences that
may increase success, retention, and degree completion rates via contextualized
mathematics in the biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.