* 1832452
* Property-Ownership Implications for Resource Management in Critical Conservation Landscapes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Hannah Gosnell, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2022
* USD 225,000.00

This project will analyze patterns of private land ownership in the Greater
Yellowstone and Northern Great Plains regions to enhance understanding of how
land acquisition and management by individuals with high-net worth affects
natural resource management in rural, high-amenity regions of the western U.S.
and other locales. The researchers will quantify rates and volumes of land
ownership change and will analyze landowner decision making about resource
management and conservation at the property and landscape scales. Project
findings will assist in the development of an overarching model of the lifecycle
of property ownership by individuals with high net worth. Special foci of the
project are the processes through which land-ownership change influences the
success of cooperative wildlife management efforts. By addressing knowledge gaps
regarding emerging property-ownership regimes in rural landscapes, this research
will help address issues related to the different perspectives of high net-
worth, often-absent landowners and longer-term residents of high-amenity
regions. Through ongoing engagement with local and regional stakeholders in the
design, execution, and dissemination stages of the project, the investigators
will provide new information and insights that can address local issues and
increase public scientific literacy and public engagement with science in rural
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite increases in the number of individuals
with high net worth as proprietors of natural resources worldwide, few scholars
have examined the trajectories of these property ownership trends and their
implications for resource-management institutions that act as mediators in
social-ecological systems. The investigators will quantify rates and patterns of
ownership change through analyses of parcel and property sales data and
qualitative key informant data. They will employ ethnographic observation and
in-depth interviews to characterize landowner resource-management decisions with
a focus on key social and ecological influences, and they will analyze
cooperative elk-management institutions using social network and institutional
history approaches. The investigators will use a recently developed property-
landscape life course framework that focuses attention on spatial and temporal
dynamics of the relationships linking private landowners, the resources they
manage, and local institutions of resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.