* 1832472
* Building Capacity: Building Capacity of Women in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Chotiner, Mount Saint Mary's University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,349,872.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at Mount Saint Mary's
University will advance the aims of the HSI Program by increasing retention in
STEM, and preparing students for research and other opportunities in STEM.
Through this project, Mount Saint Mary's University aims to improve the quality
of STEM education for its undergraduate students, the majority of whom are
Hispanic women. The purpose of this project is three-fold: 1) increase student
interest, motivation, and retention in STEM; 2) prepare students for external
research opportunities, internships, and future employment opportunities in
STEM; and 3) increase student interest in conducting STEM research and attending
graduate school. Aligned with this purpose, the project seeks to achieve four
outcomes: 1) increased satisfactory completion of undergraduate STEM major
courses; 2) increased undergraduate student retention in STEM majors; 3)
increased undergraduate participation in research; and 4) increases in the
number of STEM graduates who enter graduate school or are employed in STEM
fields. By increasing women and Hispanic representation in graduate school and
the STEM workforce, the project can contribute to increased diversity and equity
in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to improve undergraduate
STEM education by: 1) revising biology, chemistry, and mathematics courses; 2)
providing academic support for students in STEM major courses; 3) offering
summer programs that prepare students for collegiate STEM courses and future
research opportunities; 4) providing students with peer and faculty mentoring
support; and 5) supporting research and internship experiences. The University
will specifically examine the effect that peer mentoring has on student
retention. Although peer mentoring has been examined by other researchers, this
project's unique combination of women and Hispanic students, and multi-year
mentoring will provide important new information. Both qualitative and
quantitative data will be collected. The project will determine the extent to
which the participants met the project goals as well as operational objectives.
The program will add to the body of knowledge on best practices to engage
undergraduate STEM students at both Hispanic-serving institutions and
institutions that have large populations of female
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.