* 1832462
* NSFGEO-NERC Proposal: Integrated Experimental and Dynamical Modeling of Top-down Crystallization in Terrestrial Cores: Implications for Core Cooling in the Earth
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2021
* Anne Pommier, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 10/31/2021
* USD 340,000.00

On Earth, the magnetic field generated in the core protects us from the Sun's
harmful radiation. It plays a major role in the presence of life and it is
therefore critical to understand how it is generated and can last through time.
This project combines experiments and theory to understand if and how the
cooling of the metallic core of planets generates a magnetic field and
influences the core's evolution. In particular, the project aims to provide a
"revised" standard model for the origin of the magnetic field in our planet. A
novel aspect of this proposal is the constant interactions between experiments
and theoretical models. Laboratory-based chemistry will be used to refine the
models, and numerical results will then be used to motivate new experiments at
specific compositions. The proposed study should improve the current
understanding of core crystallization in the Earth and also in other planets
such as Mercury and Mars. This work will be shared with the scientific community
and will contribute to the training of students as well as postdoctoral
researchers by the PIs both in the US and in the UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
standard model describing the origin of the geodynamo posits that the field is
maintained by slow cooling of the liquid iron core below a solid mantle and
gradual bottom-up freezing of the solid inner core. This model is no longer
tenable following the first calculations of the thermal conductivity of iron
alloys at core conditions, which predict rapid cooling, a young inner core and
pervasive melting of the lower mantle early in Earth's history. In this scenario
it is presently unclear how the geodynamo was powered before inner core
nucleation. Recent studies have argued that the ancient core could have
crystallized from the top down. The central objective of this joint
experimental-theoretical project is to understand if and how top-down
crystallization generates magnetic fields and influences the thermochemical
evolution of Earth's core. This project consists of two major interlinked
components: experiments on core analogues and theoretical models of core
evolution. Phase equilibria experiments will be carried out at pressure up to 30
GPa and temperature up to 2200degC in the multi-anvil apparatus at UCSD-SIO
using NSF-COMPRES assemblies. The team will consider the Fe-S-Mg(-O) and Fe-
S-O(-Si) systems, building on PI's recent experimental work in the Fe-S-O
system. Chemical analyses of quenched products will be used to determine the
chemistry of phases, the liquidus curve and the eutectic temperature for the
investigated systems. Results will be applied to the Earth's pressure and
temperature conditions using rigorous thermodynamic extrapolation, as is common
in experimental petrology, and will also be directly applicable to small
terrestrial planets. Experimental results will be incorporated to theoretical
models of the Earth's core and other terrestrial
bodies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.