* 1832191
* A Comparative Study of the Mobilization and Mutation of Wildlife Management Strategies
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Anne Short Gianotti, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2023
* USD 375,555.00

This research project will analyze how residents and officials in urban and
suburban municipalities understand and respond to growing populations of white-
tailed deer in their communities and how strategies for wildlife management
spread among different locations. This project will enhance fundamental
knowledge about the ways that the interactions between humans and deer (as well
as interactions with plants, ticks, and other objects involved in human-deer
relationships) shape the motivations and rationales behind different wildlife
management strategies. The project will demonstrate how different management
strategies circulate and evolve across different locations, with varied
approaches to environmental management being adapted in different locales as
humans and deer develop new relationships within cohabited spaces. Through the
examination of human-nonhuman relationships and the varied local and networked
forces that influence the politics of wildlife management, this project will
contribute new information and insights regarding wildlife management and
environmental politics in urban and suburban environments. Project findings will
support the development of wildlife management strategies that are responsive to
the distinct conditions of suburban and urban areas. The project also will
provide research-oriented education and training opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students, and it will support the development of high school and
college curricular materials that use suburban wildlife case studies to
understand socioecological systems and environmental
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As many wildlife populations recover or migrate
into urban and suburban residential areas, residents and local governments face
new questions related to whether and how to manage species that previously were
absent or rare. Much of the research on wildlife management has been concerned
with the maintenance of populations to support sustainable recreational hunting,
herd health, and forest ecology, but wildlife management plans in suburban
communities must respond to distinct concerns that often are related to health,
safety, and property of people. The successful population recovery and growth of
many animal populations within suburban and urban environments raises questions
about the place of animals in human-dominated spaces and challenges traditional
wildlife management approaches. The investigators will consider the shifting
management strategies and policies related to white-tailed deer across
municipalities in Massachusetts and New York, where deer populations have
increased precipitously in many areas and many local governments have responded
by creating hotly debated deer management programs that change access to public
lands and hunting policies. The investigators will seek answers to three sets of
questions regarding emerging deer management strategies: (1) How do concerns
about deer and the practices of deer management differ across and within
municipalities in Massachusetts and New York, and how have municipal rules about
deer hunting changed over the past two decades? (2) How have suburban managers
(broadly defined to include all actors in deer management and conflicts) come to
know and be concerned about deer, and when and how do deer become overabundant
and thus an object of management? (3) How have suburban managers learned about
deer management, and how are management strategies from elsewhere negotiated and
fit to new contexts? The investigators will address these questions using a
nested, mixed-method approach that will combines surveys, geospatial analysis,
in-depth interviews, archival research, and participant
observation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.