* 1832844
* Acquisition of an SEM with quantitative X-ray detectors to research Geology-Climate-Biology connections
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Christopher Roos, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2021
* USD 420,320.00

The award will permit the acquisition of a new Scanning Electron Microscope with
X-ray detectors that will facilitate and accelerate research into relationships
among geology, climate and biology in the rock record, at anthropologic sites
and in areas of active chemical remediation. It will be used to investigate
chemical variations at the micro-scale. Geological applications include studying
large historic and prehistoric volcanic eruptions that emit sulfur that causes
global cooling over multiple years. We will also analyze fossils to investigate
ancient life at the cellular level. Environmental engineering applications
include using synthetically produced materials and induced mineral growth to
remove toxic metals from water. Anthropology applications include investigating
the relationship between humans and the landscape by learning from charcoals
what were the critical sources of fuel for cooking fires, and also how fires in
the landscape impacted these peoples. Volcanic hazard assessment, water
contamination remediation and understanding the relationship between the
environment and native pasts and cultures all have clear positive impacts on
national interests. These are only a few examples of many future research
projects to be realized through the new Scanning Electron Microscope. This
instrument will promote the progress of currently NSF funded research in
Geobiology and Low Temperature Geochemistry, Sedimentary Geology and
Paleobiology, Dynamics of Coupled Natural and Human Systems, Earth-Life
Transitions, in addition to NSF Archaeology, Office of Polar Programs, the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program and Engineering and Education
Centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument to be purchased is a tungsten
filament Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), which will be outfitted with energy
dispersive (EDS) and wavelength dispersive (WDS) quantitative geochemical
detectors and a 3 color cathodoluminescence detector. This instrument will be a
unique and regional resource. It will support cutting-edge, fundamental research
into geology-climate-biology connections and other science and engineering
projects. The improved beam density at lower voltages of modern SEM instruments
allows for micro-geochemical applications (EDS/WDS) at high spatial resolutions.
The proposed SEM can achieve a resolution of 3-4 nm, allowing imaging of
microscopic fossil cellular features on the order of 100-500 nm and can
definitively identify taxon sources of sedimentary and anthropogenic charcoals.
SMU has a long history of running successful, productive electron beam and X-ray
instrumentation. The acquisition of the proposed SEM with X-ray detection will
make SMU a regional hub for these technologies. This will lead to numerous
research education opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.