* 1832069
* Excellence in Research:  Neuroanatomy and development of mammalian homeostatic sleep regulation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Daniel Hummer, Morehouse School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 01/31/2023
* USD 999,999.00

The need for sleep is universal. All animals do it, and sleep is very tightly
regulated. The consensus view of sleep regulation involves the interaction of
time-of-day driven processes and homeostatic processes. A biological daily clock
signals organisms to be awake at the appropriate time of day, whereas a
homeostatic process drives when, how long, and how deep animals sleep after
having been awake. Although there is a good understanding of the biological
clock and how it promotes wakefulness, little is known about how sleep
homeostasis works. Previous studies by this group of investigators has uncovered
a novel genetic tool useful for gaining understanding of this fundamental aspect
of sleep regulation in mammals. However, before dissecting how sleep homeostasis
works, it is necessary to identify the neurons involved in the regulation of
sleep homeostasis and where in brain they are located. This project leverages
the novel genetic tool, together with cutting-edge genetic and neuron-level
brain imaging techniques, to identify the specific neurons that are essential
for sleep homeostasis in mammals. Identification of these sleep homeostasis
neurons is critical for research aimed at uncovering the neural and molecular
mechanisms underlying sleep homeostasis in animals. The project also provides
extensive opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
to gain hands-on research experiences, with the goal of increasing participation
of members from underrepresented groups in STEM
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The essential neuroanatomy and subsequent
mechanistic underpinnings regulating sleep homeostasis in mammals are largely
unknown. The principal investigator and colleagues discovered a novel genetic
tool useful for gaining understanding this fundamental aspect of sleep
regulation, the mechanisms of sleep homeostasis. Specifically, the principal
investigator found that mice inheriting a null Ube3a allele specifically from
their mother (Ube3am-/p+) lack neuronal UBE3a expression and all known
homeostatic sleep responses. The heterozygous nature of this sleep phenotype,
combined with floxed Ube3a alleles that allow for either Cre-dependent loss- or
rescue- of UBE3a expression, and a growing resource of transgenic lines
expressing Cre recombinase in subsets of neurons coalesce into a unique
opportunity to employ a behavioral genetics strategy to identify essential sleep
homeostat neurons in mice. Here, the investigators use Cre-directed UBE3a
loss/rescue to address three fundamental aspects of sleep homeostasis: identify
which neurons are involved, when they are involved, and where they are located.
The studies include optimization and implementation of UBE3a immunofluorescence
detection in intact, cleared brains visualized by 3D light-sheet microscopy. The
anticipated outcome of the project is genetic, behavioral, electrophysiological
and anatomical identification of essential sleep homeostat neurons in mice. The
findings are critical for future work aimed at dissecting the neural and
molecular mechanisms underlying sleep homeostasis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.