* 1832335
* Building Capacity: STEM Faculty Professional Learning in the Zone of Proximal Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Lynn Tashiro, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project fulfills part of those
aims by building institutional capacity for improving undergraduate STEM
teaching and learning. This project, a collaboration between California State
University-Sacramento and the University of California-Irvine, will support
efforts to improve the teaching effectiveness of STEM faculty and to advance
knowledge about strategies that lead to increased use of evidence-based and
equity-minded teaching strategies. Using online, hybrid, and face-to-face
training formats, the project will provide customized professional learning
programs to help STEM faculty improve their teaching. The training will also
help faculty become aware of the roles of diversity, intercultural competence,
and critical consciousness in the development and persistence of students,
including those who are underrepresented in STEM. The faculty learning programs
will be designed to meet faculty where they are in their professional career and
in their understanding of equitable classroom practices. Over the project's
funding period, the investigators estimate that the project will help
approximately 125 faculty implement evidence-based and equity-minded teaching
strategies. These faculty have the potential to improve the learning of more
than 37,000 science and math undergraduate students, as well as to broaden the
participation and success of students underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developmental and adaptive over time, the faculty
development curriculum will include 1) fundamental teaching and learning skills;
2) discipline specific, evidence-based best practices; and 3) scholarship and
critical consciousness for equity and institutional change. It will implement
and assess a model to transform STEM cultural practices that focuses on faculty.
Using a combination of quantitative and qualitative approaches, large amounts of
faculty and student data will be disaggregated to examine the impact of a
developmental set of faculty professional learning programs. Instructional and
curricular products created by faculty in these programs and their effect on
student learning in developmental math, gateway, and lower division math and
science courses will be analyzed. A quantitative, quasi-experimental study using
institutional and program data, and a qualitative longitudinal study using
observation and interview data will examine how faculty and students change
because of STEM faculty participation in a learning program that is customized
to their zone of proximal development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.