* 1832291
* ISS: GOALI: Nonequilibrium Processing of Particle Suspensions with Thermal and Electrical Field Gradients
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Andrew Hollingsworth, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 231,700.00

Colloidal particles are particles with diameters between approximately 1
nanometer and 1 micron. They can be considered as blocks for building materials,
like atoms for forming molecules and crystals. In colloidal crystals, the
particles are organized in periodic structures with ordering on a range of
length scales from nanometers to millimeters or larger. Research on colloidal
crystals is motivated by several factors. They can be used to answer fundamental
questions related to the assembly of materials, and they have many potential
applications in electronics, photonics, and life sciences. However, the rich
variety of colloidal crystal structures observed on earth are influenced by the
effects of gravity, which leads to particles settling and may lead to motion of
the surrounding fluid. In this study, a team of researchers will study colloidal
crystal formation in both normal gravity in Earth-based experiments and in
microgravity on the International Space Station (ISS). These experiments will
reveal the important roles that gravity and external forces play on particle
assembly. Ultimately, the researchers will obtain a better understanding of how
to manipulate external forces to create colloidal crystals for high resolution
3D printing on Earth and in space.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Mechanisms for
formation of metastable and glassy phases in particle suspensions will be
studied in the ISS and for comparison on Earth. Colloidal particle suspensions
are the logical candidates to take advantage of long duration microgravity
because (i) they are important for a wide range of terrestrial and space
applications, (ii) they share the common feature of coupling between macroscopic
particle transport and structure transformations at a particle level and (iii)
an adequate explanation for basic features of structure formation in suspensions
observed in Earth experiments has not been made to date. Although the time and
equipment available for both ground and microgravity experiments is limited, the
team of researchers plans to have an impact in many of these areas due to the
novel use of field gradients to manipulate the particle density, which is the
control parameter for suspensions. Thus, instead of using many different samples
to access the interesting range of particle densities, a single sample will be
arranged in a field gradient in the sample cell to cover this range. As the
particle density is directly measured by microscopy in suspension experiments, a
priori knowledge of the gradient profile is not required. The experiments
involve setting up the field gradients and observing the resulting structures
and then locally mixing a region of known density to watch it glassify or
crystallize. Some knowledge of the suspension rheology will come from
observations of mixing processes, but quantitative data will come from
microrheology measurements through tracking particle thermal motion. The use of
colloidal suspensions with real space-time microscopic observations in these
studies makes them particularly attractive for teaching students at all levels.
We have and will continue to participate in education programs that use space
themes to improve interest and skills in STEM, to work with educational
professionals to translate the project work to lesson plans for the benefit of
students in middle and high school grades and to engage high school and
undergraduate students in laboratory work as well as to train and educate
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.