* 1832068
* Excellence in Research: Integrated Hazard and Traffic Modeling for Massive Evacuation in Florida Under Uncertainty of Hurricane Track
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Wenrui Huang, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,682.00

Hurricanes are frequent hazardous events in the State of Florida. More reliable
and more accurate model predictions of hurricane-induced coastal hazards will
provide better information for the development of effective operational plans
for hurricane evacuations. This research project will integrate uncertainty
analysis of hurricane tracks, hurricane-induced coastal hazard models, emergency
evacuation models, and models of accessibility and capacity of hurricane
shelters. With the new integration of these models and the capability to examine
the interdependencies of the critical infrastructures, better dynamic massive-
evacuation traffic modeling can be produced. This scientific research
contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of science and
to advance our national welfare with benefits that will improve future hurricane
evacuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates coastal hazard
modeling with comprehensive evacuation modeling while considering the
uncertainty of hurricane tracks. For each hurricane track, coastal hazard
modeling is conducted to identify areas affected by the hurricane. Integrated
with coastal hazard modeling, emergency evacuation models are used to develop
efficient comprehensive evacuation scenarios to avoid delays and bottlenecks of
traffic flows based on the consideration of voluntary evacuation, mandatory
evacuation, and shadow evacuation. A network optimization model maximizes the
accessibility and capacity of hurricane shelters. Selected historical hurricane
events are used as case studies to test the integrated coastal hazard and
evacuation models. This research exposes students at the HBCU institution of
Florida A&amp;M University to many coastal hazard and emergency relief issues,
which range from hazard assessments to resilience of roadway networks, enhancing
the quality of education and research for both undergraduate and graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.