* 1832745
* Student Support: 2019 Metal Powder Industries Federation (MPIF) Annual Conference;  Phoenix, Arizona; June 23-26, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Kester Clarke, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 11/30/2019
* USD 42,333.00

This award supports 40 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the 2019 PowderMET sponsored by the Metal Powder
Industries Federation. This premier powder metallurgy conference acts as a
bridge between industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions.
The award provides student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas
with leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and
governmental facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic
and international schools. In addition to nurturing a powder metallurgy
community, participants will learn the latest research areas and results in
powder metallurgy. Powder metallurgy is a topic with applications in literally
every portion of the manufacturing sector in the American economy, and therefore
directly impacts economic welfare and national security in the short term by
promulgating information, but in the long term by recruiting high-quality
engineers and scientists into this field. The workforce needs of powder
metallurgy have not been met for decades; with a workforce that will see large
retirements in the next few years, recruitment of current graduate students is
essential for this industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides the
student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas with leading
researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and governmental facilities,
as well as with students and faculty from both domestic and international
universities. In addition to nurturing a global powder metallurgy (traditional
press &amp; sinter, metal injection molding, isostatic pressing, and metal
additive manufacturing) vision, participants will learn the latest research
areas and results in the fields of interest. These opportunities will not only
improve the participants' knowledge in the field but also develop scientists and
engineers who are ideally suited to craft the next generation of designs in
powder metallurgy that will push the nation's manufacturing
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.