* 1832252
* Conference: Expanding the Reach of Community Geography; Atlanta, GA; Spring 2019
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Jerry Shannon, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 06/30/2021
* USD 36,743.00

This award will support a national conference dedicated to sharing current work
in Community Geography and laying the foundation for new collaborative projects.
Community Geography is a growing subfield that draws from geographical
techniques and theories to generate inclusive, mutually beneficial research and
action that empowers communities and works toward positive social change. Unlike
traditional research models, community geography emphasizes active partnerships
at each stage of the research process, with academics working side by side with
policymakers and community groups to address issues with real world relevance
such as: local and regional food systems, economic development, access to
affordable housing, and environmental or health problems. Through instruction
that emphasizes action-based learning outside the traditional classroom,
academic courses in Community Geography provide relevant and meaningful
classroom experiences for students. This award catalyzes a broader, more diverse
network of community geographers to gather and further these efforts. Workshop
presentations will also be shared through an online web repository and both
academic and non-academic publications. The conference will demonstrate how a
geographical perspective can help solve pressing social and environmental
problems and show how the discipline can better engage members of the general
public.

This conference will be attended by approximately forty individuals, including
academic faculty from research and teaching institutions, graduate students, and
non-academic community partners (for example, staff at non-profit organizations,
members of community groups, governmental employees). The conference will follow
a two-day structure. On the first day, participants will share current work in a
series of workshops and presentations. These will be recorded via video and
shared on a publicly accessible website. On the second day, attendees will
develop new ideas for collaborative research and teaching, identify common
threads in current work and identify a research agenda for the future. The goals
of this conference are to build and strengthen network connections among
attendees, share best practices within community geography, and generate new
ideas and resources to support community engaged scholarship within geography as
a discipline. This conference will be held at Georgia State University in
Atlanta, Georgia, but attendees will be recruited nationally and we expect that
it will have a national impact.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.