* 1832022
* Excellence in Research: Crosstalk between the STK4/Hippo and NF-Kappa B pathway in mammalian cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Bekir Cinar, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 563,042.00

The goal of this project is to understand how molecular signals inside the cell
are used to control cell size and growth, cell migration, and cell survival
under changing environmental conditions. Using mammalian cells grown in culture,
undergraduate and graduate students from an undergraduate institution that
serves students from disproportionately underrepresented African-American
communities will use a range of biochemical, molecular biology, genetics, and
genomics approaches to determine how components from different signaling
pathways communicate to coordinate cell growth. This project will provide
undergraduate and graduate students with training and educational opportunities
in biological sciences, allowing them to further pursue career goals in academia
or in life sciences industries. Additionally, incorporation of research findings
from this project into the classroom curriculum will further enhance their
quality of education and research in life sciences, helping to reduce
disparities in STEM employment by broadening participation in the Nation's STEM
research workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
mechanism of the interaction between the YAP/TEAD protein, a key nuclear
effector of the STK4/Hippo pathway, and RELA, a component of the NF-Kappa B
(NF&amp;#954;B) transcription factors. The aims of this project are (a) to
define the signaling mechanism that regulates YAP/TEAD and RELA interactions,
(b) to determine the mechanism by which YAP/TEAD and RELA proteins physically
interact in the cell, and (c) to demonstrate whether YAP/TEAD regulates the
RELA-DNA interaction and the RELA-dependent gene transcription and cellular
function. The techniques to be utilized in this project include high-throughput
RNA or DNA sequencing, CRISPR/Cas9-aided genome editing, chromatin-
immunoprecipitation and other molecular assays, and bioinformatics data
analysis. The outcomes of this research include a comprehensive dissection of
the mechanism of crosstalk between the STK4/Hippo and NF&amp;#954;B signaling in
mammalian cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.