* 1832457
* Building Capacity: Enhancing Undergraduate STEM Education by Enhancing Transfer Success
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Pamela Brown, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,499,767.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project will advance the aims of
the HSI Program by increasing the number of students from community colleges who
transfer to four-year STEM programs and by accelerating their baccalaureate
degree completion. This project is a collaboration between New York City College
of Technology (City Tech) and six City University of New York (CUNY) community
colleges, five of which are also HSIs. The partners include the Borough of
Manhattan Community College, Bronx Community College, Guttman Community College,
Hostos Community College, Kingsborough Community College, and LaGuardia
Community College. The project aims to increase the number of students from the
partnering community colleges who transfer into City Tech STEM programs and to
accelerate baccalaureate degree completion by associate degree graduates. To
accomplish these aims, the project plans to strengthen transfer pathways between
City Tech and the community college partners and to increase support for
transfer students at City Tech. This project has the potential to increase the
number of STEM students from underrepresented groups, which often begin pursuit
of higher education at a community college. In addition, because CUNY is the
largest urban public university system in the nation, innovations at CUNY can
provide an example to the nation of creative approaches to improve student
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to reduce barriers
that inhibit transfer of students from community colleges to City Tech, and to
maximize support for students who successfully transfer. To accomplish these
goals, the project will create two programs. First, using the existing CUNY
Pathways articulation initiative as a model, the project will develop a STEM
Transfer Collaborative to strengthen transfer pathways between City Tech and the
collaborating community colleges. Second, using the CUNY Accelerated Study in
Associate Programs initiative as a model, the project will develop a Momentum to
the Baccalaureate program to support junior and senior-level transfer students.
The project includes research on the impact on transfer student success of (1)
collaboration between 2-year and 4-year colleges, including curricular and
pedagogical alignment; (2) adoption of supports from an associate-degree support
program to upper-level baccalaureate students; and (3) initial matriculation at
a community college versus a baccalaureate institution. The research
methodologies and approaches in this study are informed by current and tested
qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods used in engineering education
research. This project may increase the number of students, including those from
underrepresented groups, earning baccalaureate degrees in career-focused, high-
demand majors. In addition, it has the potential to create new knowledge on the
critical national issue of how to expand opportunity and access to STEM
baccalaureate programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.