* 1832109
* Collaborative Research: Community Facility Support: Centers for Transformative Environmental Monitoring Programs (CTEMPs)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Scott Tyler, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,050,523.00

Support under this grant will allow for: 1) continued provision of high
resolution temperature sensing equipment to the geosciences community using a
recently expanded fiber optic-based distributed temperature sensing (DTS)
instrument pool; 2) development and promotion of the use of actively heated
optical fiber sensing for the measurement of soil moisture and fluid flux, 3)
support to the earth science community users of small unmanned aircraft systems
(sUAS) with both instrumentation and mission training and 4) development of
innovative environmental sensor systems that leverage 3-D printing, contemporary
sensors and micro-processors, as well as ubiquitous wireless communication. The
Center for Transformative Environmental Monitoring Programs (CTEMPs) facility
will offer hands-on training and knowledge dissemination, through its formal
designation as a Consortium for the Advancement of the Hydrologic Sciences
(CUAHSI) Hydrologic Measurement Facility (HMF) Node and formal agreements with
CUAHSI to promote two hands-on workshops per year as well as training on both
the OSU and UNR campuses. Outreach will also include mission training services
for earth sciences users of unmanned aircraft through UNR's Systems Integration
Laboratory, and extensive workshops and hackathons to develop a strategy to
support dissemination of novel sensing systems to expand the impact of the OPEnS
Lab. This support is congruent with NSFs mission of promoting the progress of
science and advancing the national health, prosperity and welfare given the
societal relevance of targeted research aimed at understanding global and
regional water cycles and climate change impacts with implications for improved
water resource management and the impact of the acquisition on training the next
generation scientific workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant provides
operational facility support for a collaborative effort between Oregon State
University (PI: Selker) and the University of Nevada Reno (PI: Tyler) to allow
for continued/evolving operations over the next four year of CTEMPs. CTEMPs
offers community support for 1) planning, training, equipment loan and field
implementation using fiber optic Raman backscatter Distributed Temperature
Sensing (DTS); 2) planning and training for sUAS equipment and missions; and 3)
Earth Science community engagement in the development of innovative sensor
systems that leverage 3-D printing, contemporary sensors and micro-processors,
as well as ubiquitous wireless communication through the a new arm of CTEMPs
called the "Openly Published Environmental Sensing (OPEnS)" Lab. DTS allows for
unprecedented observation of the spatial and temporal distribution of
temperature for geoscience and environmental applications including but not
limited to, snow, groundwater and watershed hydrology, aquatic and terrestrial
ecology, karst geology, soil science (including permafrost studies), physical
limnology and oceanography, micrometeorology and glaciology. High resolution DTS
systems allow for high spatial (&lt;= 0.25 m) and high accuracy (precision to
0.02 oC) observations of river bottom, lake, or estuary bottom, snow pack, soil
horizon or atmospheric temperatures over length scales from 0.25 to 10,000 m at
high temporal frequency (1 Hz). When placed in a stream or river, fiber optic
DTS allows for observation of the location, temperature, and flux of each
groundwater inflow, calculation of an exact heat budget to determine hyporheic
exchange, and observation of micro-thermal habitats critical to successful
larval fish recruitment. CTEMPs DTS systems have been deployed on NSF-funded
research projects located on all seven continents and continue to be in demand
for hydrologic and earth science field campaigns. Unmanned aircraft support has
included photogrammetry, thermal and hyperspectral remote sensing, and future
efforts will focus on community training and support. The advent of robust, low-
cost sensors, micro-processors, and wireless communication makes possible
transformative earth sensing systems, but requires technical expertise that is
not common in the earth sciences. Building on a track record of 25 successful
projects, OSU will explore the institutionalization of the community
infrastructure in the CTEMPs-OPEnS Lab. CTEMPs-OPEnS will explore how to
integrate central technical capabilities and outreach to the earth science
communities to accelerate the dissemination and application of transformative
measurement systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.