* 1832455
* I-Corps:  Perovskite Coating for Commercialization of Solar Power Harvesting
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,02/28/2019
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 02/28/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from a
cheaper method to convert solar energy into electrical power. While the solar
energy industry is booming, its share of the total energy market is well below
1% whereas oil, natural gas, and coal is used for 85% of total energy
consumption. The exhaustion of oil and gas supplies is ever growing near, and
the negative environmental impacts caused from these energy sources is of great
concern. Solar power is an excellent alternative energy source, but the
technology involved can be costly. This project's solar cell embedded coating is
substantially cheaper than traditional solar panels and can be implemented onto
structures where solar panels would not be feasible. Application of this coating
onto standard roofing materials provides an economical way to take advantage of
solar energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is for the
commercialization potential of perovskite solar cells. The perovskite material
is tin based, as opposed to the traditional, toxic lead-based variety. The
lifetime of the perovskites is extended by the elimination of oxidation through
encapsulating the perovskite solar cells at the atomic layer through our
proprietary carbon bonding nanotechnology. These perovskite solar cells can be
embedded into a coating to add solar energy capabilities to other materials.
This technology expands the frontiers of nanoscience to address several core
academic challenges: expanding the use of graphitic nanosystems into functional
materials, developing alternative technologies to make solar power the dominant
source of commercial energy in the United States, and providing skills of
delivering this intellectual property into the marketplace through the I-Corps
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.