* 1832545
* HSIs New to NSF: Using Ocean Plastic Research to Increase Student Engagement and Persistence in Biology
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jeff Bowman, National University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 249,978.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project at National University will
advance the aims of the HSI Program by adding research experiences to
undergraduate biology courses. Through a collaboration with the Scripps
Institution of Oceanography, this project will incorporate course-based
undergraduate research (CURE) biology courses for biology majors and for non-
majors. The research topics will focus on plastic pollution in the ocean.
Students taking these CURE courses will gain experiences in the scientific
process, which can positively affect their persistence and graduation in
biology, as well as their career goals. The project will also develop the
pathway from the non-major biology course into the biology major. Thus, National
University will build its ability in the biology program, increasing the number
of students enrolling in and completing the biology degree program. In addition,
dissemination of this CURE model could enable other institutions to achieve
similar gains in biology programs, thus broadening the project's
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will 1) develop and implement CURE
modules in undergraduate courses, 2) evaluate the effect of the modules on
student perception, engagement, and persistence in biology, and 3) expand CURE
modules to other institutions, particularly those with nontraditional students.
Through the CURE modules, the project aims to enhance student engagement and
increase student retention and completion of the Bachelor of Science in Biology.
The CURE modules will use microbiology and molecular biology techniques to study
microbial communities colonizing plastic waste in the ocean. Changes in
bacterial composition of coastal waters due to plastic pollution could affect
local ecosystems and human health in ways that have not yet been determined.
Linking topics in the biology courses to a current research problem in a local
environment may increase students' interest in pursuing science careers. This
project will expand undergraduate biology education to informal settings with a
focus on serving nontraditional students in accelerated course settings. The
impact of this experience on students' career goals, as well as persistence and
graduation in STEM disciplines, will be evaluated through quantitative and
qualitative data. Students' personal circumstances and insights will be examined
to gain insight on effective institutional policies and support mechanisms. This
project will develop a model that may be implemented at other institutions
seeking to enhance their biology program via regionally relevant
CUREs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.