* 1832465
* A Robust and Reliable Resource for Accessing, Sharing, and Analyzing Confidential Geospatial Research Data
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Douglas Richardson, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 04/30/2020
* USD 600,000.00

This project will undertake a set of interrelated research activities to enhance
a robust and reliable geospatial virtual data enclave (GVDE) that will
facilitate the sharing of geospatial research data while also maintaining the
confidentiality of individuals whose identities may be at risk because of the
distinctive characteristics of geospatial data. This collaborative project
between the American Association of Geographers (AAG), the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, and the University of Michigan's Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) will enhance an
infrastructural resource that will advance scientific research by building
capacity for data sharing in geospatial data-intensive research communities in
the social, environmental, and related sciences that use geospatial data. The
GVDE resource will make a wide range of geospatial, spatial statistical, and
geographic information system software available to allow researchers to share,
access, build on, and conduct new research involving confidential data within
the enclave. It will be a secure research environment for sharing confidential
geospatial research data, thereby enabling the replication of prior research
involving confidential geospatial data. The GVDE will create new research
infrastructure for scientists to share data so that research results are
replicable and national investments in data creation are preserved for
subsequent analysis. The project will train researchers in techniques to protect
confidentiality in geospatial data. Graduate students will be involved in the
enhancement of this infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ability to
replicate and reproduce research is a corner-stone of scientific methodology.
The generation and analysis of geospatial and locational data is at the frontier
of many scientific domains, yet the unique characteristics of these data present
special challenges to data-sharing practices due to the need to protect the
locational privacy and confidentiality of research subjects. The privacy
challenges of confidential geospatial data are not yet fully understood by many
members of the scientific research community. As a result, research is often
impeded by uncertainty regarding geospatial data confidentiality or by a lack of
effective methods for safely sharing and accessing confidential geospatial
research data for analysis or replication. To address these problems, the
investigators will enhance the GVDE and its core capabilities to share, access,
analyze, and replicate geospatial data. They will evaluate and implement
confidentiality protection techniques to enable researchers to anonymize and
export maps, analyses, and visualizations derived from analyses conducted in the
GVDE. They will develop and implement a researcher credentialing system to
provide trained and trusted researchers with a durable digital identifier to
safely access and use the GVDE. They will also ensure the long-term
sustainability of the GVDE system and expand its availability to the broader
geospatial research community through outreach, dissemination, and the
development of training materials on system use, data confidentiality ethics,
credentialing requirements, research replication, and best
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.