* 1832026
* Excellence in Research:  Involvement of MEF-2 transcription factor in mitochondrial stress response through SOD2
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Atanu Duttaroy, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 411,125.00

Oxygen, in combination with other molecules, generates energy that powers many
biochemical processes. Without oxygen, humans could not exist. However, in the
process of generating energy by "burning" nutrients with oxygen, certain "rogue"
oxygen molecules, known as reactive oxygen species (ROS), are created as
inevitable byproducts. One of the body's most powerful natural antioxidant
enzymes is superoxide dismutase (SOD), which is responsible for disarming the
most dangerous free radicals of all: the highly reactive superoxide radicals.
All human cells produce superoxide dismutase to neutralize these superoxide
radicals. It has been shown consistently that muscle activity leads to a strong
increase in ROS production due to increased oxygen consumption. The investigator
will test the hypothesis that a muscle specific protein, called Myocyte
Enhancing Factor-2 (MEF-2), regulates SOD expression in the muscle tissue. Using
a variety of molecular and cell biological procedures, the mechanistic link
between MEF2 and SOD in muscle tissue will be evaluated. The project will
provide state of the art technical skills to many undergraduate students who
will be involved in many parts of the experiments. Howard University, a
culturally diverse, research-intensive Historically Black College and University
(HBCU) has approximately 97% of enrollees who are African Americans, therefore,
the project will provide rich training opportunities for underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Muscle function depends on high-level oxygen
consumption and the concomitant high-level flux of toxic reactive oxygen species
(ROS) that are generated as by-products of oxygen metabolism. Manganese
superoxide dismutase (or SOD2) is engaged in the mitochondrial defense against
reactive oxygen species (ROS). Loss of SOD2 function causes neonatal lethality.
SOD2 function is more critical in muscles than in other tissues, which is
consistent with the high level of oxygen consumption and prolific ROS generation
by muscle mitochondria. So, unfettered ROS production is a mitochondrial hazard.
As a transcription factor, Myocyte Enhancing Factor-2 (MEF-2) plays a critical
role in the specification and subsequent differentiation of all muscle types.
MEF-2 continues to be expressed in adult muscles with no other function
attributed to MEF-2 in adult insects. In Drosophila, SOD2 expression is
dependent on the presence of MEF-2 transcription factor. The central hypothesis
of this proposal is that MEF-2 plays a novel, continuing role in adult muscle
physiology by modulating mitochondrial stress response through SOD2. The three
specific objectives are to determine: 1) the mechanistic connection between
MEF-2 and SOD2 in adult muscle, 2) the influence of the MEF-2/SOD2 interaction
on oxidative stress response and mitochondrial integrity, and 3) the broad
biological significance of the MEF-2/SOD2 interaction on muscle biology at the
whole organism level. The proposed study will contribute to the understanding of
oxidative damage in muscle specifically in context to the biology of
mitochondria. Research training opportunities will be provided to many
underrepresented minority undergraduate and graduate students, who will acquire
new skills with basic and translational applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.