* 1832662
* CRISP 2.0 Type 2: Anatomy of Coupled Human-Infrastructure Systems Resilience to Urban Flooding: Integrated Assessment of Social, Institutional, and Physical Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Philip Berke, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 12/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes
(CRISP) project examines the complex interactions among stakeholders' social
networks, networks of community plans, and physical infrastructure networks
relevant to flood vulnerability and resilience. By focusing on the
interdependencies among flood control, transportation, and emergency response
infrastructure, the research will advance understanding that can then underpin
new approaches to integrating engineering, planning, and policy to improve
community resilience to hurricane and flooding hazards. This improved
understanding can also be useful to communities in planning greater coordination
among federal, state, regional, and local stakeholders involved in hazard
mitigation and infrastructure development planning and policy. This scientific
research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance our national welfare with benefits that will reduce
future flood impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
interdisciplinary contributions from civil engineering, network science, urban
planning, and public policy. The project focuses on the interdependencies among
flood control, transportation, and emergency response infrastructure. The
expected contributions are: (1) fundamental knowledge of the dynamics of
stakeholders' social networks and the influence of these networks on the
integration of flood mitigation and infrastructure resilience plans and
policies; (2) new methods for achieving greater integration across plans and
policies based on deeper understanding of infrastructure networks
interdependencies; and (3) new insights into infrastructure network
interdependencies, social vulnerability, and hazard exposure on urban spatial
structure of flood risk diffusion. The expected methodological and theoretical
innovations will be tested in Houston/Harris County using empirical datasets
from the 2017 Hurricane Harvey. These contributions can transform the flood
resilience planning and policy processes in interdependent infrastructure
systems in coastal urban areas. The project will also be the source of strong
multidisciplinary training for next generation researchers in engineering,
science, and policy through education and outreach activities that integrate the
research findings into interdisciplinary educational programs, engage students
from underrepresented groups in science and engineering, and conduct a policy
workshop to disseminate the findings to a broader
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.