* 1832090
* Excellence in Research: Pathways to Academic Success in African American Children
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* A Blankson, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 09/30/2023
* USD 649,809.00

Children with better cognitive skills perform better in school. Academic
performance begins to stabilize by the third grade, thereby setting the stage
for scholarly achievements in high school. Most knowledge about this topic has
been gleaned from studies of Caucasian children or low-income African American
children. Little is known about predictors of early achievement across various
socioeconomic levels among African American children. For this study, the
investigator will conduct a longitudinal follow-up of an economically diverse
sample of African American children who were originally assessed when they were
in preschool and kindergarten. Data will be collected about these children at
two additional time points that coincide with their fourth and fifth grade
years. This study will advance knowledge regarding academic achievement of
African American children by identifying developmental interconnections between
achievement and three cognitive processes, and by determining how the
interaction of these cognitive processes with classroom quality and student-
teacher relationship quality are linked to academic success in math and
reading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using an economically diverse sample of African
American children, the investigator will assess child/family demographics, child
cognitive ability (crystallized intelligence, fluid intelligence, executive
functioning), classroom quality, student-teacher relationship quality, and
academic achievement. The investigator hypothesizes that fluid intelligence and
executive functioning will predict math achievement, while crystallized
intelligence will predict reading achievement. The investigator also
hypothesizes that executive functioning will mediate the association between
fluid and crystallized intelligence, and that fluid (compared to crystallized)
intelligence will be a more distal predictor of achievement. In addition, the
investigator predicts that associations between cognition and achievement will
be moderated and/or mediated by classroom quality and student-teacher
relationship quality. The project will have a significant impact on science,
educational policy, and society by increasing basic understanding of factors
that impact early academic achievement. The study will also provide training and
mentoring opportunities for female undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.