* 1832002
* Rigidity and Shape Transitions in Living and Nonliving Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* Jennifer Schwarz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2022
* USD 377,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research and education to study transformations of particle and cellular systems
from fluid-like states to rigid states. From coffee beans easily flowing out of
a hopper to annoyingly getting stuck within it, from a pile of sand initially
supporting a person's weight to suddenly collapsing beneath them, and from cells
in a biological tissue readily moving past each other to remaining fixed in
place, the phenomenon of a disordered collection of particles (beans, sand, or
cells) transitioning from a flowing liquid to a rigid, disordered solid (or
vice-versa) is ever present around us. The PI and her group will conduct
analytical and numerical studies of the rigidity transition---a transition from
a system that is flowing or floppy, such as a liquid, to one that is rigid, such
as a disordered solid---to be able to predict how and when the transition
emerges. More specifically, they will study frictional particle packings and
random tilings of deformable polygons as cellular tissues to understand the role
of inter-particle and intercellular friction on the rigidity transition. To do
so, they will continue to develop algorithms to map out rigid clusters, or
regions of rigidity, in such systems. Localized rigid clusters grow in the
floppy/flowing phase and eventually connect to become a system-spanning rigid
cluster at the rigidity transition. Study of the spatial structure of the rigid
clusters will therefore allow for predictions as to how to mechanically
destabilize or stabilize the system by removing or adding inter-particle
contacts and/or interactions at the individual particle/cell level. This
approach will make the transition more controllable and thus safer should the
system need to continue to support weight, for example.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI and her group will also investigate how rigidity transitions in the bulk of a
system affect the shape of an interface between a disordered network of springs
and a disordered particle packing. This situation is particularly relevant to
the interface between the cellular cytoskeleton inside the cell, modeled as a
disordered spring network, and the DNA inside the cell nucleus, modeled as a
particle packing. The PI and her group will also study shape transitions at soft
matter surfaces, such as the creasing transition---a transition from a flat
surface to one with very localized folds. These shape studies will lead to new
inroads in the understanding of mechanical factors affecting the transcription
of DNA, and studying the developing brain as a material via creasing may help us
ultimately understands how it functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
contributing towards a generic, microscopic framework for the onset of rigidity
in nonliving systems, the proposed work extends the reach of physics to living
systems to help drive the emerging field of quantitative biology. Moreover, the
PI proposes to recruit more women to physics by discussing the scientific
advances used to decouple the biological clock and the tenure clock to senior
graduate students and post-docs. The PI will also introduce farm physics to
school children visiting Indian Creek Farm, a u-pick apple orchard/farm in
Ithaca, NY. It is a unique opportunity to combine physics with orchardry/farming
to make physics interactive and fun. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to study the rigidity transition in various particulate and biological
systems. Disordered spring networks, amorphous packings of particles, and random
tilings of the plane by deformable polygons all exhibit a rigidity transition
between a floppy/fluid-like state and a rigid/amorphous solid state. At the
heart of every rigidity transition is the onset of a spanning rigid cluster,
which has been studied in disordered spring networks for several decades now. In
2016, an algorithm based on the (3,3) pebble game was used by the PI and her
collaborators to identify rigid clusters in numerically-generated packings of
frictional discs. The spanning rigid cluster near the rigidity transition
exhibited partial rigidity, or floppy regions surrounded by rigid regions, which
is a feature not found in frictionless disc packings. The PI and her group will
continue to numerically explore the strengths and weaknesses of the frictional
(3,3) pebble game as applied to frictional particle packings to better
understand how rotations couple to translations in frictional packings of
nonliving granular matter in 2- and ultimately 3-dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;The
emergence of rigidity abounds in living matter as well. Confluent (no gap)
monolayers of biological cells exhibit a rigidity transition, which can be
captured in a vertex model where a preferred cell perimeter is varied while
maintaining a packing fraction of unity. Since regulation of a rigidity
transition is important in both a materials sense and a biological sense, it
behooves one to ask: How does the location and the nature of the rigidity
transition in vertex models change with variations in the model? The PI and her
group will construct a dimerized version of the vertex model studied previously
and analytically and numerically examine the location and nature of the rigidity
transition. Mechanosensitive activity in the form of a vertex model coupled to
an underlying spring network to model cell-cell adhesion will also be
investigated as will a rigid cluster description for these new vertex models.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rigidity transitions are typically analyzed in bulk. The
PI and her group will numerically explore the shape of an interface between two
coupled disordered materials that can each undergo a rigidity transition
independently. Does the interface undergo a shape transition from flat to
crumpled as the two systems are tuned through their respective rigidity
transitions? This situation is particularly relevant to the interface between
the cellular cytoskeleton inside the cell and the DNA inside the cell nucleus,
along with mechanical coupling between them. With this application to living
matter, activity via ATP hydrolysis drives the two systems and so the PI and her
group will determine how an active spring network, the cytoskeleton, and an
active particle-like model, the DNA, interact such that deformations outside the
cell nucleus potentially cause deformations inside it. Shape transitions also
occur at surfaces. A recent analytical microscopic theory for the shape
transition known as creasing in soft matter surfaces will be studied further by
the PI and her group to uncover how crease patterns arise on flat and curved
surfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ideas presented here contribute towards a
generic, microscopic framework for the onset of rigidity in not just spring
networks and particle packings, but in vertex models as well. Moreover,
extending the reach of physics to living systems helps drive the emerging field
of quantitative biology. The mechanically coupled cytoskeleton-DNA system may
lead to new inroads in the understanding of mechanical factors affecting
transcription, while understanding the developing brain as a material via
creasing will advance understanding of how it functions. To recruit more women
into physics to help propel the field to new heights, the PI will give a seminar
discussing the scientific advances used to decouple the biological clock and the
tenure clock to senior graduate students and post-docs. The PI will also
introduce farm physics to school children visiting Indian Creek Farm, a u-pick
apple orchard/farm in Ithaca, NY. It is a unique opportunity to combine physics
with orchardry/farming to make physics fun and help create a future generation
of physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.