* 1832163
* Excellence in Research:  Investigation of RECQ1 helicase in DNA transactions upon oxidative stress
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Sudha Sharma, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 07/31/2024
* USD 731,285.00

The characteristics of each cell are defined by its DNA, a double-stranded
helical molecule composed of two intertwined single strands of DNA. During the
normal course of life cells sustain DNA damage, which must be repaired to
maintain genetic integrity. This project will investigate how RECQ1, a DNA
helicase that separates the two strands of DNA, helps repair DNA damage and
maintain genome stability. RecQ helicases are present in all kingdoms of life
and therefore this work will have broad relevance. This research will promote
the careers of both graduate and undergraduate students. The work will provide
opportunities to earn course credits for Directed Research or for an Honors
thesis in the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology at Howard
University. Hands-on training in fundamental laboratory skills and
interdisciplinary research training will prepare students for success in
graduate education and in their future scientific careers in academia or in
industrial biotechnology. The PI also performs outreach to broaden participation
of women in science through the American Association of University Women, the
NIH Women of Color in Science, and through another NSF initiative called HU-
ADVANCE-IT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this project is that
RECQ1 acts as a barrier against genetic instability triggered by oxidative
stress and the functional association of RECQ1 with oxidatively damaged
chromatin ensures faithful expression and propagation of genetic information.
The first aim is to establish the role of RECQ1 in activation of DNA damage
response to oxidative stress and in replication fork progression during repair
of oxidative DNA damage. In the second aim, unbiased biochemical and cellular
approaches will be employed to determine catalytic activities of RECQ1 and its
interacting protein partners that allow it to facilitate repair of oxidative DNA
damage. The final aim will test the impact of RECQ1 on transcriptional response
to oxidative DNA damage and whether this is mediated through specific binding to
genomic regions susceptible to oxidation or form G-quadruplexes. Collectively,
this research will ascertain the exact role of RECQ1 helicase under oxidative
stress at the levels of replication, repair and transcriptional control. This
knowledge will also help determine whether different RecQ family members have
functional redundancies or whether they have specialized functions that may be
critical in regulating oxidative (and other genotoxic) stress in the
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.