* 1832567
* Building Capacity: City College of New York STEM Communities
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Joseph Barba, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project at the City University of
University of New York (CUNY City College) will advance the aims of the HSI
Program by building a social media platform designed specifically for students
entering, continuing, or transferring into STEM majors. Students transitioning
from high school to college, from two-year institutions to four-year
institutions, or from lower division to upper division coursework face academic
and logistical challenges. These challenges include navigating a new
environment, learning the mechanics of registration and other campus activities,
and dealing with changes in rigor and pacing in coursework. These challenges can
be amplified at urban institutions, where commuting and working outside the
classroom present added obstacles. CUNY City College plans to address these
challenges by building a social media platform for students entering,
continuing, or transferring into STEM majors. The platform will be designed as a
"one-stop" location for academic support, tutoring, and social interaction. The
platform is envisioned to also promote networking and interaction for students
with limited time on campus due to commuting or work needs. The platform will
also be a home for virtual tutoring and will list resources and contact
information (e.g. financial aid) to connect students with what they need on
campus. It is expected that this platform will improve student success and
retention in STEM, thus contributing to increasing diversity in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A social media platform that supports community-building
and information sharing interventions may assist students at critical
transitions by improving access to critical services for students who attend
urban commuter schools. Successfully addressing culture shock is expected to
result in higher retention and graduation rates for these students. This
hypothesis will be explored by creating the CUNY City College STEM Communities
platform: a custom-built, open-source, social networking platform intended to
augment and extend the outreach and support services that CUNY City College
offers to incoming students, transfer students, and students transitioning from
lower division to upper division coursework. CUNY City College STEM Communities
is also expected to draw these students into social and informational
interactions that will mitigate the effects of culture shock, resulting in
increased retention and graduation rates. CUNY City College STEM Communities has
four objectives: 1) to explore the degree to which a custom-constructed social
media platform can build and extend student engagement opportunities at multiple
levels with peers, mentors, and student organizations to mitigate culture shock;
2) to explore the degree to which that platform can also improve student
educational achievement and workforce preparation through the mobilization of
"affinity groups" focused on experiential learning, research, entrepreneurship,
student clubs, and gateway classes that are supported by near-peer Course
Connectors, enhanced by academic support during flexible hours, and buttressed
by teaching assistants and faculty; 3) to increase cohort members' self-efficacy
and internal locus of control through an online social belonging intervention;
and 4) to contribute to the literature on factors producing and affecting campus
culture shock, particularly at urban commuter colleges, and its mitigation
through the use of social media. The results of this research will identify
factors that contribute to the cultural shock in transitioning underrepresented
STEM students and will explore the effectiveness of social media to mitigate
it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.