* 1832065
* Identification of Urban Flood Impacts Caused by Land Subsidence and Sea Level Rise for the Houston-Galveston Region
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Jiang Li, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2023
* USD 599,212.00

In addition to being vulnerable to natural hazards such as hurricanes or
tropical storms, many coastal cities also experience significant land subsidence
and sea level rise which can exacerbate the urban floods. Although many previous
studies have started to realize the significant impacts imposed by land
subsidence and sea level rise to coastal communities, incorporating these
factors into flood inundation modeling and planning is still a challenge. To
address this challenge, this project develops a model to understand and identify
the contributing impacts from land subsidence and sea level rise to urban
floods. The model will be tested on the Houston-Galveston region using selected
extreme events including Hurricane Harvey which occurred in 2017. The goal of
the project is to improve U.S. urban flood mitigation and strategic planning to
save lives and protect properties from damage and to increase urban
sustainability and resilience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed
research is to understand and identify urban flood exacerbated by the
contributing impacts from land subsidence and sea level rise. The enhanced
hydrologic and hydraulic models will be coupled with a developed land subsidence
simulation model and one sea level rise projection model downscaled to the San
Jacinto River Basin to identify corresponding flood impacts contributed by land
subsidence and sea level rise for the Houston-Galveston region. The proposed
methodology assimilates land subsidence and sea level rise scenarios into
hydrologic and hydraulic modeling to delineate inundation extents. This method
takes advantage of a processed-based distributed hydrologic model to reveal the
underpinning of the urban flood exacerbated by land subsidence and sea level
rise. The Houston-Galveston region is selected as the test-bed for the proposed
project, a historical land subsidence zone that has subsided up to 10 ft. since
1940s and where sea level rise is projected to rise another 1 to 4 ft. by 2100.
The research results will advance current knowledge on interactions among
atmospheric, hydrological and geological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.