* 1832243
* HSIs New to NSF: Los Futuros de STEM (STEM Futures): Building Student Success in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Nicholas Alfonso, Pueblo Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,445.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project fulfills part of those
aims by building capacity at Pueblo Community College to meet the needs of low-
income students in the STEM pipeline. The project will create a STEM
professional development program, enhance student supports, and develop co-
requisite supplemental instruction. It is expected that these capacity building
efforts will increase student enrollment and graduation rates in STEM programs
at Pueblo Community College. This project will also engage students in STEM
careers through partnerships with local industry so that students can build a
future in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop the Pueblo
Community College educational experience that includes campus outreach, targeted
recruitment, curricular redesign, close advising, academic alerts, and
faculty/staff professional development. The goal of the project is to increase
STEM student success, including enrollment, performance, persistence,
graduation, and the transfer to four-year STEM degree programs. Students will
receive faculty mentoring to improve self-efficacy and scientific literacy.
Learning will be enhanced via the creation of unique supplemental instruction
courses to improve academic performance, self-efficacy, and persistence. The
supplemental instruction structure will be developed for mathematics, biology,
and physical sciences course often taken by first-semester students. The
supplemental instruction in science courses will include interactions with STEM
faculty mentors, student peer mentors, and industry partners to further connect
the course content to STEM programs and careers. This project will investigate
how to develop effective personal, curriculum, and academic supports that
promote student enrollment and persistence in STEM majors. By collecting both
quantitative and qualitative data, the project will generate new knowledge about
factors that stimulate student success in STEM at the community college
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.