* 1832121
* HBCU-Excellence in Research: Understanding Atmospheric Moist Convection and Organization Using Automatic Feature Identification and Tracking
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Xiaowen Li, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,827.00

Convective updraft core and its lifecycle are fundamental processes in
atmospheric moist convection. Cumulus parameterization is a critical component
in global climate prediction. The ultimate goal of the study is to improve
cumulus parameterization using a physically based, time-variant convective
updraft core concept. The close collaborations between the PI and Co-PI will add
new research field (atmospheric sciences) and strengthen the current research
and teaching (computer sciences) at Morgan State University, an HBCU
(Historically Black Colleges and Universities) that has been recently designated
as Maryland's preeminent public urban research university. An education
component is built into the study, where a graduate student and an undergraduate
student will be supported and trained in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics) field at Morgan State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coherent
updraft cores are the engine for convective heat and moisture transport.
However, systematic study of convective updraft cores from a Lagrangian point of
view has not been performed before. This project will take advantages of
existing computer image recognition and machine learning algorithms, adapt them
to high resolution cloud-resolving model simulations, in order to automatically
identify updraft core features and track them throughout their full life cycle.
Three sets of progressively more sophisticated simulations will be carried out:
ensemble simulations of triggered single convection, quasi-equilibrium state
simulation, and case studies using observed large-scale forcing. Convective
updraft core characteristics such as their sizes, depths, lifespan and spatial
distributions will be derived from these simulations. Model sensitivity tests
that perturb environmental conditions, e.g., stability, water vapor, wind shear,
will reveal environmental controls on updraft core characteristics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Convection organization will also be studied in the
context of updraft cores through their congregation, merging and splitting.
Although not immediately achievable in the framework of current project, the
ultimate goal is to use the time-variant convective core concept established in
this study to improve cumulus parameterization in global climate predictions. A
database including thousands of convective updraft cores and their lifecycles
will be compiled and made public through this project for further
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an interdisciplinary study that takes
advantage of existing data mining and machine learning algorithms in information
sciences and applies them to 3D wind fields where convection is embedded.
Identifying and tracking updraft cores is a novel approach that will provide new
insights to dynamics and physics of moist convection and its organization. The
time-dependent updraft core concept can potentially be used to replace the
steady state plume model in current GCM cumulus parameterizations, allowing for
a scale-independent cumulus parameterization with a physical underlying
concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.