* 1832846
* IDBR TYPE A: Definitive Chemical Analysis of Microbial Volatile Mixtures and Chemical Intermediates via Microwave Spectroscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2017,06/30/2022
* David Patterson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 06/30/2022
* USD 592,100.00

An award is made by the Instrument Development for Biological Research (IDBR)
program in the Division of Biological Infrastructure and the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging (CMI) program in the division of Chemistry to Harvard
University to develop new instrumentation which can measure the complex mixtures
of volatile molecules found in diverse chemical and biochemical environments.
The instrument will be able to completely analyze complex mixtures of molecules
in microbiomes and in rapidly changing chemical environments. The microbes that
live on and within vertebrates play a critical role in metabolism, but the
molecular mechanisms underlying their influence are not well understood. This
instrument will allow simultaneous monitoring of many molecules produced by
these microbes. The same instrumentation will also be adapted to detect
important, short-lived chemical species. These highly reactive species play
central roles in many chemical reactions - for example, in flames and in the
atmosphere - but many have never been directly observed. Developing this
instrumentation will also provide an ideal arena for an interdisciplinary
collaboration in which undergraduate and graduate students in physics,
chemistry, and chemical biology will learn about the challenges and capabilities
of each other's areas of science. Overall, advancing this technology will add a
powerful technique to the suite of chemical analysis tools currently available
to the microbiology and chemistry
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting, identifying, and
quantifying the complex mixtures of volatile, reactive molecules found in
microbiomes and many other chemical environments is a challenging and important
problem. A host of sensitive mixture analysis techniques exist today, but no
technique can definitively analyze gas phase mixtures with hundreds of
components, and many methods require laborious adjustment for each new species
to be analyzed. The analysis of short lived, reactive species is a particularly
difficult problem, as most separation techniques operate too slowly to observe
such molecules. Fourier Transform Microwave Spectroscopy (FTMW) is exceptionally
well suited to this challenging analysis problem. FTMW works by exciting and
then detecting narrow, highly specific rotational (microwave) resonances in gas
phase molecules. Fingerprints of distinct species can be separated
electronically, and physical separation or purification of samples is not
required, even for mixtures with hundreds of components. The new instrumentation
leverages recent advances in microwave spectroscopy techniques, cryogenics, and
fast electronics to dramatically increase the sensitivity of FTMW. The cryogenic
techniques used here further provide one of the most inert chemical environments
ever achieved, allowing for the stabilization and detection of highly reactive
compounds. These reactive compounds play critical roles in many chemical
environments, despite lasting for a small fraction of a second under typical
conditions. The instrumentation will be adapted to study both complex mixtures
produced in microbiomes and reactive mixtures produced in rapidly changing
chemical environments. This instrumentation will allow scientists to unravel
chemical environments of previously unmanageable complexity, providing an
important new tool for studying a wide range of important chemical and
biochemical systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is being made jointly by
two Programs- (1) Instrument Development for Biological Research, in the
Division of Biological Infrastructure (Biological Sciences Directorate), and (2)
Chemical Measurement and Imaging, in the Division of Chemistry