* 1832910
* RII Track-4: Using the Cryopreservation and Microfluidic Technologies to Engineer Bottlenose Dolphin Ovarian Function for Testing Marine Contaminants' Female Reproductive Toxicity
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Shuo Xiao, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2020
* USD 214,400.00

Nontechnical description of the project&lt;br/&gt;The bottlenose dolphin is the
most common marine mammal along the U.S. coastal states and is designated as a
federally protected species under the Marine Mammals Protection Act (MMPA). As
one of the apex predators and by having extensive lipid-rich blubber layers, the
bottlenose dolphin is more susceptible to the bioaccumulation of lipid soluble
marine contaminants. Many of these contaminants are endocrine disrupting
chemicals (EDCs) such as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and phthalates, that
can adversely impact the female reproductive functions of marine mammals.
Studies related to investigating the effect of marine contaminants on female
bottlenose dolphin reproduction are dependent on recording whether a dolphin can
be pregnant and produce a viable calf. However, it is difficult to monitor the
specific impact of EDC's on the ovary and its related functions. The central
objective of this research proposal is to use the cryopreservation and 3D
microfluidic technologies to engineer the bottlenose dolphin ovarian function in
vitro. The proposed research will allow the establishment of a high-throughput
ovarian toxicity screening platform to determine the reproductive toxicity of
marine contaminants on female bottlenose dolphins as well as other marine
mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description of the project&lt;br/&gt;The
ovary is the primary female reproductive organ and contains follicles at various
developmental stages. The follicle primarily functions to secrete sex steroid
hormones and to support its enclosed germ cell oocyte for maturation, ovulation,
and fertilization. The goal of the proposed research is to visit the host site
at Oregon Health and Science University to learn ovarian tissue cryopreservation
and the in vitro growth of follicles from large mammalian species. The first
research objective of research one is to cryopreserve mouse ovarian follicles
through vitrification for establishing a long-term follicle storage platform.
The PI will culture follicles in vitro and examine the follicle reproductive
outcomes to investigate the effect of vitrification on follicle and oocyte
health and also determine the vitrification-induced cell injury. The second
research objective is to cryopreserve bottlenose dolphin ovarian follicles and
use microfluidic technology to engineer dolphin ovarian function in vitro. We
will collect and cryopreserve ovaries from fresh-dead, stranded bottlenose
dolphins, use the microfluidic platform to support a long-term dolphin follicle
development and maturation, and validate this system by testing known ovarian
toxic chemicals. The proposed work will allow the development of a high-
throughput platform to study the female reproductive toxicity of marine
contaminants on female bottlenose dolphins and enhance PI and his team's
research ability in female reproductive toxicology in marine animals. The
broader impact of this study will result in a platform that can be used for
cryopreserving ovarian tissues and for other cell/tissue types. Microfluidic
culture will provide a novel method to three-dimensionally grow mammalian
cells/tissues in vitro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.