* 1832942
* Developing an Evidence-Based Best-Practices Community for Supporting Low-Income High-Achieving Students in STEM Education and the Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Quincy Brown, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,555,756.00

Advancing our knowledge of evidence-based best practices for recruiting,
retaining, mentoring, and supporting low-income, high-achieving STEM students is
of strategic importance for the nation. The NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program provides competitive
awards to enable higher education institutions to provide scholarships to low-
income, high achieving STEM students who have demonstrated financial need.
S-STEM projects also advance the adaptation, implementation, and study of
evidence-based curricular and co-curricular activities that promote the
recruitment, retention, and graduation of low-income students in STEM fields.
Although individual awardees advance efforts on their own campuses, it is
important for the community to periodically engage in a robust exchange of ideas
and knowledge. To that end, this project led by the American Association for the
Advancement of Science will convene two S-STEM Symposia, one in 2019 and a
second in 2021. The two Symposia will together provide at least 1300
participants with an opportunity to: (a) share and learn about effective STEM
undergraduate education and workforce preparation strategies; (b) disseminate
effective STEM undergraduate education and workforce preparation ideas to their
colleagues and others; (c) make new connections and create collaborations; (d)
promote a shared measurement system; (e) enhance communication; and (f) generate
a sense of community among those seeking to expand academic opportunities for
low-income STEM students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's activities will
include: 1) producing publications that document effective strategies and
practices for increasing the number of talented students with demonstrated
financial need pursuing a STEM education and career workforce; 2) co-sponsoring
and implementing webinars for the S-STEM community; and 3) developing and
maintaining a website that includes information about the symposia, S-STEM
projects, and resources to advance research on recruiting, retaining, mentoring,
and supporting high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.