* 1832327
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Tornado Development and Maintenance in Supercells with an Emphasis on "High-End" Events
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Leigh Orf, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2023
* USD 590,369.00

In 2011, tornadoes in the United States killed 553 people and caused $28 billion
in property damage. Most of the damage and fatalities were caused by violent
tornadoes spawned by supercell thunderstorms, with six tornadoes receiving EF5
rankings, the most violent category of the Enhanced Fujita scale. Last year,
several outbreaks occurred with over 140 confirmed tornadoes rated between EF2
and EF4 that resulted in substantial damage and over 30 deaths. While
significant advances in our knowledge of supercell thunderstorms and tornadoes
have occurred in recent decades, understanding of the fundamental processes
occurring within supercells that result in tornadoes remains elusive. This void
in knowledge is especially concerning for violent tornadoes that are responsible
for a disproportionate number of fatalities and injuries as well as damage.
Until these tornado genesis and maintenance processes are understood, our
ability to forecast such events is severely limited. The primary goal of this
research is to improve the fundamental understanding of processes underlying the
formation and maintenance of tornadoes in supercell thunderstorms, especially as
these processes relate to violent tornadoes. This knowledge is critical for
improving tornado forecasts, tornado warning lead times, and estimations of
potential tornado strength and longevity, and is especially applicable to
tornadoes of strong and violent intensity. In conjunction with an awarded NSF
grant providing continued access to the NSF-funded Blue Waters supercomputer,
the research will analyze petabytes of data to study the processes occurring in
supercells that result in tornadoes of varying strength, longevity, and
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;Despite advances
in observational and modeling/computing technology, much still needs to be
understood about the evolution of tornadoes. Few computer simulations exist in
which a well-resolved tornado forms within its parent supercell, and this work
uses the highest resolution simulations of violently tornadic supercells
conducted to date. A control simulation with 30 meter grid spacing has been
completed where twenty fields in a volume centered on the tornado during its
entire life cycle have been saved to disk every model time step, which will
facilitate the most accurate analysis possible. 20 m and 15 m simulations
containing long-track EF5 tornadoes have also been completed, and additional
runs at these resolutions will be executed as needed. Tools to efficiently
interrogate and analyze model data saved every time step will be improved and
new tools will be developed. New simulations will be conducted in other
environments in which violent tornadoes were observed. By analyzing simulated
storms in different environments and comparing tornadogenesis failure cases to
cases where violent tornadoes occur, the research team aims to identify
processes common within unusually violent supercells involved in the formation
and maintenance of tornadoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;A
better fundamental understanding of tornado development in supercell
thunderstorms should help guide future field programs in which new features
identified in these numerical simulations are targeted for study, and ultimately
lead to improvements in our ability to accurately forecast significant tornadic
events and increase tornado warning lead times. Improving our fundamental
understanding of tornado maintenance, made possible through analysis of the
simulations described, should provide insight critical for National Weather
Service forecasters to better predict, once a tornado has developed, how long a
particular tornado may last. This type of information is invaluable, especially
when pertaining to high-end, long-track events. The improved understanding of
tornadoes in addition to cutting-edge visualizations of this research will
facilitate science education in forums ranging from formal courses for students
to learning venues for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.