* 1832680
* CRISP 2.0 Type 2: Collaborative Research: Organizing Decentralized Resilience in Critical Interdependent-infrastructure Systems and Processes (ORDER-CRISP)
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Omar Abdul-Aziz, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 205,588.00

This Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes
(CRISP) project develops an integrated resilience modeling framework for
mitigating vulnerabilities in critical interdependent infrastructure systems.
The framework evaluates the coupled nature of vulnerabilities across physical
and social systems in Miami and Houston. By focusing on the effects of recent
hurricanes on the interdependent-infrastructures in energy, water,
transportation and telecommunication, and the human-infrastructures
interactions, the project explores options for resilience. The system
vulnerabilities are quantified with regional inoperability based economic-
interdependency models. The project will develop an app for information sharing
with the public. Thus, this scientific research contribution supports NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare
with benefits that will optimize investments in the nation's critical
infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates risk-based models,
agent-based simulations, dynamic models of social vulnerability, and models of
economic impacts of inoperability. The novelty lies in integrating the
interdisciplinary research components: (i) incorporating wind and flood
inundation risk into the utility and service disruption models to analyze and
determine the extent of interdependent infrastructure failures in energy, water,
transportation, and telecommunication sectors; (ii) constructing socio-
infrastructural systems of vulnerability and analyzing evacuation/relocation
behavior to assess the need for emergent critical infrastructure services; (iii)
micro simulation for analyzing coping behavior and facilitating decentralized
resilience through information sharing and critical resource pooling; (iv) a
macro (city level) inoperability based resilience model to integrate household
and social responses with disrupted interdependent infrastructure systems; and
(v) developing an app to facilitate and scale up participatory resilience
through crowd-sourcing which will be usable in other disaster settings. The
project will engage, mentor, and offer an innovative active learning environment
for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students by giving priority to the
disadvantaged and underrepresented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.