* 1832483
* Fire-Driven Forest Transitions in Response to Land-Use Impacts and Moisture Availability
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Thomas Veblen, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 349,911.00

This research project will investigate the complex ways in which changing
environmental conditions, changes in types and abundance of fuels, and wildfires
have altered forest patterns and regeneration dynamics in forest ecosystems.
This project will offer new insights regarding how environmental variability and
land-use practices affect the probability of extreme fire events, and it will
provide a better understanding of the ecological processes and human-related
factors that are responsible for rapid shifts from forest to non-forest
vegetation. The project has the potential to improve modeling of forest
resilience, advance scientific understanding of factors affecting the occurrence
of forest fires, and provide valuable support to the resource-management
community. The investigators will interact with forest and national park
managers to address land management challenges caused by increased occurrence of
extreme wildfire events. The project will open new pathways into science,
technology engineering, and mathematics and provide research experiences for
undergraduate and graduate students, including students from underrepresented
minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global increase in wildfire activity
is causing shifts from forest to non-forest vegetation types in many regions of
the world. These changes have important implications for future supplies of
forest products and other forest benefits. Knowledge of where and when wildfire
occurs and how wildfire alters the potential for subsequent wildfires is
critical for understanding the long-lasting, fire driven shifts in ecosystem
states. The research will address two basic geographic questions: (1) What are
the conditions and mechanisms that initiate shifts from forests to more fire-
prone vegetation types? (2) What are the factors and mechanisms that tend to
favor continued dominance of the more fire-prone vegetation and impede tree
regeneration? The project will be conducted in a summer-dry, temperate forest
ecosystem that is widely recognized as a region that is highly sensitive to
long-lasting shifts in forest covers and forest collapse driven by environmental
factors and land-use practices. The investigators will integrate broad-scale
spatial modeling of fire and vegetation changes with intensive, fine-scale field
measurements and analytical field experiments of microclimate and tree
regeneration. Findings from this project will provide new understandings about
global land-use practices and ecological processes relevant to increased
occurrence of extreme fire events that factor in rapid shifts from forest to
non-forest vegetation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.