* 1832511
* Building Capacity: Positive Learning Opportunities and Research Experiences to Promote Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Thomas Thorp, Saint Xavier University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,461,404.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at Saint Xavier
University will advance the aims of the HSI Program by increasing retention and
graduation rates of undergraduates in STEM fields. To this end, the project will
create a STEM Studio that will provide students with ongoing community, social,
and academic supports. The STEM Studio will also serve as the hub for
experiential learning opportunities and systemic faculty and peer mentoring of
undergraduate students. Many high-impact educational experiences designed to
broaden participation in STEM are directed at high-achieving and/or lower-
achieving students. In contrast, this project will connect all students to high-
impact educational experiences from which they are likely to show direct,
measurable benefits. By addressing major challenges faced by many undergraduates
majoring in STEM, Saint Xavier University expects to increase retention and
graduation rates, which in turn will open doors to graduate level work and
careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To achieve the overarching goal of
improving retention and graduation rates, the project will implement four
objectives: (1) create the STEM Studio to provide a gathering place for a
community of Saint Xavier University scientific scholars; (2) centralize
targeted academic support strategies for undergraduates in science courses at
critical transition points; (3) provide opportunities for student-faculty
collaborative research and for other high-impact learning experiences such as
short-term field research; and (4) provide networking opportunities and
curriculum enhancements that connect academic coursework to the workplace.
Success of this program will be evaluated in terms of both persistence to degree
and assessment of the institutional climate for inclusivity. The project will
apply a multivariate statistical analysis to the collected data to identify
correlations between the objectives, student perceptions of validation and
belonging, and academic outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.