* 1832208
* CRISP 2.0 Type 2: Collaborative Research: Exploiting Interdependencies Between Computing and Electrical Power Infrastructures to Maximize Resilience and Flexibility
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Victor Zavala Tejeda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 674,433.00

Electrical power and computing infrastructures are increasingly interdependent
with each other--computing provides information that enables decision-making,
commerce, government, and social interaction, and disruptions in power supply
may trigger critical losses of information and decision-making capabilities,
potentially resulting in significant economic losses. To reduce critical risks
and identify synergies from the growing interdependence of these
infrastructures, the objective of this Critical Resilient Interdependent
Infrastructure Systems and Processes (CRISP) project is to increase the
resilience and efficiency of electrical power and computing infrastructures by
understanding how to exploit and maximize emerging synergies between the two
infrastructures. The project will have broad impact in computing and power grid
research and industrial practice, leading to better design of power and
computing infrastructures and their improved management, and benefiting
resilience and efficiency of both. Project results will be disseminated to the
research and industrial communities via papers, talks, and models as open-source
software. Students and postdoctoral fellows involved will gain a holistic
systems-level understanding, giving them the ability to combine concepts in
optimization and energy markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
optimization formulations for theoretical insights on resiliency and economic
benefits that can result from infrastructure coordination. It will also
investigate new market designs that properly incentivize the provision of
spatio-temporal load modulation flexibility at large-scale (in the form of
virtual power flows) amongst various kinds of computing assets, exploring
different levels of coordination (because distinct business and regulatory
considerations govern them) and feasible computing flexibility. To achieve these
goals, the project will embed those optimization formulations within stochastic
programming models to identify optimal system layouts that benefit both
infrastructures. In addition, the project will develop suitable utility
functions for varied types of computing providers that the ISOs (Independent
System Operators under Federal Energy Regulatory Commission) can use to quantify
costs associated with load flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.