* 1832041
* Excellence in Research: Tolerance of Ambiguity and Academic Success
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Chadia Affane Aji, Tuskegee University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2024
* USD 458,246.00

Researchers at Tuskegee University propose to conduct a cross-sectional
longitudinal study of engineering, non-engineering, and non-STEM students to
examine the impact of tolerance of ambiguity on academic success. The research
literature documents engineering identity as an important factor for persistence
and academic success for underrepresented minorities. However, there is limited
research on the factors that influence the cognitive development of an
engineering identity. This research is expected to identify pedagogical
techniques that will help increase the probability of academic success of STEM
students by measuring the influence of the current curriculum in the context of
constructs of ambiguity of tolerance, intellectual mental models and engineering
identity. The project team also will redesign one introductory aerospace
engineering course and one calculus course to provide a learning environment
that will facilitate movement towards relativistic cognitive models promoting
tolerance of ambiguity. The findings of the proposed research are expected to
inform a data-supported curriculum improvement plan for a learning environment
that will facilitate the desired student outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project is grounded in theories of identity development, tolerance of ambiguity,
and intellectual development. The hypothesis is that an empirically based
understanding of the impact of the impact of tolerance of ambiguity and the
formation of engineering identity will inform curriculum innovations that will
positively impact academic success, retention, and persistence of students in
engineering and other STEM disciplines. The researchers will use a quasi-
experimental design to address five research questions: (1) Is there a
correlation between tolerance of ambiguity and intellectual models of the
engineering problem space? (2) Is tolerance of ambiguity a robust indicator of
academic success of STEM students? (3) Is there a difference between the
development of cognitive models of STEM and non-STEM students? (4) Is there a
correlation between professional identity and tolerance for ambiguity? and (5)
Does gender have an influence on tolerance for ambiguity? The revised Rydell-
Rosen AT scale will be used to determine the tolerance for ambiguity, and
engineering identity will be measured using an instrument that captures the
three dimensions. The data analysis will consist of descriptive and inferential
statistics. The project will guide the development of effective structural and
pedagogical strategies to increase the retention, persistence, and academic
success of underrepresented students in engineering and other STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is funded by the Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education: Education and Human Resources (IUSE): EHR Program
(NSF 17-590). IUSE supports projects that are designed to improve student
learning through development of new curricular materials and methods of
instruction and development of new assessment tools to measure student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.