* 1832921
* MechBio 2018: The Mechanome in Action; Irvine, California; July 26-27, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jun Allard, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 06/30/2023
* USD 37,663.00

The emerging field of mechanobiology requires the coordination of knowledge from
biologists, physicists, engineers and chemists. There are substantial barriers
for interaction between these fields due to methodological and cultural
differences. Thus, there is a critical need for developing collaborations
between the fields, without which we will be unable to comprehend the mechanical
basis of fundamental biological processes. The broad goal of this workshop is to
establish mechanobiology as an interdisciplinary and collaborative field, much
as the field of systems biology has been established in recent decades. This
workshop, "Mechbio symposium: The Mechanome in Action", will bring together
researchers from multiple disciplines in July of 2018 at the University of
California, Irvine, to discuss recent advances in research that addresses how
mechanical signals are read, generated, and transmitted by living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will impact the training of future
leaders in mechanobiology. The eve of the workshop will feature a graduate
student symposium that will be chaired by two graduate student co-organizers
under the advisement of the Organizers. This will be an opportunity for a new
generation to express their own interests and priorities, delegate
responsibilities, and organize a scientific event. It will also serve the larger
goal of the workshop by generating interactions between trainees across
laboratories. We will offer Mechbio Opportunity Awards for new collaborations
that are established during the course of the meeting. This award will be open
to attendees and will provide reciprocal travel between the labs of new
collaborators. Awardees will be required to present their findings at a future
meeting. This type of award has been highly successful at the UC Irvine Center
for Complex Biological Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.