* 1832421
* Building Capacity: Addressing Critical Transitions of First-Year STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Laura Sanders, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at Northeastern Illinois
University, an HSI, aims to increase retention of students by engaging them in a
supportive, research-based learning community. This learning community will be
called Agua en Comunidades Experimentales (ACE), which means Water in Research
Communities. The ACE learning community will include social supports, scientific
training, and research experiences related to water science. The project will
evaluate the impact of the ACE learning community on student success in
introductory STEM courses as well as student retention in STEM degree programs.
By enhancing the preparation of students, the project seeks to increase the
number of STEM-interested students who declare a STEM major and earn a
baccalaureate degree in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACE learning community
will create a longitudinal, four-year "home base" for students who enter college
at the developmental level. This approach differs from the typical learning
community model, which places student cohorts in the same set of courses offered
during the first semester or first year of college. Other important aspects of
the ACE learning community include its focus on research that has a societal and
community benefit, and its embedding of academic supports within the curriculum.
Northeastern Illinois University will work with other institutions to develop
internship positions for ACE students and to create faculty development
workshops to prepare faculty to mentor ACE students. The project seeks to
develop a model that can be disseminated and adopted by multiple departments at
Northeastern Illinois University, as well as by other institutions. The outcomes
of the ACE learning community model will add to the evidence base about
strategies and interventions to support the success of students, including low-
income, first-generation, and underrepresented minority students. Quantitative
and qualitative assessments will be conducted to identify best practices in
building students' identities as scientists, and how their self-efficacy or
confidence in STEM studies correlate with success rates in STEM courses. This
information is important for producing a national STEM workforce that is highly
capable and diverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.