* 1832548
* Computational investigation of thermo-diffusive instabilities in flames: from laminar cellular structures to turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Guillaume Blanquart, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2022
* USD 323,240.00

The propagation of unstable flames is at the center of numerous natural
phenomena and engineering applications. Understanding and modeling these
unstable flames and how they interact with turbulent flows are of critical
importance to designing efficient and clean energy conversion devices,
mitigating the risks of accidental explosions, and understanding astrophysical
phenomena. This work is to conduct a computational study to reveal a complete
picture of the geometry of the near-limit premixed flame front. While the
primary focus is on thermo-diffusively unstable flames, the results are expected
to shed light onto numerous additional scientific problems. This work will lead
to the development of high-fidelity computational models, which will be used for
designing and optimizing high-performance combustion systems for propulsion
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental observations and theoretical
studies have long pointed out the differences between laminar stable flames and
thermo-diffusively unstable flames. Unfortunately, state-of-the-art techniques
currently used to simulate large-scale turbulent flames fail to adequately
predict the flow field of reacting mixtures that are intrinsically unstable.
This work is to quantify the fundamental characteristics that make unstable
flames different from their stable counterparts: the size of the cellular
structure and the acceleration of the flame front propagation. These two
features form the foundation onto which any Large Eddy Simulation (LES) models
will be built: they determine the size of the LES filter and control the closure
of the chemical source terms. The strength of the proposal relies on considering
an extensive range of conditions from 1D spherical flames, to 2D stationary
tubular flames, to 3D unstable laminar and turbulent flames. Throughout the
analysis, no shortcut of accuracy will be taken, and previously neglected
effects (such as Soret/Dufour) will be revisited and included (if necessary).
The outcome will be a complete picture of the geometry of the reaction zone, and
the proposed work will have important impacts on many natural phenomena and
engineering applications: from energy generation to safety to
astrophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.