* 1832433
* New to NSF: Recruiting and Retaining Students into Computing
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Akhtar Lodgher, Texas A&M University-San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 07/31/2023
* USD 290,235.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project at Texas A&amp;M
University-San Antonio will advance the aims of the HSI Program by increasing
the retention and completion rates of students in computer science and to better
equip them to achieve careers cyber security. The project also plans to increase
the number of transfer of students who transfer from two-year colleges into
computer science programs at the University. The project plans to integrate
cyber security topics throughout the entire computer science curriculum, so that
students will obtain an NSA Cyber Defense Education certificate upon graduation.
This certification can increase the competitiveness of the graduates in high-
demand jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this program are to broaden
and strengthen the pipeline of students, including Hispanic students, entering
the field of computing and cyber security. To meet workforce demands, the
project will develop a computer science undergraduate computer science program
in which cyber security topics are integrated throughout the curriculum. The
project also seeks to increase the retention rates and strengthen the
marketability of students by enabling student to automatically earn a
certificate in cyber security education upon graduation. Computer science
researchers will collaborate with curriculum and instruction researchers to
develop cyber security modules for use throughout the computer science
curriculum. These modules will contextualize computing topics via a cyber
security lens. To assist in the retention of students, the cyber security
modules will use Model Eliciting Activities, a teaching and learning methodology
that has been demonstrated to be particularly effective for women and other
groups that are underrepresented in engineering. The project includes a
partnership between the team of computing and education researchers at Texas
A&amp;M University-San Antonio and the computing departments of rural Laredo
Community College and urban San Antonio College, both of which are Hispanic-
serving community colleges. The community college partnerships will increase
opportunities for student transfer, while the curriculum changes and use of
inclusive pedagogy should increase the likelihood that students persist and
graduate with degrees in computing that can enable them to launch careers within
computing fields. Through a design experiment methodology, the project will
investigate the impact of Model Eliciting Activities and the incorporation of
cyber security on instructor effectiveness and student attitudes and
performance. This research results could inform the practices of other computer
science and related programs that seek to increase student success and diversity
in computing programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.