* 1832993
* RII Track-4: EASE - Functional Electrical Stimulation and Mechanical Actuation of Soft Exoskeletons
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Vishesh Vikas, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,956.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Soft material robotics is envisioned to be
the future of robotics that combines the concepts of the Internet of Things
(IoTs), wearable sensors, material science and artificial intelligence to
fabricate robots that can assist and collaborate with humans. This field is of
special interest to roboticists and engineers as it has multiple fundamental
challenges and there are tremendous benefits for applications to fields such as
agriculture, disaster robotics to assistive rehabilitation. This project will
enable researchers from the University of Alabama to enhance their capabilities
to develop next-generation soft material exoskeletons (exosuits) stimulated by
mechano-neuromuscular actuators through a collaboration with researchers at the
University of Pittsburgh. Mechanically and electrically actuated soft exosuits
are envisioned to have an impact on the fields of assistive robotics,
rehabilitation robotics, and elder care. The research will result in the
development of design and control principles for mechano-neuromuscular actuated
soft wearable exosuits, thus greatly enhancing life and reducing rehabilitation
cost for individuals who suffer from paralysis, stroke, and spinal cord
injuries. The applied nature of this research will play an instrumental role in
attracting students to STEM fields that include computer science, electrical
engineering, mechanical engineering and biomedical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will integrate learning with research to develop design methodologies
and control principles for composite fiber-reinforced soft exosuits. These
exosuits will integrate electro-mechanical actuation (motor-tendons) with the
functional electrical stimulation (FES) of muscles to provide ease of movement
by assistance and rehabilitation. This research will advance the University of
Alabama's (UA) rehabilitation research through the development of design
methodologies for motor-tendon driven soft exosuits by adapting principles from
fields of compliant mechanisms and composite materials for soft structures. The
resulting multi-layer soft material composite exosuits, with reinforced fibers,
will address stress concentration and distribution problems specific to
electromechanical actuators. This will include addressing anchor-point stress
concentration and efficient transfer of actuator forces between components.
Nonlinear controllers will be developed to integrate electromechanical and
neuromuscular actuation in soft exosuits to effect ease of movement. The
proposed research will contribute towards the understanding of design principles
for soft wearable materials, which are tough to model, and how their behavior
and/or interaction varies with the environment of contact. Furthermore, the
research will contribute towards the development of next-generation actuation
technologies for mechano-neuromuscular actuators. The research will result in
hybrid control principles for mechano-neuromuscular actuators that provide
wearable soft exosuits with less stiffness. Given the medical resources and
interdisciplinary faculty at UA, this proposal will help in building capacity
for a wearable robotics and rehabilitation research program in the state of
Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.