* 1832823
* CAREER: Emergence of Population Diversity from Stem Cell Decision Making in Asexual Planarians
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Eva-Maria Collins, Swarthmore College
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 06/30/2024
* USD 804,226.00

Diversity of individuals is indispensable for population survival and evolution.
This CAREER project examines how diversity can emerge from decision making of
individual cells in a multicellular regenerative organism. Freshwater planarians
are famous for their regenerative capabilities that are based on a large number
of adult pluripotent stem cells (ASCs). These ASCs allow them to reproduce by
binary fission, thus creating a clonal population and raising the question of
how this species is able to create sufficient diversity to survive on
evolutionary time scales. Using tools from statistical physics the PI recently
demonstrated that reproduction is largely random, but that reproductive patterns
exist whose molecular and physical determinants remain to be investigated. This
project aims at testing the hypothesis that population diversity arises from a
joint effect of the specifics of planarian reproduction mechanics and epigenetic
diversity of ASCs in individual worms. The PI will integrate the research
objectives of this proposal into three educational initiatives, which focus on
"learning through research" and long-term engagement of students: (1) The PI is
establishing a partnership with Vista Magnet Middle school that allows 6th
graders to work together with her lab on research projects throughout the school
year. (2) The PI will continue her efforts toward participation of high school
students in research. In particular, she will continue to enable students from
Torrey Pines High School to engage in research in her lab throughout the year,
which allows them to design and execute their own science projects. (3) The PI
will continue her efforts in promoting undergraduate research, in her own group
as well as through a new research-centered, quantitative biology laboratory
course that she has developed. The course will launch in 2016 and is currently
for incoming biology freshmen only. In the context of this proposal, the PI will
widen the student population to physics freshmen by adding more physics to the
curriculum, and thus create a truly interdisciplinary research-driven laboratory
course at the interface of biology and physics in terms of content and student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How cellular decision-making causes specific
phenotypes in a population has received a lot of attention in the context of
single celled organisms, but less is known about how epigenetic inheritance
affects population diversity in multicellular organisms. This study will close
this knowledge gap using planarians and a unique experimental setup, whereby
thousands of individual reproductive events have already been recorded and form
the statistical framework for the PI's studies on the population level. The PI's
strategy is to (1) test the hypothesis that within individual planarians, ASCs
are differentially distributed, in terms of spatial orientation and/or molecular
and cellular characteristics (division and death rates, genetic and epigenetic
diversity) through quantification of ASC localization, cellular dynamics, and
single cell sequencing, (2) investigate the biomechanics of asexual reproduction
to understand how resources get distributed among offspring using traction force
measurements and time-lapse imaging, and (3) develop a mathematical model based
on the cellular and organismal level experimental data to predict population
level phenotypic diversity. The model will be tested by comparing its
predictions with existing experimental data and the reproductive patterns of
specially designed founder individuals in which all cells are known to originate
from a single ASC, through RNA-seq and statistical analysis. Together, these
approaches will allow the PI to test the hypothesis that spatial epigenetic
heterogeneity of stem cells in individuals combined with a stochastic
reproduction mechanism determine intraspecies phenotypic differences on the
population level, which will be measured in terms of reproductive behaviors. The
proposed work will shed new light onto the role of transgenerational epigenetic
inheritance for the evolutionary success of asexual multicellular life. On a
broader level, stem cell decision-making is currently receiving considerable
attention because an understanding of how stem cells switch states
stochastically and in response to environmental cues is indispensable for
successful stem cell therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being
jointly supported by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of
Physics and the Cellular Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences