* 1832873
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Roles of Symbolic Communication
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* James McGrath, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 19,619.00

Symbolic information permeates modern human life. The human capacity to produce
and manipulate symbols likely evolved during the Pleistocene and can be seen as
a watershed development for the species. While past symbols themselves generally
do not preserve into the modern day, the archaeological record can preserve
traces of technologies that were used to produce symbolic information.
Archaeological deposits dating to the Late Pleistocene produce some of the
earliest evidence for these technologies in the form of ochres: iron-rich rocks
and earth capable of producing vibrant pigments. Archaeologists are well
situated to study this preserved material culture and to place these behaviors
within a social and ecological context. While the relationship between the use
of symbolic technologies and modern levels of intelligence has been well
investigated, the capacity for these early technologies to communicate social
information and what that might imply about the social group in which they were
used have received relatively limited attention. This project investigates how
human populations reacted to changing environmental conditions during the Late
Pleistocene through shifting demographics, with archaeological evidence for
greater use of symbolic technologies indicating increased population
interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first phase of this project involves the
examination and comparison of ochre assemblages from three Late Pleistocene
archaeological sites located in the Western Cape province of South Africa:
Pinnacle Point 5-6, Knysna Eastern Head 1, and Boomplaas Cave. This phase will
generate data on how hunter-gatherer groups reacted to changing environmental
conditions through population aggregations and dispersals through time. An
increased use of symbolic technologies is likely to occur during periods
characterized by highly productive environments and population growth.
Archaeological deposits dating to these periods are expected to have a relative
increased ochre nodule weight, size, count, and evidence of human modifications.
Unproductive environments favor lower population densities, resulting in a
reduction in symbolic behaviors and the opposite pattern in the ochre
assemblages. The second phase of this project will involve the geochemical
fingerprinting analysis of the ochres from Pinnacle Point 5-6 via neutron
activation analysis. Data generated from this phase will be used to explore
changes in territorial range sizes and land use accompanying these expected
demographic shifts. Results from the overall study will contribute to the
growing body of knowledge concerning population size and structure for early
modern humans, the origins of symbolic behaviors, and archaeological approaches
to signaling identity. This project has significant broader impacts by engaging
with students and the local research community in Cape Town, South Africa
through the Human Evolution Research Institute seminar series and training
workshops at the University of Cape Town.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.