* 1832581
* Women in Cognitive Science:  International Collaboration, Scientific Advancement, Workplace Culture
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Laurie Feldman, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,987.00

The goal of Women in Cognitive Science is to improve the visibility of women in
the field and to create an environment that would invite discussion of the
issues that all scientists, but women in particular, may be required to
negotiate in the trajectory of creating and sustaining a successful career.
Several workshops are designed for women in cognitive science, especially women
in the early stages of their academic career. The workshops focus on developing
international collaborations, negotiating challenges to scientific advancement,
and successfully navigating the workplace culture. Workshops will take place at
meetings of the Psychonomic Society, the Cognitive Science Society, and the
Association for Psychological Sciences. The workshops will take the form of
public forums with invited speaker-panelists to initiate discussion about best
practices for the professional advancement of women in cognitive science at the
individual and institutional level. These workshops will be live-streamed to
increase exposure, and will also feature "speed-mentoring" for personalized
assistance to young faculty. By partnering with the above-mentioned established
societies, the workshops will maximize the outreach potential to a group that
continues to be underrepresented in senior academic positions in the cognitive
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.