* 1832064
* Excellence in Research: A Comparison of Educational Outcomes at Institutions of Higher Education
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Haydar Kurban, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,982.00

A significant proportion of Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) baccalaureates earned by Black/African-American students in the US is
awarded by Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). This proposed
research will combine several administrative data sets and a new methodology to
estimate the effects of HBCU attendance on graduation rates in STEM subjects,
graduation rates generally, and the probability of attending graduate school
after the baccalaureate, relative to attending a non-HBCU institution. The
investigators will also study why some students succeed better in an HBCU
compared to a non-HBCU institutions. This is an important contribution to
economic science and labor market policy as the US tries to broaden and increase
its STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will merge a series of
large, detailed, administrative data sets and use a new methodology to estimate
the causal effects of HBCU attendance on a series of outcomes. Specifically, it
will investigate three interrelated issues: the causal effect of attending and
HBCU on (i) the probability of graduating with a STEM degree, (ii) graduation
rates, and (iii) attending graduate school after graduating with a STEM
baccalaureate degree. The PIs will adopt a recently developed methodology by
Hoxby and model HBCU attendance as part of Black students' human capital
decisions. Instead of the traditional methodology based on propensity score
matching in these studies, the proposed study will use the new and more robust
methodology that controls for selection and heterogeneity to estimate these
student outcomes. The work is based on a matched data set from the College Board
and National Student Clearinghouse (NSC). This merged data set and methodology,
not used before, will allow the researchers to control for heterogeneity of
HBCUs in the study. The results of this research will advance knowledge on the
contribution of HBCUs to human capital formation in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.