* 1832824
* Ammonothermal cubic boron nitride single crystal growth near ambient pressure and temperature
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kai Landskron, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 593,019.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Boron nitride is a semiconductor material, and in its
cubic crystal structure, it is one of the hardest materials known. Unlike
diamond, boron nitride can be used in more reactive environments given its
superior stability against oxidation and unintended chemical reactions with, for
example, iron at elevated temperatures. Synthesis of large diameter single
crystals would significantly advance high-pressure experimental configurations
when used as anvils, and the power electronics field by achieving high-
efficiency electrical power conversion. Availability of large single crystals
would be transformative to multiple additional areas by enabling wide-scale
research using high-quality material and permitting exploration of novel
electronic devices. Current methods used to synthesize this material yield only
small crystals at high cost making them impractical for wide-scale adaption.
This project investigates growth of single crystal boron nitride using a
different, more scalable technique which operates under milder conditions. The
PI and co-PI are devoted to education and accordingly, their research results
are being incorporated into graduate courses. The PI is hosting wiki articles
and videos on a world-accessible server by working closely with student
volunteers. Additionally, the PI is visiting regional, underrepresented and
rural, high schools to educate the public on the impact of materials on society.
The co-PI is an advocate for underrepresented groups and is continuing his
participation in Open Houses and similar events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: Cubic boron nitride (c-BN) is a wide bandgap semiconductor and one of
the hardest materials known. Synthesis of this materials is currently limited to
high-pressure anvil systems limiting their size to ~1 mm in diameter. The
ammonothermal method, utilizing supercritical ammonia at pressures below 300 MPa
and temperatures below 800 C, is a solution-based, bulk single crystal growth
technique which is being explored to enable growth of large single crystal c-BN.
Solubility of BN in a variety of solutions utilizing alkali and alkali-earth
metals and halides as mineralizers is under investigation. Suitable growth
conditions are applied to bulk, single crystal growth of c-BN on c-BN seeds
synthesized as part of this research in anvil systems. BN crystals are
characterized for their properties and tied to growth conditions. Availability
of large, single crystal c-BN would prove transformative for power electronics
research in the form of substrates given its highly beneficial physical
properties (high thermal conductivity and breakdown voltages) and the ability to
be doped both p- and n-type. Similarly, large single crystal material would have
a profound impact on the fabrication of super-hard ceramic tools. This research
provides in-depth education for students on the topic of single crystal growth
methods and associated (novel) equipment development reinvigorating the waning
single crystal growth community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.