* 1832820
* I-Corps:  Securing Mobile Devices with Memorable, Usable, and Secure Authentication
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Ye Zhu, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broad impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to protect
security and privacy of mobile device users with memorable, usable, and secure
authentication schemes. According to statista.com, the number of smartphone
users in the world will be more than five billion by 2019. The popularity of
these mobile devices is due to a unique set of features including ubiquitous
Internet access through communication technologies such as Wifi and 4G/LTE, easy
to use touch-based inputs, and numerous applications and games. In the meantime,
the security of mobile devices is becoming a major concern as device users are
storing sensitive data such as personal contacts and utilizing sensitive
applications like banking and stock trading. Strong authentication as the
forefront defense mechanism can prevent unauthorized access to a mobile device
that may lead to lack of accountability, data loss or stealing, and identity
theft. Due to the popularity of mobile devices and their uses in government,
business, and even military applications, securing mobile devices with secure,
memorable, and usable authentication is of great societal
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on exploring the
market potential for multi-dimensional authentication schemes. The new paradigm
of multi-dimensional authentication schemes can achieve better memorability,
security, and usability at the same time. The new schemes fuse information from
multiple dimensions to form a password, allowing the schemes to enlarge the
password space and improve memorability by reducing memory interference. The
information fusion can increase usability as fewer input gestures are required
for passwords of the same security strength. The schemes can also be shoulder-
surfing resistant. A successful authentication requires a user to respond to a
random challenge so that a set of predefined rules are satisfied after
adjustments made by the user. The schemes can also be used for continuously
monitoring device user behavior to ensure the current device users is a user
authorized to use the device. Through this project, we will be able to
investigate the needs from various customer segments and polish our technologies
and prototypes to meet the needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.