* 1832425
* Building Capacity: Infusing Research as Pedagogy
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Liesl Jones, Union County College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,499,101.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project at Union County College
will advance the aims of the HSI Program by integrating research into
undergraduate STEM courses. The project plans to embed course-based
undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) into STEM gateway courses, support
independent research experiences during the academic year, and develop a summer
research academy. The project aims to provide students with research
opportunities that increase student engagement, critical thinking skills,
retention and graduation rates, and transfer into a STEM major at a four-year
institution. Union County College has an economically, racially, and ethnically
diverse student body. Consequently, this project can contribute to building a
diverse STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine how
research opportunities may increase student engagement, critical thinking
skills, student retention and graduation, and transfer into a baccalaureate STEM
program. The project includes three coordinated interventions: 1) integrating
course-based research into eight STEM gateway courses; 2) supporting independent
student-driven research experiences; and 3) creating a summer research academy.
These interventions will incorporate student-driven research into the
curriculum, enhancing the traditional community college learning experience. The
project will assess the impact of research experiences by comparing baseline and
post-intervention populations using the Critical-Thinking Assessment Test
instrument. In each of the three interventions, the project will use this
instrument to determine critical thinking skills at the beginning and completion
of the interventions. Students will also be tracked to examine retention in the
major. Finally, data will be collected on student performance including grades,
enrollment in STEM courses, and graduation and transfer rates. To examine the
impact of CURES, a comparison will be made between students who participate in
the CURES and baseline data for STEM majors. Students in the academic year
research projects and research academy will be compared to students who did not
participate, as well as to the college's baseline data. It is anticipated that
the project may serve as a model for both two- and four-year institutions
seeking to develop a research as pedagogy curriculum model to build critical
thinking skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.