* 1832778
* The Thirteenth (13th) International School/Symposium for Space Simulations; Los Angeles, California; September 6-14, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* David Schriver, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2019
* USD 25,000.00

This award is to support student travel to the International School for Space
Simulations (ISSS). It was first held in 1982 in Japan as a joint collaboration
between leading scientists from the US, Asia and Europe, in order to teach basic
simulation techniques to students going into this growing field. The first
meeting was a great success and since that time ISSS has been held on average
every 2 to 3 years rotating locations between Europe, Asia, and the US. The next
ISSS meeting will be the 13th in the series and following the tradition of
rotating between Asia, Europe and the US will be held in the United States at
the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) from September 6-14, 2018. This
project is for support for (non-UCLA) students to be able to attend ISSS-13. The
ISSS meeting has provided new generations of students with a basic understanding
of the numerical simulation techniques and is for many their first exposure to
cutting edge space science research. Feedback from students over the years who
have attended ISSS meetings has been overwhelmingly positive, with some saying
it was their favorite meeting they attended as a student. Scores of previous
ISSS students have gone on to careers in space plasma simulations as
researchers, professors and civil servants at NSF and NASA. Since space science
is an international endeavor, the international aspect of this meeting opens
future space scientists and simulators to the world at large and initiates
contacts and collaborations among scientists, researchers and students that last
a lifetime.

The first four days of the ISSS meeting comprise the school portion and include
intensive hands-on training with experts in the field such that when finished
students will learn how different types of codes work, including particle in
cell (PIC), hybrid and magnetohydrodynamic (MHD), and will have run the codes
themselves to produce output and graph the results. Basic simulation codes are
given to the students, which are theirs to keep after the meeting for further
use and study. The symposium portion of the meeting is held immediately after
the school portion and allows the students who have just learned the basics of
the various codes to interact with world experts who conduct cutting edge
research in space science. The environment of the symposium is maintained to be
student friendly whereby students can feel free to ask basic questions and
interact with top scientists in smaller groups or one on one sessions, either at
the science presentations, poster sessions or social events meant to foster
teaching and collaboration. This school and symposium approach has proven over
the years to be very effective for students to maximize their knowledge gain
from the meeting.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.