* 1832031
* Excellence in Research:Single Crystal Growth and Investigation of Novel Exotic Fermion Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Zhiqiang Mao, Norfolk State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,181,590.00

Non-technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electronic devices we use today
operate by controlling the motion of negatively charged electrons, known as an
electric current, through a material by applying a voltage. However, electrons
possess not only an electric charge but also a property known as their intrinsic
spin, which is analogous to a spinning top. This has led to the development of
electronic devices that function by exploiting both the charge and the spin of
electrons in a new form of electricity known as spintronics. Although still in
its infancy, this field of spintronics has far reaching potential in
applications such as ultra-low power electronics and quantum computing.
Recently, a new class of materials, known as fermion materials, topological
insulators and semimetals, or just quantum materials, were discovered which
allow electronic currents to be controlled using both charge and spin. As part
of this Excellence in Research project, supported by the National Science
Foundation, a new, strategic partnership between the Department of Physics at
Norfolk State University (NSU) and the 2D Crystal Consortium-Materials
Innovation Platform (2DCC-MIP) at Pennsylvania State University has been formed.
The collaboration between the two groups leverages their respective unique
capabilities in single crystal growth, materials characterization, and modeling
into a team focused on the discovery of new Weyl semimetals, which are specific
solid state crystals that are good candidates for quantum materials.
Additionally, this project also strengthens education and training in the field
of growth of crystalline materials, the importance of which was highlighted in
the National Research Council's report "Frontiers in Crystalline Matter." By
providing students with in-depth research training in the NSU Department of
Physics and in 2DCC-MIP at Penn State this research has a significant impact on
the education, research training, and professional development of at least nine
undergraduate physics majors and a graduate student in material science, that
are all underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Topological fermions such as Dirac and Weyl fermions in
condensed matter are not only of fundamental importance, but also carry great
promise for information technology applications. Although 3-, 6- and 8-fold
fermions have been predicted in a wide range of materials, these predictions are
still awaiting experimental verification. The unavailability of single crystal
samples of those proposed candidate materials has slowed the progress in this
area. This research partnership addresses this challenge by developing a
comprehensive strategy to grow and characterize single crystals of the proposed
candidate materials. This approach accelerates discoveries of novel topological
materials. The new fermion candidate materials which are of interest include: 1)
3-fold fermions Pd3Bi2S2, Ag3SeAu, A4Pn3 (A=Ca, Sr and Ba; Pn=As, Sb and Bi),
R4Pn3 (R=La, Ce; Pn =As, Sb and Bi), and ReRh6Ge4 (Re = Y, La and Lu), 2) 6-fold
fermions MgPt, PdAsS, K3BiTe3, Mg3Ru2, FeS2 and PtP2, and 3) 8-fold fermions
CuBi2O4, PdBi2O4, PdS, CsSn, CsSi, Ta3Sb, MPd3S4(M=rare earth) and Nb3Bi.
Materials characterization the research team uses include magnetotransport,
quantum oscillation, and ARPES measurements (performed at 2DCCMIP) and XRD, time
resolved reflectivity, and transient grating measurements performed at
NSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.