* 1832016
* LTER:  CAP IV - Investigating urban ecology and sustainability through the lens of Urban Ecological Infrastructure
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Daniel Childers, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 11/30/2023
* USD 4,678,275.00

Humans are rapidly becoming an urban species. It is profoundly important,
therefore, to understand urban ecosystems. Cities are consumers of energy and
resources and producers of waste. They are also social networks that create
innovation, efficiency, and solutions. The Central Arizona-Phoenix LTER Program
(CAP) empowers researchers from the environmental and social sciences to study
cities as social-ecological systems. The scientific goals of the CAP research
are: 1) to use long-term data to articulate and answer new questions about
cities that require a long-term perspective; 2) to develop and use future
scenarios to help answer research questions; 3) to apply and create new
knowledge about urban ecosystems; and 4) to build broad partnerships to make
cities more resilient and sustainable places to live. In addition, Ecology
Explorers, CAP's premier education program, will connect teachers and pre-
college students with CAP scientists. CAP is also involving Phoenix residents in
scientific research by working with community partners and municipal agencies.
Finally, CAP's rich database is a valuable and growing resource for scientists,
students, teachers and decision makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding urban
ecosystems remains central to the CAP enterprise. The central question
articulates the interconnectedness of human motivations, behaviors, actions, and
outcomes with urban ecosystem structure and function: How do the ecosystem
services provided by urban ecological infrastructure (UEI) affect human outcomes
and behavior, and how do human actions affect patterns of urban ecosystem
structure and function and, ultimately, urban sustainability and resilience? A
new theoretical focus for CAP is on Urban Ecological Infrastructure (UEI) as a
critical bridge between the system's biophysical and human/social domains. UEI
is thus central in the conceptual framework that guides all CAP activities. CAP
researchers explore new social-ecological frontiers of interdisciplinary urban
ecology in residential landscapes, urban waterbodies, desert parks and
preserves, the flora, fauna, and climate of a 'riparianized' desert city, and
urban design and governance. CAP research is organized around eight
interdisciplinary questions and researchers are organized into eight
Interdisciplinary Research Teams to address these questions. CAP now includes
research on broader societal impacts, with a theoretical focus on the nexus of
ecology and design to enhance urban sustainability and resilience. This focus,
combined with ongoing CAP scenarios work, is the translational link between
social-ecological research outcomes and city institutions, ultimately making
Phoenix, and cities in general, better places to live.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.