* 1832692
* CRISP 2.0 Type 2: Collaborative Research: Water and Health Infrastructure Resilience and Learning (WHIRL)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Matthew Seeger, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,570,000.00

Drinking water and public health systems are some of the most critical
infrastructures that support human well-being. This Critical Resilient
Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes (CRISP) project will provide
new insights about how these systems interact with each other and adapt to
challenges. The project will also investigate how the public learns about and
engages with public health and water systems. The focus will be to assess how a
range of disruptions, from routine challenges to large-scale disasters, alter
public interactions with these systems. Study data will include interviews with
subject matter experts from water utilities and public health agencies. It will
also include a national survey to understand how well these US infrastructures
can adapt to future challenges. Information gained from project partners and the
national survey will be used to identify factors and develop models that can be
used to enhance resilience of both systems. This project will advance knowledge
that can be applied to promote access to cleaner, safer drinking water for all
communities, including socially and economically disadvantaged ones. It will
serve the national interest by identifying practices that can be used to improve
management for, and communication methods between, water and public health
systems, thereby improving the health, prosperity and welfare of communities.
Collaborations with the Water Research Foundation (WRF), National Association of
County and City Health Officials (NACCHO), American Indian Mothers, Inc. and
others, will assist in translating research results to new practices and
policies that reduce the burden of disease in vulnerable populations. The
project will also provide training to students, including underrepresented
minorities, in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will make theoretical
contributions in two primary areas. First, it will build upon organizational
learning theory as it is manifest from risks, hazard and disruptions in water
events and ground this within systems theory and organizational sense-making.
Outcomes include new norms, procedures, structures, capacity and technology
designed to promote higher reliability and resilience. This will include
describing the ways risk, hazards and failures impact public policy agendas and
policy learning outcomes. Second, this research will contribute to theoretical
work on resilience in critical infrastructure by connecting the social,
managerial, and technical frameworks as manifest around water events. Emerging
risks with unknown impact include shrinking cities, decaying infrastructure and
persistent under-funding. Transformative aspects of the project include creating
theoretical models that describe how the relationship of communities to these
coupled interdependent systems shapes organizational learning from disruptions,
and in turn enacting changes that enhance resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.