* 1832229
* LTER:  Drivers of Abrupt Change in the Florida Coastal Everglades
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* James Fourqurean, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 11/30/2022
* USD 2,383,999.00

Coastal ecosystems like the Florida Everglades provide many benefits to society.
They protect coastlines from storms and store carbon. They provide habitat and
food for important fisheries. They also support tourism and local economies, and
store freshwater for millions of people. The Florida Coastal Everglades Long
Term Ecological Research (FCE LTER) program addresses how and why coastal
ecosystems are changing in response to sea level rise and the actions of people.
Like many coastal ecosystems, the Florida Everglades are threatened by the
diversion of freshwater to support urban and agricultural expansion. At the same
time, sea level rise has caused coastal ecosystems to become saltier,
threatening the freshwater supply, stressing freshwater plants, and causing the
soils to collapse. When the soils beneath coastal wetlands disappear, seawater
invades even more quickly. Researchers in the FCE LTER are continuing long-term
studies and experiments to understand how these changes influence ecosystem
functions and services. They are also developing tools for resource managers to
create an effective freshwater restoration program. The science team includes an
active community of graduate students. As a group, they reach the public through
education and outreach activities, and regularly advise policy-makers on
resource management decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FCE LTER research
program addresses how changing fresh and marine supplies of water influence
coastal ecosystem dynamics through: (i) continued long-term assessment of
changes in biogeochemistry, primary production, organic matter, and trophic
dynamics in ecosystems along freshwater-to-marine gradients, (ii) maintenance of
existing in situ and ex situ long-term experiments, (iii) use of high-resolution
remote sensing, coupled with models to forecast landscape-scale changes, (iv)
addition of synoptic satellite sites to capture discrete spatio-temporal
responses to episodic disturbance, and (v) initiation of new experimental
manipulations to determine drivers and mechanisms of resilience to saltwater
intrusion. Data syntheses integrate month-to-annual and inter-annual data into
models of water, nutrients, carbon, and species dynamics throughout the
Everglades landscape to compare how ecosystems with different productivities and
carbon stores respond (maintain, increase, or decline) to short- (pulses) and
long-term changes (presses) in hydrologic connectivity. Understanding and
predicting the drivers of abrupt changes in ecosystems is a key challenge in
ecosystem ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.