* 1832710
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing the Impact of International Accords on Local Environmental Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Brian King, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 17,886.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project analyzes the impact of a
recent international environmental accord on local environmental governance. In
contrast to earlier environmental accords, which concentrated on
internationally-proscribed commitments, recent international agreements are
based on diverse national approaches. This research addresses a gap in
understanding of how vulnerable communities and their interests interact with
the new international system of nationally-determined contributions. Given that
farming communities are particularly vulnerable to the impacts of increasing
environmental variability, detailed analysis of the implications of the new
international agreements by local communities is needed. The research will
enhance the understanding of how the interests of farmers in environmentally
vulnerable and food-insecure communities interact with national contributions to
international accords, with implications for environmental adaptation efforts in
the agriculture sector. The research anticipates identifying opportunities for
national contributions under the international agreements by directing attention
to local priorities and initiatives. To that end, the project will engage local,
regional, and national stakeholders and decision-makers. As a Dissertation
Research Improvement Award, support for this analysis meaningfully advances the
student's research career.

The research answers three questions: (1) How does a national government align
its national plans with local policies and project implementation plans
regarding food insecurity? (2) How does the content of a national government's
international commitment affect priority-setting, implementation, and
relationships around internationally-funded food security initiatives? And,(3)
How does the country-by-country structure of the international agreement affect
the inclusion of local interests? In the context of a South African case study,
the doctoral student will conduct research using mixed methods, including
interviews with diplomats and government representatives, interviews with
municipal officials, extension agents, and community organizations, interviews
with smallholder farmers and community residents, and observation of
internationally-funded adaptation projects in local communities. The research
will also incorporate existing data such as national sustainable development
plans and policies. The project stands to make contributions to understanding
the enactment of international accords at the local level, and this has the
potential to advance theory on environmental governance as the research will
evaluate the alignment of policies and priorities across scales of governance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.