* 1832309
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Fundamental Limits of Information Systems: A Computational Approach
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Chao Tian, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 191,300.00

Information theory provides a general framework in which the fundamental limits
of information systems (wired and wireless networks, cryptographic systems, data
compression and storage systems, and others) can be meaningfully investigated.
The investigation of such limits is traditionally conducted analytically,
requiring in many cases substantial ingenuity. As modern information systems
become more and more complex, such an approach becomes rather unwieldy. The main
goal of this project is to build upon initial successes in applying a
computational approach to characterize the fundamental limits of certain
distributed storage systems, and to further understand what it takes for the
proposed computational approach to be successful in the broad setting of big-
data infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed computational approach is
built upon the vantage point that the overall process of identifying and proving
fundamental limits can be alternatively viewed as an optimization problem under
the specific constraints of the system at hand and the general constraints of
information measures. The difficulty lies in the fact that such optimization
programs are usually very large for any practically relevant problems, and
numerical results are difficult to interpret. This project pursues three major
thrusts: 1) finding more efficient problem representations using symmetry and
other constraints; 2) improving the optimization algorithms using domain
knowledge; and 3) finding intelligent interpretations of the computed results
through duality to facilitate engineering design. The results are expected to
have measurable impacts on the following two disciplines: 1) Big-data
infrastructure: The ongoing big-data movement calls for information systems with
diverse reliability and functionality requirements. By identifying the
fundamental limits of such systems, accurate performance evaluations and
meaningful design guidelines may be assessed; and 2) Information theory: The
proposed study will bridge the disciplines of computational optimization and
information theory, and instill more computerized intelligence into information
theory research.