* 1832970
* RII Track-4: Winter Weather Whiplash and its Impacts on Socio-Ecological Systems
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Alexandra Contosta, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 03/31/2023
* USD 100,613.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the popular media, "weather
whiplash" describes how rapid changes in weather, for example from drought to
deluge or wildfire to downpour, can result in substantial economic and social
costs. Scientists have recently adopted the "weather whiplash" concept to
illustrate the ecological consequences of extreme changes in weather conditions.
Missing from both the popular media and the scientific literature is an
understanding of how rapid reversals in winter weather can impact natural
systems and human communities. A deeper understanding of these events, the ways
in which they have changed over time, and the extent of their impacts is needed
in order to mitigate their potential risks. This project will advance this
understanding by making an extended visit to the National Socio-Environmental
Synthesis Center (SESYNC) in Annapolis, Maryland. While there, the PI will: 1)
develop a classification scheme to categorize different types of winter weather
whiplash events; 2) examine whether and how these events have changed through
time with novel statistical techniques; and 3) determine the impacts of winter
weather whiplash by evaluating their costs to life and property. The project
will both advance the scientific idea of winter weather whiplash as a new type
of extreme event while also increasing public awareness of the drivers and
impacts of winter weather whiplash. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Compound extremes are a class of extreme events
receiving increased attention in scientific, policy, and risk management circles
due to their outsized impacts on natural systems and human communities. "Weather
whiplash" is a more colloquial phrase for describing compound extreme weather
events that might include shifts from drought to deluge, wildfire to downpour,
or hot to cold conditions. Prior media coverage of weather whiplash, as well as
past research on compound extremes, have largely ignored winter weather whiplash
events. Yet compound extremes in winter weather may impact physical, natural,
and human systems in unique ways. The goal of this project is to develop a
quantitative framework for understanding the drivers and impacts of winter
weather whiplash events through an extended visit to the National Socio-
Environmental Synthesis Center (SESYNC) in Annapolis, MD. While in residence,
the PI will: 1) develop a typology of winter weather whiplash events by
consulting government databases, conducting key informant interviews, and
reviewing historical media; 2) examine whether and how these events have changed
through time with a statistical technique that quantifies the behavior of
compound extremes; and 3) determine the impacts of winter weather whiplash by
evaluating their costs to life and property. The primary outputs will be
publications and presentations for both scientific and public audiences. The
fellowship's outcomes include developing the PI's abilities to engage in
convergence research around the theme of winter climate change while also
helping make the PI's home institution institution a national leader in
addressing societal grand challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.