* 1832164
* Collaborative Research:  Capturing 4D Variations in Stress, Slip, and Fault-Zone Material Properties: The 2019-2021 Gofar Transform Fault Earthquake Prediction Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,04/30/2021
* Emily Roland, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 04/30/2021
* USD 225,875.00

This project will determine the fault properties that control the magnitude and
timing of earthquakes on Gofar Transform Fault in the equatorial Pacific Ocean.
With an advanced array of ocean bottom seismometers (OBSs), rock collection, and
fault imaging, this research will produce a multifaceted understanding of two
magnitude 6 earthquake zones and the regions that separate them. To ensure a
continuous earthquake dataset over the period that next large earthquakes are
expected, this project involves three research cruises: 1) to deploy the OBSs
and collect rock samples; 2) to recover, refurbish, and redeploy the OBSs and to
survey the fault-zone with an autonomous underwater vehicle (AUV); and 3) to
recover the OBSs. The two-year dataset is expected to record hundreds of
thousands of microearthquakes in addition to hopefully capturing the next two
magnitude 6 mainshocks. This research will reach 6-12th grade students, by
taking two teachers from low-income school districts in New England to sea and
working with these teachers to develop curricula that can be used by teachers
throughout the US. The teachers will work with project scientists and the
University of New Hampshire's Center for Mathematics, Science, and Engineering
Education to develop a "Curriculum Kit" - a web-based set of resources that will
include classroom-based earthquake investigations, background information, and
periodic classroom video chats with the Gofar experiment scientists. This
project will also enhance earthquake research at the university level both
nationally and internationally through the support of graduate students and
postdocs. Gofar fault was chosen for this project because previous work there
allows for the planning of a precise experiment aimed at imaging transitions in
fault behavior over just a few kilometers. This experiment will capture the
temporal evolution of the fault in unprecedented detail and link these
variations to the underlying geology and fault mechanics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the aim of this project is to understand why
oceanic transform faults are dominated by aseismic slip, have such repeatable
seismic cycles, and nucleate hundreds of thousands of small earthquakes in the
rupture barriers that stop large earthquakes. In particular, previous work at
Gofar indicates that rupture barrier behavior cannot be explained by basic
bimodal frictional properties and requires more sophisticated rheological
descriptions of the fault zone. This project approaches these questions by
recording the time dependence of earthquake stress drops with a strong-motion
array and by estimating seismic velocities within the rupture barrier using 4
mini arrays of short-period OBSs that will allow us to use a seismic technique
known as double beam forming to determine the space-time evolution of shear
velocity. The project will determine if the pre-seismic changes in S-velocity
are contained to a narrow fault-zone or spread throughout the wider damage zone
and to what extent they extend to seismogenic depths. This research will compare
the migration of the velocity anomalies, or lack thereof, with fault mechanics
models to try to constrain the underlying rheology of the rupture barrier and
investigate the role of dilatancy in stopping large ruptures. The project will
also conduct the most comprehensive, high-resolution mapping of a RTF to date
through a combination of AUV based bathymetry, backscatter, photomosaic imaging,
and water column surveys along with rock dredging. This suite of studies will
help clarify the roles of dilatancy and hydrothermal alteration in producing the
contrasting seismic behavior between the rupture zones and rupture barrier
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.