* 1832126
* Excellence in Research: Numerical Analysis of Quasiperiodic Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Roberto De Leo, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2023
* USD 249,908.00

Hamiltonian dynamical systems are of paramount importance in both Mathematics
and Physics. These systems are defined by an energy function, called
Hamiltonian, and often admit first integrals, namely other functions,
independent on the Hamiltonian but that also, just like the Hamiltonian, do not
change their value over the solutions of the equations of motion. Since this
formalism was introduced by Sir W.R. Hamilton almost two centuries ago, it grew
to embrace the physics of most non-dissipative phenomena, as well as several
important branches of geometry that arose naturally out of it, and it became one
of the main building block of quantum mechanics. Nevertheless, until relatively
recently, an important class of Hamiltonian systems was overlooked, namely the
case when some first integral is multivalued (an example of multivalued function
is the angle coordinate on a circle). Such systems arise naturally from quantum
mechanics (in the so-called semiclassical approximation), in particular in the
theory of conductivity of metals at low temperature under a strong magnetic
field. Experimental data on this phenomenon were collected for many metals
starting from seventy years ago but they could not be checked against the theory
exactly for the lack of a theory of Hamiltonian systems with multivalued
Hamiltonians. Since the Eighties, Fields medalist S.P. Novikov and his school
started filling this gap and about ten years ago the experimental data were
successfully verified in the simplest cases, namely for Au and Ag. At the same
time, a new field of topology, called Quasiperiodic topology, arose as the
generalization and formalization of this Hamiltonian system and important
theoretical results have been found after the numerical study of the simplest
cases. This project aims, on the one hand, at completing the verification of
these fundamental experimental data for the several metals still unchecked and,
on the other hand, at extending and deepening the numerical study of
quasiperiodic topology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is
to continue and deepen the numerical study of Quasiperiodic Topology focusing,
in particular, on the topology of level sets of multivalued maps on the
n-dimensional tori. Its main subgoal is the contextual analytical study of the
properties suggested by the numerical experiments. This will be achieved through
the following specific objectives and methods: (1) development and
implementation in Perl/Python/C++ of old and new algorithms for the numerical
and analytical study of multivalued maps on n-tori; (2) numerical exploration
and classification of these maps; (3) analytical study of minor and major
properties of such maps. As an application of these results, a further important
subgoal of the project is the application of the code generated in (1) to verify
from first principles for the first time some important experimental data about
conductivity in metals measured in Fifties and Sixties and whose mathematical
description involves quasiperiodic functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.