* 1832860
* EAGER: Small Motionless Antenna with Reconfigurable Transmission
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Khai Ngo, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2019
* USD 100,566.00

Rescue operations in the wake of a hurricane has been hindered by the absence of
a compact apparatus for underwater communication. Data can be transmitted or
received through seawater, earth, or other challenging environments at the rate
between 1000 and 10,000 events per second by stationary or rotatory methods. The
antennae for such transmission ought to be portable so that they can be carried
by first responders. Stationary antennae as simple as a loop of wire are not
portable as they require kilometers of real estate. Rotatory antennae employing
motor(s) driving permanent magnets suffer from reliability, noise, and service
duration associated with moving parts. The proposed concept overcomes these
shortcomings by avoiding bulk motion in the synthesis of a centimeter-sized
antenna swirling a magnetic cloud. It relies on 'variable material' rather than
the 'variable structure' on which mechanical rotation relies. Local first
responders will be consulted, and their feedback will be used to identify design
constraints. Electrical, civil, and ocean engineering students will learn
electromagnetism, power electronics, and hardware validation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the work plan is to reduce the
dimensions of an ultra-low-frequency antenna from kilometers to centimeters. The
full proposal proves mathematically that such drastic size reduction requires
the generation of a rotating magnetic field. The EAGER novelty is to create such
rotating magnetic field without using moving parts. Two pieces of hardware will
be designed, constructed, and tested: an ultra-low-frequency antenna and a
sensitive magnetometer capable of detecting femto-Teslas. The antenna is
constructed from two basic cells. Each basic cell comprises a Neodymium magnet
serving as a source of magnetic flux, a ferrite yoke serving as a high-
permeability conduit of magnetic flux, and a current-controlled saturable
inductor serving as a 'shutter' for magnetic flux. The shutter's core is
realized by non-oriented 80% nickel-iron alloy or square-loop ferrite that can
be saturated with low control current. At zero control current, the shutter's
permeability is high. Since the ferrite yoke's permeability is already high, the
flux from the magnet is trapped (no emission) by the shutter and the yoke. As
the control current increases, the shutter's permeability decreases to let more
flux emit from the magnet. A circular array of basic cells and the associated
modulated control currents will generate a spinning magnetic cloud. Simulation
of a preliminary design suggests that 100 femto-Teslas at 1000 Hertz would be
detected under seawater at 100m away from a two-cell prototype with dimensions
of 15 x 9.5 x 3 cubic centimeters. This preliminary design will be refined in
the first quarter, and a flux shutter will be constructed. The shutter, ferrite
yoke, and permanent magnet will be integrated to realize the antenna in the
second quarter. A single-axis induction magnetometer will be designed and tested
in the third quarter to measure the expected femto-Teslas at 100 m away. Three-
axis magnetometer will be constructed in the fourth quarter to detect the field
vector. The power electronics to drive the antenna will be designed and
fabricated by the third quarter. The antenna and its driver will be integrated
and field-tested in the fourth quarter. The project is deemed successful upon
detection of 100 femto-Teslas at 1000 Hertz at 100m distance with an antenna
volume less than 450 cubic centimeters, and without moving
parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.