* 1832042
* LTER:  KBS - Mechanisms of Resilience in Agricultural Landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* G. Philip Robertson, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 11/30/2023
* USD 4,610,842.00

Working farms cover much of the United States, providing food, feed, and biofuel
to global markets. Changing weather patterns and land use are making it more
difficult to manage agricultural lands for profit and environmental health.
Midwestern field crop farmers are quick to note that changes in rainfall
patterns are playing havoc with their management. The Midwest is experiencing
more overall rainfall during the growing season, but it comes in heavier rain
events. Climate scientists warn that this trend is likely to continue, or even
get worse, and that we may well see more intense dry periods between these heavy
rains. How can agricultural landscapes be made more resilient in the face of
these extreme conditions? The next phase of the Kellogg Biological Station Long-
term Ecological Research program tackles this question. Scientists will explore
what aspects of the environment (above and belowground) help agricultural
landscapes resist and recover from intense droughts and how drought effects
interact with changes in land use. Scientists from many disciplines will work
together to uncover the role of plants, soils, microbes, insects, time, and
farmers in providing buffering capacity to agricultural lands. The research will
focus on annual field crops, perennial grasslands, and natural areas that make
up much of the agricultural landscape across the Midwest. The experiments will
provide new insights into how environments respond to change. Discoveries will
inform the policies, programs, and management of agricultural and natural
environments across the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term experiments and
observations will be maintained and complemented with new experiments that
simulate growing-season droughts and add prairie strips within row crop fields.
The new experiments will test the importance of three classes of hypothesized
resilience mechanisms: resource availability (soil resources and social
resources), diversity (including species richness and intraspecific genetic
diversity), and adaptation (both biological and technological). By examining
mechanisms of resilience in each major land use in our spatial domain - annual
crops, perennial biomass crops, and successional and conservation lands - the
researchers will lay the foundation for understanding how changing land use and
climate will interact to affect ecosystem functions. Farmer surveys to be
conducted over the course of the project will reveal how managers' decision-
making adapts to environmental change and thereby contributes to resilience.
This research uniquely examines biogeochemical, ecological, evolutionary, and
social dimensions of resilience in agricultural systems and
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.