* 1832876
* RII Track-4: Advanced Control Strategies for Floating Offshore Wind Farms
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andrew Goupee, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 96,275.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop
improved controls strategies that can aid in reducing the cost of energy for
floating offshore wind farms. The primary purpose of wind turbine controls is
for regulating power production as the wind environment changes. However,
control strategies that best harness wind energy for floating wind farms have
yet to be investigated. Improving the cost-competitiveness of floating offshore
wind turbine technology is essential for meeting the U.S. Department of Energy?s
Wind Vision target of harnessing 86 GW of wind energy by 2050. In particular,
nearly 60% of the U.S. offshore wind resource resides in water deeper than 60
meters, which requires floating, rather than fixed-bottom, wind turbine
technology. This project will yield several important benefits, including
improvements to publicly available floating wind turbine farm simulation tools
and models that are used by numerous researchers in the U.S. and around the
world. In addition, the curriculum for the University of Maine Mechanical
Engineering program will be strengthened in the areas of control systems and
renewable energy as a result this project. In turn, these curriculum
enhancements will better prepare University of Maine mechanical engineering
graduates with STEM skills needed to advance cost effective offshore wind energy
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is to formulate, implement and quantify the
performance of advanced floating wind offshore turbine farm control
methodologies integrating multiple inputs and control actions through using
comprehensive numerical simulations. This project will improve the powerful,
open-source computer-aided-engineering tool FAST.Farm for the simulation of
floating wind turbine farms currently being developed at the National Renewable
Energy Laboratory. This tool is of high interest to offshore wind researchers
and designers as it is robust, computationally efficient, and permits the
analysis of entire wind farms. With this improved tool, the proposed research
will explore several novel active wind turbine blade pitch, generator torque,
nacelle yaw and fluid-structure coupling control architectures that seek to
maximize energy capture and minimize structural loads for a floating wind farm.
New nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC) schemes will be tested that
incorporate feedforward LiDAR wind measurements and critical floating platform
degrees of freedom. These NMPC techniques will be extended to permit individual
blade control that minimize asymmetric rotor loading resulting from wind shear,
atmospheric turbulence and nacelle yaw error. Farm-level wake steering
algorithms will be enhanced to account for the significant lateral movement
floating wind turbines can undergo due to mean environmental loads. The
influence of low-cost, active fluid-structure coupling tuned mass systems
employing existing hull water ballast on the improvements in floating wind
turbine global performance will also be investigated. The proposed research will
ultimately pioneer active control methodologies that can significantly reduce
the cost of energy for a floating wind farm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.