* 1832709
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Community Solidarity on Frontier Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Andrea Torvinen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 21,254.00

Throughout history, human societies have cycled through periods of coalescence
and fragmentation and processes of social identification play an important role
in their long-term success. When people identify strongly with others in their
community, the potential for collective action is high and the community as a
whole tends to thrive. However, the archaeological record illustrates the
development and decline of villages, states, and empires over time and across
space. Widespread and long-lasting collective action, therefore, occurs most
frequently when groups of individuals (1) recognize membership in the same
social categories (e.g., nationality or religious affiliation) and (2) engage in
repeated, face-to-face interactions (e.g., neighbors or colleagues). When one of
these modes of social identification is weak or breaks down, the potential for
collective action decreases and the community is at risk for failure. While this
theoretical framework was developed for regional-scale, comparative research
involving cases of modern nation-states and social movements, this project
adapts it into a methodology that can be applied at the community scale within a
frontier context. Traditional frontier studies treat these peripheral regions as
whole entities and focus on how they engage with or in reaction to processes
occurring within the core, rather than examining the agency frontier inhabitants
have in shaping, maintaining, and altering their social identities. By examining
how people expressed their identity through material culture, this project will
shed new light on how collective identities form and change in frontier regions.
Furthermore, this project involves long-term collaboration among American and
Mexican researchers working in the northern frontier of Mesoamerica and will
result in rapid advances in the characterization of social dynamics within
northern frontier communities and across the region as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine the interplay of the two
modes of identification to establish the potential for collective action through
time and across spatial scales within the Epiclassic (600-900 CE) site of La
Quemada, Zacatecas, Mexico. The material culture of the northern frontier region
suggests both the existence of shared social categories and direct interaction
among frontier communities, yet these communities persisted for varying lengths
of time. La Quemada, for example, was abandoned around 900 CE, while other sites
persisted. It is hypothesized that either a change in how La Quemada residents
identified with one another weakened its collective identity, or the conditions
for sustained collective action never existed at the site scale. Ceramic data
collected via chronological, stylistic, and petrographic analysis will be used
to assess each mode of social identification: (1) shared styles of ceramic
decoration are assumed to represent similar social categories; and (2) the raw
materials used to produce pottery are interpreted as evidence of direct
interaction. The characterization of social identification within La Quemada and
how changes in identification may have impacted the potential for collective
action will provide a model that can continue to be tested in the future through
comparison with more persistent communities in the northern frontier and in
other frontier settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.