* 1832237
* Building Capacity: The Dominican University STEM Success Model to Support Students through Critical Transitions
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Paul Simpson, Dominican University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,631,714.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project will advance the aims of
the HSI Program by implementing teaching and student support practices that can
increase the success of undergraduates in early STEM courses. Research has shown
that such early success can be crucial to student retention and long-term
success in STEM fields, an issue of national interest. To promote success in
introductory STEM college courses and support the transition from lower-division
to upper-division coursework, the project will: (1) implement a STEM Summer
Bridge program to prepare entering students for success in college-level STEM
courses; and (2) transform first and second-year courses in biology, chemistry,
and mathematics to promote engaged student learning and to enable diverse
students to succeed in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
enhance the quality of undergraduate STEM education and to increase retention
and graduation rates of undergraduate students pursuing STEM degrees. Each
intervention will include three components: (1) peer-led team-learning
approaches and course-embedded tutors to improve academic performance; (2)
inclusive pedagogy to improve student course engagement and student-faculty
relationships; and (3) supplementary support through a Student Success Case
Manager who will connect students to university and community resources related
to financial, social, or emotional challenges, and who will facilitate their
academic success. Project activities are designed to provide first-generation
and nontraditional college students with the academic, psychosocial, and
community supports needed to succeed in STEM. To generate knowledge, the project
will investigate the extent to which the summer bridge program, peer-led team-
learning, inclusive pedagogy, and case management improve academic performance
and persistence in the first year, and evaluate the impact on student
relationships, sense of community, and the effectiveness of academic supports
for at-risk students. The student body at Dominican University is 74% commuter,
51% Hispanic, 50% first generation to attend college, and 49% low income. This
diversity is representative of nationwide demographic trends in higher
education. Thus, evidence generated about the effectiveness of this project can
have broad applicability for other colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.