* 1832538
* Building Capacity: Improving the Undergraduate Chemistry Experience by Green Chemistry, Active-learning, and Peer-led Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Erik Menke, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,442,497.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at the University of
California, Merced, will advance the aims of the HSI Program by increasing
undergraduate student interest and success in chemistry. The project will
redesign laboratory courses to use student-guided inquiry and green chemistry,
develop a peer-learning environment that builds a sense of community, and
develop short videos to complement lower-division chemistry courses. These
videos will feature diverse STEM professionals who will connect chemistry
concepts learned in the course to how they use these concepts in their current
STEM career. Because many students take chemistry courses, this project can
contribute to ensuring that a diverse population of students pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to increase student interest,
success, and connection to faculty and peers. The project will redesign
laboratory courses to enhance student understanding of chemistry content,
knowledge of chemistry research, and connection to peers and the broader campus
community. The labs will emphasize the environmental implications of chemistry
research. Videos that accompany the redesigned labs are expected to increase
student knowledge of career paths in chemistry, motivation for chemistry, and
student learning and persistence. The videos will be available in English and in
the speaker's native language, to foster the development of student STEM
identity, in particular for diverse students. Analytics tools available in the
learning management system will be used to measure the use of the videos by
students. Finally, peer-led team-learning is expected to improve students'
conceptual understanding, grades, attitudes, and retention. Student learning
outcomes will be assessed by student grades, pre-post surveys, retention in the
major, graduation rates, and by observation of classroom and lab interactions.
The duration and frequency of student use of the peer-led opportunities will
also be tracked and correlated with surveys of student attitudes. The project
videos will be freely available to the broader community, with the goal of
disseminating these tools to enhance learning of undergraduate chemistry. This
project seeks to advance understanding of how to support diverse students'
success in chemistry and to connect students with STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.