* 1832179
* PFI:AIR - TT:  Textured Piezoelectric Ceramics
* TIP,TI
* 01/02/2018,12/31/2019
* Shashank Priya, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 12/31/2019
* USD 199,999.00

This PFI: AIR Technology Translation project focuses on
translating piezoelectric ceramic science to fill the need for high performance
sensors, actuators and transducers. The piezoelectric effect is the ability of
certain materials to generate an electric charge in response to an applied
mechanical stress. Piezoelectric ceramics are important because they play
critical role in daily use devices including automobiles, aircrafts, medical
instruments, food processing, and house-hold electronics. This project will
result in scale-up of the manufacturing process of a particular type of
piezoelectric ceramic: textured piezoelectric ceramics. Textured ceramics have
the following unique features: three-to-five times higher transduction
coefficients, thermal stability over high temperatures, and mechanical
robustness as compared to randomly oriented polycrystalline ceramics. These
features provide the following advantages: higher efficiency, resolution, cost
savings, miniaturization, and power density. Textured ceramics can be
synthesized using the same process as that established for random ceramics and
thus do not require any new tooling or equipment.

This project addresses the following technology gaps as it translates from
research discovery toward commercial application. The sintering stages in
achieving textured ceramics will be analyzed to identify the challenges
associated with scaling the manufacturing process to ensure consistent
production. This includes establishing the process for synthesizing the seeds in
large quantities with adequate morphology and dimension, and tailoring the
binder-burnout and sintering profiles. The effect of processing variables that
play a deterministic role in achieving the large grain brick-wall like
microstructure will be evaluated. Matrix/seed template interfaces in the
microstructure will be investigated using high resolution microscopy to
understand the nature of domain wall motion with applied electric field. This,
in turn, will provide assessment of the processes controlling the mechanical and
electrical aging behavior. In conjunction with the time-temperature dependent
sintering studies, the field-stress dependent domain migration studies will
provide a full understanding of the electromechanical behavior of the textured
ceramics.

In addition, personnel involved in this project, undergraduate and graduate
students, will receive innovation and entrepreneurship experiences through
Virginia Tech's Catalyst program, KnowledgeWorks entrepreneurship events,
participation in the Nexus Conference, and participation in the iScholars
program.

The project engages Harris Corporation, Prime Photonics, and the Virginia Tech
Intellectual Property Office to augment the team's research capability, provide
access to industrial testing and manufacturing environment, and guide
commercialization aspects in this technology translation effort from research
discovery toward commercial reality.