* 1832117
* Excellence in Research: GaAsSb/GaAs Nanowires based Avalanche Photodetectors on Si
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Shanthi Iyer, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,999.00

An important building block of the quantum information circuit is the single
photon detection device. The avalanche photodetector in the nanowire
configuration is a promising route to achieving single photon detection as it
enables reduction in the impact ionization region, thus improving gain and
detectivity. Further, the relaxation of the lattice mismatch constraint in the
nanowire configuration enables integration of the avalanche photodetector to the
traditional silicon technology. GaAsSb is an ideal material system for
wavelength tunability in the optical communication wavelength range of 1.3 -
1.55 microns. The GaAsSb/GaAs heterostructure will be designed for independent
multiplication and absorption regions, with the former occurring in the larger
bandgap GaAs junction to minimize the effect of Zener breakdown, which is a
common problem in low band gap materials. This proposal's central theme is on
the growth and design optimization of the separate optical absorption and
multiplication region in the GaAsSb/GaAs nanowire based avalanche photodetector
heterostructure on Si. Two different nanowire configurations namely axial and
core-shell will be examined using a variety of material and device
characterization techniques. The experimental work will be complemented by
modeling using different software packages. Emphasis will be on engineering the
increase of the electric field in 3D and gaining deeper insight into the
avalanche mechanism (multiplication of the carriers) in the two different
nanowire configurations. The performance in these two configurations will be
evaluated to arrive at an optimized design in the final phase to achieve nano-
avalanche photodetector with gain exceeding 10 in the near infrared region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: Avalanche photodetectors are commonly used for
high speed, high gain and low optical signal detection applications. The
interest in nanowire - based avalanche photodetectors stems from the potential
success of single photon detection devices. Nanowire architecture due to its one
dimensional attributes leads to unique and novel material properties and
concomitantly enables adaptation of fabrication processes from thin film
technology. The relaxation of lattice mismatch constraint, small footprint, high
surface to volume ratio, superior optical trapping and feasibility of
implementing in different nanowire architectures can be strategically used to
improve the detector performance and enabling heterogeneous integration with
traditional Si technology. &lt;br/&gt;In the proposed work, separate optical
absorption and multiplication region avalanche photodetector concepts from the
thin film form will be adapted toward bandgap engineering of GaAsSb/GaAs
heterostructure in a unique manner, exclusive to the nanowire architecture. The
GaAsSb material system has been chosen as it encompasses the bandgap tunable in
the telecommunication wavelength region. Different design concepts in the
implementation of avalanche photodetector will be realized: axial and radial
architectures, the latter of which is exclusive to the nanowire configuration.
The investigation of nanowire ensemble based avalanche photodetectors enable
taking advantage of the vertical alignment that allows superior light trapping
properties leading to enhanced optical absorption. The performance in the two
different configurations will be evaluated to arrive at an optimized design in
the final phase to achieve nano-avalanche photodetector with gain exceeding 10
in the near infrared region. &lt;br/&gt;This study will provide deeper insight
into the effect of photoconductivity modulation on the avalanche mechanism in
nanowires due to the band bending at the surface stemming from the close
proximity of the surface to the core of the NW, particularly in axial
architecture. Advances made in the heterostructure design toward achieving an
increased 3D electric field in a lower dimensional structure will enable
transformational improvement in the device performance with significant impact
on material and device research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.