* 1832471
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for Nanothread Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* John Badding, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,800,000.00

The NSF Center for Nanothread Chemistry pioneers a new form of carbon molecule,
formed when arrays of small molecules transform under pressure into arrays of
long thread-like molecules in a diamond-like geometry. These remarkable
reactions totally reorganize every atom within the starting molecules to produce
highly ordered parallel arrays of nanothreads. The team of researchers in the
Center for Nanothread Chemistry aims to produce whole new families of
nanothreads with diverse chemical compositions, structures, and properties.
These materials can currently be made only in very small amounts, and a key goal
of the Center is to learn how make larger quantities that will enable further
fundamental science and technology impacts. This "flexible diamond" material may
be broadly useful in application areas such as high strength composites, energy
storage, and catalysis. These new nanomaterials also provide a rich venue for
public outreach and the training of a diverse next generation of emerging
science professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Center for Nanothread
Chemistry defines the chemistry generating a new class of organic molecules
defined by pervasive covalent bond connectivity in multiple dimensions.
Nanothreads, the first such example, are highly extended one-dimensional
molecules with cage-like bonding, akin to the thinnest possible threads of
diamond and capped by circumferential hydrogen. Nanothreads are synthesized by
an innovative mechanochemical technique in which molecules with multiple
unsaturated functions react under stress applied at carefully controlled rates.
This strategy overcomes the traditional requirement for topochemical
commensuration between the reactant and product and thus allows for many more
molecular crystals to react into well-defined structures. The Center team is
developing an actionable understanding of the reaction mechanism and enabling
the design of new threads with desired arrangements of both interior heteroatoms
and exterior functional groups. Post-synthesis modification allows for versatile
incorporation of new groups of diverse function and also allows for additional
structural elaboration. The unique architecture and properties of nanothreads
provide opportunities for commercialization. The interplay of theory, synthesis
and characterization provides rich training opportunities for diverse groups of
students and researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.