* 1832338
* Resource Hub: The NSF National Resource Hub for STEM Education at Hispanic-Serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Elba Serrano, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,633,530.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This collaborative project at New Mexico
State University, Dona Ana Community College, and California State University,
Northridge, will advance the aims of the HSI Program by establishing the NSF
National Resource Hub for STEM Education at Hispanic-Serving Institutions. This
HSI Resource Hub will help HSIs develop the strategies and processes to obtain
the resources needed to improve the quality and outcomes of undergraduate STEM
education. It will also support efforts to build institutional capacity for
advancing the STEM careers of students and faculty at HSIs. The HSI Resource Hub
aims to achieve these goals by building a national network of all HSIs;
providing training, mentorship, and peer review to improve grant-writing
practices; enabling institutions to identify and fill gaps in their capacity to
obtain funding, and to develop administrative tools for conducting STEM
research; providing training on diversity, equity, and inclusion issues relevant
to STEM education; and disseminating resources that support evidence-based,
inclusive teaching practices that increase student retention and graduation.
This project has the potential to advance knowledge about how to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, how to build research capacity, and how to obtain
resources for these efforts, at HSIs and other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HSI Resource Hub aspires to reach the
more than 450 HSIs in the US, with special focus on including those institutions
that have received little or no prior NSF support. The project aims to build HSI
collaborations that can support existing STEM research, increase STEM research
capacity, and encourage implementation of leading-edge pedagogy in STEM
education. Regional conferences, workshops, online networking platforms,
certifications, and a mini-grant program for junior faculty will support broad
participation and enhance professional expertise in writing effective grant
proposals. Gap analysis and collaborations will help HSIs identify and develop
the infrastructure needed to manage successful STEM research and education
projects. Evaluation of the HSI Resource Hub will use quantitative, qualitative,
and mixed methodologies to provide data that will guide and refine the project
throughout the funding period. The HSI Resource Hub activities and outcomes will
be disseminated through a dedicated website, conference presentations,
workshops, newsletters, publications, and social media. By uniting HSIs across
the nation, the HSI Resource Hub is expected to have positive impacts on
increasing the degree completion rates of students pursuing STEM degrees, thus
enhancing the diversity of the US STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.