* 1832558
* Building Capacity: Collaboration for Inclusive and Engaging Curriculum, Instruction, and Achievement
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Matthew Cover, California State University-Stanislaus
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,462,263.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at the California State
University-Stanislaus (Stanislaus State), will advance the aims of the HSI
Program by improving STEM student retention, graduation, and success by
developing a STEM faculty culture of evidence-based teaching and student-
centered learning environments. Over a four-year period, cohorts of faculty will
attend summer teaching institutes, academic year workshops, and peer support
groups. It is predicted that this faculty-led professional development program
will transform teaching and improve student success across all STEM disciplines
at Stanislaus State. If successful, this project could serve as a model for
institutional change efforts to improve STEM education at other universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to transform the
culture of STEM teaching and learning at Stanislaus State by increasing the use
of evidence-based and culturally-engaging teaching practices. The project aims
to generate new knowledge about: (1) the effectiveness of a faculty-driven
professional development program to broadly influence STEM teaching practices;
(2) whether implementation of the Culturally Engaging Campus Environments Model
among faculty results in measurable improvements in psychosocial indicators of
student success at an HSI; and (3) the ways that sustained and collegial
professional development activities can produce meaningful changes in the
teaching culture of college faculty. Both qualitative and quantitative data will
be collected and analyzed. Project impact will be evaluated by measuring the
benefits realized by the students it serves. The project will also assess
faculty, and will track the processes used to develop, implement, and sustain
project activities, to facilitate the adoption of similar programs at other
institutions. Through a holistic professional development program that produces
widespread changes in the culture of teaching and learning at Stanislaus State,
this project plans to double the use of evidence-based teaching practices and
decrease the non-pass rate in all STEM gateway courses. In turn, these
improvements are expected to support increased performance of students in STEM
courses, and increased sense of belonging and higher retention rates among STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.