* 1832371
* Characteristics of the Oceanic Lithosphere and the Propagation of Pn and Sn Seismic Phases
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Donald Forsyth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 221,916.00

Earthquake recordings made by seismometers at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean
contain important information about the structure and evolution of Earth's
tectonic plates. When a plate initially forms near a mid-ocean ridge, for
example, pods of melt can become trapped within the plate as it cools. These
pockets of frozen melt have a different composition than the surrounding
material and as such, alter how seismic waves propagate. This project plans to
examine existing data recorded by two arrays of ocean-bottom seismometers
deployed in the western Pacific. Novel observational and modeling techniques
will be used to search for pods of melt emplaced during the formation of the
tectonic plate. An important aspect of the project is to reconcile competing
models of the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary, that is, the transition from
the rigid lithospheric plate to the more pliable rock below. Certain types of
seismic observations suggest quite convincingly that the asthenosphere is
mechanically weak relative to the overlying plate (lithosphere) but if this is
the case, it is difficult to explain the existence of the seismic waves that are
recorded. One hypothesis, which will be explored thoroughly, is that the
addition of small-scale structures such as the frozen melt pockets can reconcile
the two observations. The project supports the training of a postdoctoral
investigator as well as undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pn and Sn waves - high frequency
guided waves traveling within the lithosphere - provide one of the few ways that
the fine-scale structure of the lithosphere can be probed. A detailed analysis
of Pn and Sn waves recorded on two arrays of ocean-bottom seismometers (OBS) in
the western Pacific will be carried out during this project. By examining the
detailed waveforms in addition to the traditional approach of modeling the
overall shape of the coda, it will be possible to resolve the overall velocity
structure of old oceanic lithosphere better, the amplitude and scale of
heterogeneities within the lithosphere, and the attenuation structure of the
lithosphere. In turn, these observations will add to our understanding of the
processes of lithospheric formation. The approach will be to combine detailed
data analysis using new analytical techniques applied to more high quality Pn
and Sn records than ever available before with extensive modeling of propagation
of seismic waves in 3-D heterogeneous media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.