* 1832436
* Building Capacity: STEM Student Success from Two-year to Four-year Institutions through Classroom-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Alfredo Leon, Miami Dade College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,279,233.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project will advance the aims of
the HSI Program by adding course-based undergraduate research experiences
(CUREs) to introductory algebra, biology, and chemistry courses, which serve as
gateways into STEM majors. This project is a collaboration between Miami Dade
College, the largest two-year HSI in the nation, the University of Florida, and
the University of Miami. The project predicts that the addition of CURES will
enhance the undergraduate learning experience, thus supporting increases in the
number of students obtaining associate degrees in STEM disciplines and in the
success of students in transferring to four-year institutions. The project will
identify factors for increasing retention and completion rates in STEM degree
programs for undergraduates, including Hispanic and underserved students. The
project seeks to enrich the STEM workforce by increasing the number of trained
STEM professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to increase
undergraduate persistence and completion in the STEM degrees through the
adoption of CURE-infused STEM gateway activities. This project aims to improve
understanding of how integration of CUREs and other educational supports in
gateway courses will affect retention and completion rates of undergraduate
students. Faculty will participate in professional development activities to
incorporate CUREs into STEM gateway courses in mathematics, biology, and
chemistry. The CUREs in gateway courses will be designed to enhance the student
experience by engaging students in contextualized learning with real world
experiences. The students in the CURE-infused STEM courses will devise their own
investigations, write a scientific research paper, and present their findings at
a public poster session. The senior undergraduate students and graduate students
from the University of Florida and the University of Miami, along with the
faculty from Miami Dade College teaching the gateway courses, will lead
authentic research laboratories at Miami Dade College. Through curricular
enhancement, together with faculty professional development, this project seeks
to 1) increase the percentage of STEM students enrolled in CURE-infused STEM
gateway courses in the disciplines of mathematics, biology, and chemistry; 2)
increase the number of undergraduates continuing from a first to a second
sequential STEM course; 3) increase the number of undergraduates completing a
STEM associate degree in three years; 4) increase the percentage of students
successfully transferring into STEM baccalaureate programs; 5) increase the
number of STEM faculty teaching CURE-infused STEM courses; and 6) increase the
number of students participating in CURE-infused STEM courses. By collecting and
analyzing quantitative and qualitative data, the project can generate new
knowledge about the factors that stimulate student persistence and completion in
STEM at the Community College level. The project seeks to develop a model for
integrating CUREs into the STEM curriculum that could be useful to other
institutions, especially Hispanic-Serving Community
Colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.