* 1832534
* Building Capacity: Integrated Interventions to Improve Undergraduate Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Donna Stokes, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,499,879.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at the University of
Houston will advance the aims of the HSI Program by improving retention of
students from first-year courses to higher level courses, and through completion
of the bachelor's degree. The project will analyze student motivation and desire
for obtaining a STEM degree. It will also implement and test the effectiveness
of academic interventions, such as a summer bridge program, on student success.
As one of two public research institutions in the state of Texas designated as
an HSI, and given the demographics of its student enrollment, the University of
Houston can contribute to developing a diverse STEM workforce for the state of
Texas and the Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two components: an
intervention component and a research component. The objectives of the
intervention component are to implement and test the effectiveness of
interventions including: (1) a Summer Bridge Program, (2) a First Year Interest
Group, and (3) the Undergraduate Research Guild Experience program. The
objective of the research component is to examine the effect of these
interventions on motivational and self-regulatory student characteristics and
psychosocial contextual factors (e.g., sense of belonging) that are malleable to
change through intervention and that are associated with college grades and
persistence to graduation. The project will evaluate the implementation and
effectiveness of these interventions, which have built-in academic and personal
support mechanisms. By measuring the impact of these integrated interventions on
student success, the project will extend knowledge about best practices for
improving retention and graduation rates. The project has the potential to
increase the graduation rate of STEM undergraduates who are prepared to advance
into STEM careers and graduate or professional school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.