* 1832834
* WORKSHOP: Student Travel to CHI Mentoring (CHIMe) 2018
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Marvin Andujar, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2019
* USD 25,825.00

This grant supports participation by approximately 25 students from U.S.-based
educational institutions in the Computer-Human Interaction Mentoring (CHIMe)
2018 workshop, which will be held April 21-22 in conjunction with the 2018 ACM
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2018), and whose goal is
to provide an opportunity for networking and mentoring among students in the
field of HCI who belong to one or more of the following communities: women,
underrepresented minorities, and persons with disabilities. CHI 2018 will be
held April 21-26 in Montreal, Canada, and is sponsored by the Association for
Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Human-Computer Interaction
(SIGCHI). The annual CHI conferences are the leading international forum for the
presentation and discussion of research and practice relating to human-computer
interaction, and they are attended by approximately 3,000 HCI professionals from
around the world. More information about this year's conference is available
online at https://chi2018.acm.org/. The topic of Human Computer Interaction
(HCI) is more important now than at any other time in the history of computing.
As computers become smaller, faster, and more ubiquitous, our ability to use
them effectively becomes critical. Not only must we design usable systems, but
we must do so in a rapidly changing landscape of computing hardware that
includes desktops, mobile phones, and embedded systems. A unique aspect of HCI
is that it requires the study of not just computing, but of the combination of
computing and people. Because people are involved, HCI is a field where aspects
such as culture, socio-economic background, gender, etc., are considered in the
systems that we build. This is a clear argument for the development of a diverse
field of researchers who bring to bear a wide range of experiences in their
problem solving skills. The PIs have made a serious effort to attract
participants from HBCU (Historically Black Colleges and Universities) and HSI
(Hispanic-Serving Institutions). Additional funds for the workshop are being
provided by Microsoft Corporation. More information about the workshop is
available online at https://chime2018.wordpress.com/.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CHIMe 2018 will replicate the successful formula employed
in the 2010 and 2012 workshops, and will be run as a series of presentations and
panels. The workshop will harness the cumulative experience of successful STEM
professionals in the field to provide a unique forum in which to showcase the
technical achievements of diverse researchers in computing and to encourage a
new generation of researchers from underrepresented groups. With its focus on
graduate students in HCI, the workshop will be positioned to have a direct
impact on future faculty and researchers in this area of endeavor. It will
provide a highly technical and supportive environment for underrepresented
minority doctoral students in the field of HCI to discuss their research and to
receive constructive feedback from experts, along with ample opportunities for
networking and peer mentoring. Speakers will include leading researchers in the
field drawn from these same communities, who will address a broad range of
issues ranging from technical concerns (such as appropriate evaluation methods)
to some of today's hot topics (e.g., health and accessibility, ubiquitous
computing, games, privacy, theory and computer science education). The speakers'
diverse occupations in government labs, academia and industry will provide
attendees with different perspectives of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.