* 1832615
* I-Corps - A New Technological Approach to Infrared Detection
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* John Blaho, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on the
development of a lower-cost, improved performance infrared radiation detection
technology. Numerous technologies presently exist for detecting Infrared
radiation. Those which are cost effective for commercial applications tend to
lack adequate performance specifications, while those with ideal performance are
too expensive. This technology has broad application potential. The proposed
I-Corps program explores implementation and commercialization opportunities
within the project's initial application focus of Nondispersive Infrared (NDIR)
gas sensing of carbon dioxide and volatile organic compounds (VOC), such as
methane and ethylene gas. These sensors have significant markets related to
smart ventilation systems for cars, homes, and businesses, as well as leak
monitoring in industrial processes and oil and gas production. Further enabling
the mass deployment of these sensors will have significant impact on energy
conservation, environmental protection, and health and safety. Additionally,
longer term development of the technology may prove to be disruptive in thermal
imaging applications. Presently, thermal imaging applications are broad but the
hardware is often too cumbersome and expensive to be practical for commercial
use.

This I-Corps project is based on the premise that the intersection of different
scientific disciplines leads to disruptive innovation. The project's technology
is a fundamentally different approach to infrared radiation detection than those
developed in the past 50+ years. This project pursues an optical solution to a
semiconductor material processing problem which has hampered the realization of
adequate production yield, manufacturing scalability, and device performance,
resulting in too high a cost and limited suitability for many commercial
applications. Previous progress on this project has focused on the theoretical
development of the optical design and experimental verification of these
nanofabricated structures. Initial results have been encouraging, and work
continues to enhance responsivity, as well as other necessary device
specifications. This I-Corps process will be used to refine our understanding of
customer problems/needs and the potential for our technology to solve them. This
will further inform our technology development path and specification focus,
enabling the release of a useful product to market sooner.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.