* 1832553
* Building Capacity:  Building Bridges into Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Doris Espiritu, City Colleges of Chicago Wilbur Wright College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,702,170.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at Wilbur Wright College
will advance the aims of the HSI Program by enabling talented, underprepared,
low-income students to pursue and complete a bachelor's degree in engineering or
computer science. Public schools in urban areas struggle to prepare their large
populations of low-income students in math and science. Thus, many high school
graduates are not well prepared to pursue further education requiring
quantitative or analytical thinking, or to join the US workforce in jobs
demanding these skills. This project aims to develop and implement pathways,
practices, and interventions to support student success in engineering or
computer science at two critical transitions: from high school to community
college, and from community college to four-year universities. The project plans
to achieve this goal partly through streamlined connections between Wilbur
Wright College, the Chicago Public schools, and public four-year colleges and
universities in Illinois. The strategies developed and the knowledge produced in
this project are expected to be significant to a broad segment of public
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be centered at Wilbur Wright
College, an urban community college in the City Colleges of Chicago system.
Wilbur Wright College is the largest federally recognized Hispanic-serving
community college in Illinois. The project aims to build bridges across critical
transitions by creating a Summer Bridge Camp to improve math skills and prepare
incoming students for an engineering or computer science curriculum. It will
also create a one-year engineering Gateway course to further strengthen
students' math skills and self-efficacy. The project also aims to enhance
practices that support the development of students' professional identity (i.e.
the ability to see themselves as engineers or computer scientists), through
faculty and near-peer mentoring, tutoring, intentional advising, engineering and
computer science social events, and participation in professional meetings. The
project will track students' semester-to-semester GPA, retention, transfer,
graduation rates, and length of time to complete the associate's and bachelor's
degrees. Self-efficacy and identity will be measured by an educational research
professional. This project is expected to contribute to the national need for a
diverse engineering and computer science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.