* 1832898
* RII Track-4: Designing Solution-Processed Hybrid Metamaterials via DNA Self-Assembly
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Kannatassen Appavoo, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 06/30/2022
* USD 246,292.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With increasing demands to build
devices that have a smaller footprint but operate at greater speeds, it is
critical to develop materials with never-before-seen properties. These demands
in performance are tied with developing nanofabrication techniques that are
cheap and scalable in order to rapidly deploy these advanced materials into
novel energy, communication and medical technologies. Metamaterial, a class of
material that does not occur in nature, can possess exotic properties as
determined by their periodic, organized structures rather than the intrinsic
material properties of their individual units. However, fabricating
metamaterials is often costly and time-consuming, thus requiring sophisticated
tools to create periodic arrays of nanostructures with high precision. In this
project, the Principal Investigator will partner with experts at Brookhaven
National Laboratory to develop a low-cost solution-process technique to
fabricate three-dimensional metamaterial (BNL). The goal is to use self-
assembly, the natural process by which complex structures are put together, to
arrange subunits of different nanostructures into a three-dimensional
metamaterial, providing real-time insights on the environmental factors that
modify this process. This highly interdisciplinary project provides education
and training opportunities in the fields of photonics, nanofabrication and high-
resolution microscopy, and enables graduate and undergraduate students from
Alabama to conduct research at BNL. If successful, this project will offer a
strategy to create metamaterial on a large scale, aligning with the Materials
Genome Initiative's vision to discover, manufacture, and deploy advanced
materials in half the time and at a fraction of the
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The development of
metamaterials has provided researchers an unpreceded way to achieve control over
light-matter interaction, leading to exotic optical effects such as cloaking,
superlensing and enhanced entangled photon generation. A critical step towards
integrating metamaterials into energy-harvesting and sensing technologies is to
develop nanofabrication methods that are low-cost and can be adapted for large-
scale manufacturing. This project aims to develop a DNA-guided solution-
processed strategy to fabricate hybrid three-dimensional metamaterials. The
precise assembly of dissimilar nanostructures is achieved by selectively coating
their surfaces with DNA to introduce directional bonding that can be programmed
to self-assemble in a desired orientation. This allows high-quality crystalline
nanostructures of different shapes (spheres, cubes or octahedrons) and materials
(metal and dielectrics) to form into three-dimensional periodic arrangements of
nanostructures. Since the intrinsic properties of an individual nanostructure or
unit cell can be controlled, this provides a unique platform to understand how
complex nanostructure assembly give rise to emerging optical phenomena,
including nonlinear effects. A key part of this project is in situ linear and
nonlinear optical experiments performed in a microfluidic reactor that can
control the nanostructure-assembly microenvironment. By tuning the
microenvironment, we will study how various electromagnetic modes couple and how
to tune these various mechanisms with respect to each other. Furthermore, we
will use full-field three-dimensional finite-difference time-domain
electromagnetic solvers to model the optical properties of these hybrid
metamaterial systems. If successful, the project will provide a route to
fabricating metamaterials with exotic linear and/or nonlinear properties using
solution-processed methods, which offer several advantages such as design
flexibility, high-throughput, and the potentials for integration into ink-like
or roll-to-roll printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.