* 1832926
* EAGER: A Longitudinal Study of Knowledge Diffusion and Societal Impact of Nanomanufacturing Research &amp; Development: Harnessing Data for Science and Engineering
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Alias Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 158,387.00

Since the National Nanotechnology Initiative was implemented in 2000,
significant progress has been made in understanding the unique physical
phenomena that occur at the nano-scale and in designing and fabricating new
nano-scale materials, structures, devices and systems. To realize the benefits
to the nation of these advances in nanotechnology, however, advances must also
be made in nanomanufacturing, and these advances must translate, in turn, into
production by industry. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) project will investigate the knowledge diffusion and societal impact of
nanomanufacturing research, using advanced data analytics frameworks. The study
results are expected to inform government, industry, and researchers in
identifying research gaps and how resources and investments could be directed to
address obstacles to scaling the most promising nanotechnology discovery to
industrial production. The project is highly exploratory and hence suitable for
the EAGER program. The research results will be broadly distributed. The project
responds to the NSF Big Idea--Harnessing Data for 21st Century Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops new analytical models
and frameworks to study and analyze the outputs of research in
nanomanufacturing. Nanotechnology studies are mostly high-level industry-wide
reviews based on smaller-scale survey and are mostly available to members. This
project is data science-driven, based on existing large databases and state-of-
the-art data analytics including journal articles, patents, licenses and
technology transfer datasets and made publicly available. The project develops a
framework that systematically collects relevant data generated in the past 15-20
years from university technology transfer offices, public news databases,
patents and publications, and analyzes the influence of research investments and
specific projects on knowledge diffusion and its commercial impact. From the
data, the project develops a novel, scalable text mining, topic modeling, trend
analysis, and network analysis to quantify, evaluate, and visualize each
research effort's long-term knowledge diffusion. The expected outcomes are to
understand, (1) nanomanufacturing knowledge diffusion path from academic
publications to patents to commercialization, (2) impact of federal investment
in nanomanufacturing research in facilitating long-term knowledge diffusion, and
(3) the difference between large-scale collaborative projects and small-scale
individual projects facilitating long-term knowledge diffusion. The broad set of
analytical techniques developed from this research are expected to further
advance the scientific use of these methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.