* 1832407
* RUI: The Multi-Dimensional Structure of Urban Landscapes and the Supply and Distribution of Ecosystem Services
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Peleg Kremer, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2024
* USD 206,007.00

This research project will address the relationship between the spatial
organization of urban components and the delivery and distribution of urban
ecosystem services such as air filtration, local climate regulation, and noise
reduction. To better identify how the spatial organization of urban structure
interacts with environmental and ecological phenomena to produce and distribute
urban ecosystem services, this project will help build the scientific foundation
for understanding urban structure-ecological function interaction by testing the
relationship between common compositions of urban structure classes, including
the integration of the vertical dimension of building, and indicators of
ecosystem services. Modeling of urban structure-ecological function
relationships at a fine spatial scale-will provide geographers, urban planners,
and engineers with the scientific foundation necessary for planning effective
interventions to promote urban sustainability and human well-being. Project
findings will benefit researchers and public officials working in the fields of
urban planning and design, environmental health, environmental justice, and
environmental modeling. To complement the basic research components of this
project, special educational outreach activities will introduce students from a
diverse set of urban backgrounds, including members of groups underrepresented
in STEM, to concepts and hands-on data-collection and -analysis activities
relating to ecosystems services in their localities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid
growth in the global urban population poses major challenges to the health and
well-being of urban dwellers and requires innovative approaches to urban
planning. The investigators will conduct a multi-dimensional urban structure
classification and comparative analysis of the relationships between urban
structure and surface temperature in seven U.S. cities. A more focused case
study in Philadelphia will address the urban ecosystem services of air pollution
and noise mitigation through a new mobile data-collection and analytic scheme.
This project will explore answers to several critical questions regarding
sustainable urban design: Are common multi-dimensional urban structure classes
similar across cities, and are they stable across scales of aggregation? Are
urban surface temperature signatures explained better by such urban classes than
by individual land-cover classes? How is urban structure associated with
ecosystem services such as air pollution and noise mitigation? How do different
configurations of urban vegetation help mitigate air and noise pollution in
cities such as Philadelphia? The project will include the development and
verification of the multi-dimensional, functional urban land-cover
classification using multiple case study cities in the U.S. Research activities
will include spatial and statistical analysis of land use and land cover,
elevation, and other remote sensing data as well as a stratified sampling scheme
of fine-scale, spatially explicit measurements of a series of urban ecosystem
service indicators, including surface and ambient temperature, air pollution,
and noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.