* 1832350
* Acquisition of an Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer for Clumped Isotope Analysis to Expand the Alabama Stable Isotope Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Thomas Tobin, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 259,706.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program grant
supports acquisition of an isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) at the
University of Alabama to facilitate faculty, student and regional collaborative
research with a focus on deciphering Earth?s climate and water body temperature
conditions across notable mass extinction boundaries in Earth?s history. The
instrument to be acquired is specialized for the analysis technique of clumped
isotope paleothermometry, and while relatively new has been shown to prove
useful for independently estimating the temperature of formation of carbonates
in the ancient sedimentary, rock and fossil records. The instrument would be
first-of-its kind in the SE U.S., with the exception of south Florida and
benefit researchers across the states of Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi,
Louisiana, Arkansas, Tennessee, and North and South Carolina. The investigators
intend to engage graduate and undergraduate students in experiential learning
using the new instrument and will work with a local HBCU, Fort Valley State
University, in a cross-university collaboration to facilitate the recruitment of
underrepresented students to the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRMS to
be acquired will be capable of making routine ?clumped? isotope ratio
measurements of the double substituted isotopologue 13C16O18O or mass 47 clump,
which is a measure of the enrichment of the number of CO2 molecules containing a
13C-18O bond above the number expected by a random distribution of carbon and
oxygen isotopes. Clumped isotopic analysis can be used to independently infer
the temperature of formation of carbonates at the time they were precipitated
(paleothermometry) without any assumptions about the oxygen isotopic composition
of the water from which they precipitated. Clumped isotope paleothermometry is a
relatively new technique which has been primarily employed in the analysis of
ancient carbonate material from multiple sources, including shallow diagenetic
fluids, dolomitization, soil carbonates, speleothems, methane seeps, and a
variety of biogenic carbonates (e.g., bivalves and corals). As the technique is
relatively new there is still active development work being conducted on
standardization techniques and inter-laboratory comparisons are being made.
Research applications will include, but are not limited to, studies of the
effects of climate on the proliferation of human civilization and how different
food sources were utilized and prepared by indigenous populations;
paleontological investigations of the growth rates of extinct organisms;
paleoclimate changes across mass extinction boundaries; and studies of the
importance of diagenesis in Precambrian carbonates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.