* 1832973
* RII Track-4: Defining the Environment in Science and Policy
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* David Bond, Bennington College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 09/30/2020
* USD 78,421.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The RII Track-4 EPSCoR research fellowship
supports anthropological research that examines the constitutive relationship
between the problems of fossil fuels and the formation of environmental science
and policy. As a Member of the School of Social Science at the Institute for
Advanced Study (IAS) in Princeton, New Jersey for the academic year 2018-19, the
PI intends to continue ongoing ethnographic research on the relationship between
fossil fuel disasters and environmental protections, synthesize findings in
direct conversation with leading scholars from across the social sciences, and
finish a book length manuscript on the place of the environment in the
tumultuous present. With sites ranging from the history of pollution and
landmark legislation on clean air and clean water in the United States to
present day venues working to measure and manage hydrocarbon pollution, this
book describes how the negative ecologies of fossil fuels help draw the
coordinates of the environment into effective scientific and political relief.
Although fossil fuels loom large in present concerns over climate change, the
longer history of petro-problems and environmental protections is often
neglected. This understudied relation has serious implications for the resurgent
place of environmental concerns in theory and politics today.
&lt;br/&gt;?&lt;br/&gt;??&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;In advocacy,
science, and governance, the environment has become a vital field of knowledge
and responsibility in the contemporary. While much is done with the environment,
less attention has focused on the emergence of the environment itself as a
converging field of action for advocacy, science, and regulation. The research
describes how the environment gained potent empirical and ethical definition in
response to the problems of fossil fuels from the 1960s to the present, and
explores the implications of this neglected relationship for theory, politics,
and people today. To a striking degree the specific crisis that the environment
realized, the forms of understanding and responsibility it authorized, and the
horizons of action and anticipation it routinized all bear the imprint of
hydrocarbon afterlives. Whether by way of urban smog or petrochemical runoff or
even oil spills, as fossil fuels unravel the conditions of life they also
instigate new state authority to monitor and police those conditions. Yet the
resulting definition of the defendable environment, wedged in between
hydrocarbon excess and public outrage, has often been effective to the extent it
sidesteps the underlying petro-problems and focuses attention instead on
stabilizing the mediums of exposure, like clean air and clean water, and perhaps
now a stable climate. This has serious consequence, for not only has the
environment been designed to divorce measures of harm from measures of gain but
the category has found its most forceful definition through moralizing and
managing an ahistorical, moderately contaminated, and exceedingly technical
understanding of legitimate life. Today, as the disruptions of fossil fuels snap
back into focus around rising planetary concerns like global warming, ocean
acidification, and the so-called Anthropocene, this history of our present is
significant not only for its previous neglect but also for its reworking of
environmental crisis and critique today. As the first faculty member from
Bennington College to be invited to IAS, this work will also raise the
intellectual profile of the PI's home institution, stimulate ambitious research
agendas among faculty and students while improving infrastructures of support
for such work, and catalyze new research among current collaborators, both at
the home institution and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.