* 1832187
* Uncovering Potential Risks of Wind-induced Cascading Damages to Construction Projects and Neighboring Communities
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Youngjib Ham, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 352,481.00

Unstructured construction sites, including incomplete structures and unsecured
resources (e.g., materials, equipment, and temporary facilities), are among the
most vulnerable environments to windstorms such as hurricanes. Wind-induced
damages to construction sites cause substantial losses, disruption, and
considerable schedule delays, and thus negatively impact the efficiency of
construction projects. Moreover, wind-induced damage caused by equipment,
materials or structural elements, for example, originating from construction
sites negatively affect neighboring communities, triggering structural damage,
serious injuries, and casualties, as well as economic losses. This project will
create and validate a new streamlined Imaging-to-Simulation framework to prevent
wind hazard events from causing catastrophic damage to construction projects and
neighboring communities. This project will benefit our society as it will
significantly enhance current windstorm preparedness and mitigation plans, which
ultimately promote public safety, property loss reduction, insurance cost
reduction, and induce a culture of preparedness for disasters. This
multidisciplinary research will help broaden participation of a new generation
of young people in the Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) fields
through integrated research and pedagogical
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using knowledge on potential at-risk
construction resources obtained through experimental testing of extreme wind
events, this project will partially or fully automatically model the current
state of construction sites through machine vision techniques using multimodal
visual data obtained from construction workers and camera-equipped unmanned
aerial vehicles. To perform multi-physics simulation of multiple discrete
objects in unstructured construction sites, an impulse-based discrete element
method will be conceptualized. This method explicitly accounts for impulse-based
dynamics by realizing efficient computing, which enable balancing between
significant speed-up and reasonable simulation fidelity. The approach can
describe the collective motion of mutually interacting components over time.
Component-based vulnerability and impact analysis with 3D Building or Civil
Information Models (BIM/CIMs) will then be conducted to generate fundamental and
highly specific knowledge on wind-induced damage mechanisms. Finally, the entire
system will be validated in real-world construction projects and within a 12-fan
Wall of Wind facility that can generate up to hurricane category 5 wind speeds.