* 1832543
* Building Capacity: Integrating Research, Mentoring, and Industry Collaborations to Improve STEM Recruitment and Retention
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Pamela Marshall, Maricopa County Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,499,985.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project at the Phoenix College will
advance the aims of the HSI Program by incorporating multi-disciplinary Course-
Based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) into STEM curricula in colleges
throughout the district. The program will develop CUREs for three targeted
audiences. For non-science majors, it will develop a community-based CURE model
designed to promote science literacy, positive attitudes toward science, and
recruitment of students into STEM majors. For STEM majors, it will develop a
CURE model designed to increase retention, transfer and degree completion of
STEM majors. For future STEM professionals, it will develop a workforce CURE
model designed to improve workforce-related skills and interest in STEM careers.
The program is expected to involve more than 3000 community college students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this project are to 1) promote
increased interest in STEM disciplines, especially among students from groups
that are underrepresented in STEM; 2) increase recruitment and retention of
students in introductory STEM courses; 3) increase the number of students from
two-year HSIs who transfer into STEM degree programs at four-year institutions;
and 4) establish cross-sector partnerships with industry to improve workforce
readiness and promote interest in STEM careers among two-year HSI students. The
project has constructed a comprehensive plan for developing, implementing, and
assessing CUREs in introductory courses at two- and four-year institutions. The
program will train and mentor community college faculty in the process of
developing multidisciplinary CURE modules that address research questions
relevant to university researchers, industry partners, and the local community.
Identification of the unique barriers and best practices associated with the
implementation of CUREs at two-year HSIs will be a useful resource for other
two-year and four-year institutions, including two-year HSIs that want to
increase the transfer success of students from two-year to four-year programs.
Knowledge generated from this project will be shared within the Maricopa County
Community College District system, and distributed to the larger educational
community through local, regional, and national publications and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.