* 1832282
* Building Capacity: Institute for Interdisciplinary Science:  Preparing Students for the 4th Industrial Revolution
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Charles Hauser, Saint Edward's University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,499,950.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at St. Edward's
University in Austin, Texas aims to create the Institute for Interdisciplinary
Science. The Institute will support student workforce training, cross-sector
cooperation, and interdisciplinary activities that can prepare faculty and
students for opportunities in the 4th Industrial Revolution. This revolution is
predicted to produce a virtually-connected world in which digital, physical, and
biological domains are intertwined. It is a world of smart homes, cloud
computing, big data analytics, e-commerce, robotics, and artificial
intelligence. As the 4th Industrial Revolution unfolds, collaborations between
industry and higher education become critical to ensure that graduates have the
knowledge and skills to be successful in the new workplace. The Institute will
facilitate these collaborations by developing mutually beneficial industry-
academia partnerships, providing professional development and research
opportunities, and facilitating networking for exchange of new directions and
ideas. The Institute's partnerships with companies will offer summer
internships, which can provide economic support and encouragement to students
pursuing STEM degrees, and support eventual entry into STEM careers. In turn,
students will contribute to research and development in the digital era,
furthering the objectives of the companies where they work. This project has the
potential to serve as a model for other institutions, especially HSIs and other
Minority-Serving Institutions (MSIs), to develop programs with similar goals,
thus broadening participation and increasing diversity in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support efforts of the School
of Natural Sciences at St. Edward's University to build capacity in
interdisciplinary sciences, informatics, and emerging technologies and to
increase students' readiness for the 4th Industrial Revolution. The Institute
aims to establish an educational and professional framework that will facilitate
cross-sector partnerships and interdisciplinary collaborations. The Institute
will: (i) coordinate on-campus interdisciplinary seminars and experiential
learning events that will challenge faculty and students to explore complicated
problems with cross-disciplinary approaches; (ii) organize cross-sector
cooperative agreements with public and private entities around the Austin, Texas
area and beyond; (iii) expose STEM majors to postgraduate opportunities by
connecting them with employers and graduate programs through guaranteed
internships; (iv) finance faculty and student professional development by
offering awards to faculty and micro-credentialing scholarships to students; and
(v) catalyze faculty advancement, interdisciplinary collaborations, and
innovative research by offering research opportunity awards. The project's
research questions will focus on effects of the interventions on student
persistence and on whether faculty professional development grants and research
opportunity awards are a means to enhance student success. Together, these
activities are designed to improve student access and success in the emerging
4th Industrial Revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.