* 1832315
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing and Mapping Ecosystem Service Uses and Values Among National Forest Stakeholders
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Stephen Crook, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 01/31/2021
* USD 10,326.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project focuses on developing
methods to equitably inform U.S. public land management based on improved
understanding of the values and uses a wide range of stakeholder groups have
regarding public lands. The U.S. Forest Service has been tasked with including
the variety of benefits individuals and society obtain from ecosystems, often
called ecosystem services, in National Forest planning and decision-making.
While the concept aims to directly link environmental decision-making with human
wellbeing, there is little guidance on how to collect and include data related
to human wellbeing and cultural values in ecosystem service-based management. A
first step in giving more attention to wellbeing and cultural values through an
ecosystem services framework is to better understand the diverse ways National
Forest lands are used and valued by different stakeholder groups. This research
will provide data and demonstrate methods that can be used to fulfill statutory
requirements for National Forest planning going forward, while allowing
stakeholder groups to provide input into public lands management. Furthermore,
results will be shared with the Forest Service and presented to stakeholder
groups, improving understanding of priorities and highlighting values that are
shared among groups. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
project will provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.

While the concept of ecosystem services has risen in prominence as a decision-
making framework over the last two decades, analysis has often focused on few,
easily quantifiable services rather than the more difficult to quantify cultural
benefits that individuals and society may value most. This research will address
this knowledge gap through the development of participatory approaches for
identifying, valuing, and mapping ecosystem services that will link the concept
with the resource use, cultural values, and livelihoods of diverse stakeholder
groups. First, investigation of which ecosystem services are identified, used,
prioritized, and most valued by different stakeholder groups will be conducted
through semi-structured interviews. Secondly, participants will engage in a
participatory mapping exercise focused on understanding the spatial patterns of
the uses and values they have identified across the landscape, which will be
input into geographic information system software and analyzed. Finally, these
place-based findings uncovered from participatory engagement with multiple
groups will be compared with non-participatory methods for ecosystem service
assessment, including spatial models of ecosystem service provision and results
from semi-structured interviews with forest managers that uncover institutional
ecosystem service priorities. While this project focuses on developing these
methods and establishing data for Gifford Pinchot National Forest, the methods
used will applicable to public lands across the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.