* 1832134
* Excellence in Research (EiR): Radical Scavenging Interactions of Carbon Nanodots and Smart Polymer-Carbon Nanodots Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Darlene Taylor, North Carolina Central University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,108,887.00

Carbon nanodots are a type of newly engineered non-toxic nanomaterials. They
have scavenging potential of free radicals, which are highly unstable and
reactive molecules, in biological systems and other environments. Because free
radicals are associated with inflammation, which can lead to potentially serious
pathological conditions, a better understanding of the interfacial reaction
mechanisms between carbon nanodots and biological systems is a critical step
toward using these nanomaterials in applications. This project will enhance the
understanding of the surface chemistry of carbon nanodots and the roles of the
surrounding conditions on carbon nanodots interfacial reactions in biological
systems. Additionally, the data on free radical life cycle from this study will
help guide experiments and computational modeling in other investigations of
nanomaterials for biomedical engineering applications. Broader impacts of the
findings from the proposed study include: 1) Development of customized nanoscale
materials for biomedical and, potentially, environmental applications, 2) Hands-
on training of under-represented STEM students throughout the projects and
curriculum revision that can be scaled up in other STEM oriented institutions,
and 3) Impact on the K-12 science and engineering education in under-represented
educational communities through the PIs network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this study is to better understand how carbon nanodot's free radical
scavenging potential is influenced by surrounding biological systems and
biochemical conditions. The scope of the proposed work will be mainly limited to
delineating the mechanisms involved in interfacial interactions. This will be
done by investigating reactions between functional groups on carbon nanodots and
biological/biochemical molecules. This study will be carried out by using carbon
nanodots with various functional groups, polymer-protein conjugates and hybrids,
and spin-trap protein radicals with three thrusts: 1) Synthesis and preparation
of carbon nanodots, conjugates and hybrids, and spin-trap protein radicals, 2)
Evaluation of anti-oxidative activities of the prepared molecules in biological
system, and 3) Computational modeling of calorimetric techniques with empirical
data. The intellectual merit of this study is to advance our understanding in
the following areas: 1) Interfacial and intermolecular reaction chemistry and
fundamentals of free radical reactions between nanomaterials, especially carbon
nanodots and biological systems, 2) Free radical life cycle mechanisms by
building computational models, which can also be applied to other similar
engineered nanomaterial studies, and 3) Reaction mechanisms associated with
molecules and protein radicals from immune-spin trap methods that overcome
technical challenges currently present in many free radical
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.