* 1832971
* RII Track-4: Event Based Approach to Model Indoor Airflow Patterns
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ehsan Mousavi, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 162,550.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Indoor air quality (IAQ) is a
major environmental health issue, as we spend up to 90% of our time indoors.
Experimental assessment of IAQ is not always feasible and is very expensive. As
a result, engineers and building scientists employ computer simulations to model
the movement of indoor air and contaminants. These simulations, however, are
severely limited by their computational intensity. This fellowship will enable
the PI to develop a new approximation methodology for modeling indoor air
patterns. This approach is called Event Based Modeling (EBM). The PI will
collaborate with colleagues at the University of California, Berkeley (UC
Berkeley) to develop and validate the EBM approach in the Building Science Lab
at UC Berkeley, which is among the largest university laboratories in the world.
A successful development of EBM will result in method to optimize building
energy consumption while improving air quality. Providing clean air in hospitals
is crucial as pathogens can be transported through air, leading to healthcare
associated infection (HAI). In the United States, HAIs cost between $35- $45
billion and claim 90,000 lives each year. EBM will be a new tool for designing
hospitals that are safe and efficient. This research will support dissemination
of this new knowledge in the classroom, where the future generation of designers
is educated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop a new and innovative methodology called the
event-based modeling (EBM) approach to simulate airflow patterns for realistic
human-environment interactions. EBM can provide a path to simulate complex,
random human-environment interactions that are pragmatically impossible to solve
using current approaches. The PI will investigate the validity, characterize a
range of applicability, and determine the practical limitations of EBM. The
fellowship will take place in the Center for the Built Environment (CBE) at the
University of California, Berkeley in collaboration with internationally
recognized building scientists. The fellowship will provide an opportunity for
the PI to conduct experiments in an environmental chamber that allows control
over the levels of temperature, humidity, and ventilation. This project will
advance the knowledge of indoor air modeling by: (1) developing a new
approximation approach (i.e., EBM) to air movement in the indoor environment;
(2) testing the accuracy and validity of the approach; and (3) characterizing
circumstances under which this approach may be utilized. This work has the
potential to transform the future of research on transient indoor airflow
patterns. An accurate assessment of indoor air quality improves our quality of
life. EBM will transform the current approach to building ventilation design by
enabling just enough air to be conditioned and distributed to where it is
needed, thus saving energy. A promising application of the proposed work is in
hospitals where controlling airborne disease transmission is critical. Using the
event-based modeling approach, smart air control systems could be designed to
improve healthcare outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.