* 1832717
* Workshop on Artificial Intelligence and the "Barrier of Meaning"
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Melanie Mitchell, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 04/30/2019
* USD 20,088.00

This workshop brings together eminent scholars in the fields of computer
science, psychology, biology, neuroscience, and others to address the topic of
"understanding" in artificial intelligence. In this activity, participants will
consider what it would mean for advanced computer systems to possess human-like
understanding, explore how necessary it is for intelligent systems to exhibit
such understanding, and discuss approaches to imbuing these systems with such a
capability. Engagement of a multidisciplinary community will develop new and
actionable insight into how we define, design, implement, and control complex
systems that overcome this barrier of meaning. The workshop will likely also
lead to outcomes and follow-on activities to benefit AI education and public
awareness regarding the state of current artificial intelligence, including its
limitations and potential vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach in
this workshop is to explore how complex systems extract meaning from the
information they encounter. Workshop participants will engage questions about
the function and mechanisms of "understanding" or "extracting meaning" in
complex systems across many disciplines, and focus specifically on the relevance
of human-like understanding for creating artificial intelligence systems that
are reliable, adaptable to novel situations, and robust against adversarial
attacks. Understanding the nature and necessity of understanding remains among
the deepest intellectual challenges in AI research. Workshop discussions will be
aimed at clarifying common questions and identifying possible novel pathways to
answering these questions. Organizers will publish both technical and general-
readership summaries communicating the results of the workshop discussions
concerning the notions of understanding or meaning as phenomena in diverse
disciplines, and how these phenomena relate to, or enable, the robustness that
will be needed for safe and trustworthy AI in the real
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.