* 1832523
* Building Capacity: Transforming Undergraduate Education in STEM Through Culturally Relevant Pedagogy and Community Engagement
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Francisco Guajardo, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,480,002.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project at the University of Texas
Rio Grande Valley will advance the aims of the HSI Program by increasing the
retention and graduation of undergraduate students in science and mathematics.
The project plans to achieve its goals by offering well-designed, high impact
STEM courses that build upon culture, community engagement, and regionally-
relevant research. To these ends, this project will train STEM faculty in
culturally relevant pedagogy and community engaged scholarship. These faculty
will then develop new mathematics and biology "gateway" courses for first
year/early career students, offered in a bilingual modality. The faculty will
also develop new classes in Community Engaged Scholarship and Learning, which
will emphasize meaningful engagement in community-based STEM-related projects.
By emphasizing the broader, societal relevance of STEM fields, these new courses
will help first year students develop a sense of belonging and commitment. It is
expected that these innovations will enhance students' success in STEM, helping
to address a national need to increase diversity in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design and implement professional
development workshops to help faculty develop inclusive, culturally relevant
teaching practices, and to help faculty implement effective community engagement
and experiential learning in STEM. These faculty will develop and teach new
introductory core biology and math courses ("gateway courses") in a bilingual
modality, as well as new first year courses in Community Engaged Scholarship and
Learning. Through measures of academic, behavioral, and perceptual gains (e.g.,
pre/post assessments; measures of science motivation), the project will
determine the impact of these courses on students' sense of belonging, pride,
and cultural wealth, with the goal of defining how these characteristics
intersect with student performance and retention. Using surveys, open ended
questions, and focus group interviews, this project also aims to measure the
impact of the professional development activities and new courses on faculty
awareness of community engagement and on the faculty's use of culturally-
relevant pedagogies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.