* 1832842
* Quantifying Transport and Mixing in the Stratosphere and Upper Troposphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Gang Chen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 596,513.00

This research project will help improve the understanding of the dynamics and
predictability of nonlinear processes during a breakdown of polar vortex in the
stratosphere, responsible for extreme cold outbreak events in the late winter
and early spring. This study may also shed light on processes responsible for
transport and mixing across the edge of polar vortex in a changing climate. In
the upper troposphere, this is relevant for atmospheric rivers, blocking, and
other type of extreme weather that has important societal impacts. The outcome
of the research project is expected to have broad implications across a very
wide range of fluid flow problems and generate more dialogues between the theory
of dynamical systems and applications to atmospheric and oceanic fluids. One
graduate student at UCLA will be trained in analysis of observational data and
the use of idealized and comprehensive models of the atmosphere. Several
undergraduates will be trained in data analysis of atmospheric
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extratropical atmosphere is characterized
by the westerly circumpolar flow, with the polar vortex in the stratosphere and
the subtropical jet stream in the upper troposphere. Variations in the
stratospheric polar vortex and tropospheric jet stream are critical for the
dynamics, chemistry, and predictability of these regions. Increases in the
amplitude of planetary-scale Rossby waves in the stratosphere interrupt the
westerly circumpolar flow, resulting a stronger transport of warm air mass into
the polar stratosphere and leading to a sudden warming there. The stronger
transport of ozone during a stratospheric sudden warming event helps prevent a
continuous loss of ozone over the polar regions during dark winter there.
Similarly, the blocked westerly flow in the upper troposphere can impact the
transport of energy, momentum as well as water vapor. There is still a lack of
understanding about the nonlinear nature of the flow in the presence of large
amplitude waves, which limits our ability to predict these events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to gain new knowledge on
the fundamental processes at work for the Lagrangian transport (following the
motion of air parcel) in the westerly flow from the dynamical systems point of
view in conjunction with the theory of transport and mixing in the atmosphere.
More specially, stratospheric warming events will be characterized by the
Lagrangian descriptor, a metric stemmed from the dynamical systems, in
observations and idealized models of stratosphere-troposphere coupling. The
observed patterns will be compared with transport and mixing in a comprehensive
chemistry-climate model and chemical compositions in satellite observations at
different time scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.