* 1832234
* BIGDATA: EAGER: Catalyzing Research in Multimodal Learning Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2016,08/31/2019
* Marcelo Worsley, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 235,290.00

Data science techniques have revolutionized many academic fields and led to
terrific gains in the commercial sector. They have to date been underutilized in
solving critical problems in the US educational system, particularly in
understanding Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and increasing
retention for students traditionally underserved in STEM. The goals of the
Directorate for Education and Human Resources through the Critical Techniques
and Technologies for Advancing Foundations and Applications of Big Data Science
&amp; Engineering (BIGDATA) program are to advance fundamental research aimed at
understanding and solving these critical problems, and to catalyze the use of
data science in Education Research. As more open-ended learning environments are
being employed in schools, it is critical to understand how they affect
learning, motivation and engagement in STEM. The most widely used methods in
educational research are inadequate for addressing these questions because they
do not address the scale and complexity of the data provided from these
environments. The current standard practice in learning science and education
research for analyzing these types of data is to record student activity in
these spaces on audio or video, create qualitative coding schemes, and code the
data by hand. This is labor intensive and prone to personal judgment and error.
It also tends to result in research that is not replicable or scalable. For
example, if each researcher studying important educational areas like
collaboration or developing planning skills uses his or her own coding framework
in their work, it makes it difficult to group the results of these studies and
understand the bigger picture. In addition, it is often impossible for one
research group to reproduce the results another research group found by trying
to use the other group's coding framework. This Early Concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) will advance the understanding of how promising new
technology environments affect these outcomes by bringing together experts in
computer science, data science and education research to develop new methods of
studying these environments that are not likely to have the same problems. By
using data from new methods of data capture such as logs of interaction with the
objects in a maker space or new data mining techniques to analyze data from
audio or video recordings, the Principal Investigators seek to greatly increase
the field's ability to learn about what people are learning in these
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators propose to bring
together experts in data analysis, computer science, and educational research to
develop new ways to pursue multimodal learning analytics (MLA). MLA opens the
door to exploring learning environments, whether classrooms or design studios,
that have been difficult to investigate before. New types of sensors and data
mining techniques make it possible to capture the process data that is usually
lost in the activities in these spaces. The PIs propose to achieve this through
a series of workshops. The first will define directions and map potential tools
to important constructs they can be used to measure. The middle workshops
constitute a series of iterative cycles of tool development and refinement. The
final hack-a-thon workshop will involve participants coding prototypes and full
models of tools that will be openly available to the community.