* 1832286
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Examining linkages between the Agulhas Leakage and ocean overturning in the last glacial cycle and through the mid-Pleistocene transition
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Allison Franzese, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 207,452.00

Studies of Earth's past climate and oceans are important for developing an
understanding of the range of possible behaviors in the climate system. This
project seeks to reconstruct the history of the "Agulhas Leakage" from the
Indian Ocean into the Atlantic Ocean, and to understand how changes in this
leakage are related to past climate and the ocean's circulation. The Agulhas
Current is a large boundary current (similar to the Gulf Stream) that flows
southward along the southeast African margin. When it gets to the southern tip
of Africa, most of the current turns back to the east, but some rings spin off
into the Atlantic. This leakage brings water that is saltier than Atlantic water
into the Atlantic, and this salt is carried by surface currents, including the
Gulf Stream, to the far North Atlantic where it contributes to the formation of
North Atlantic Deep Water. Thus, the Agulhas Current system is a key part of the
ocean's large-scale overturning circulation. Changes in climate factors in the
past may have led to changes in this system, and the goal of this project is to
investigate such changes by combining evidence for the surface and deep ocean
circulation from sediment cores collected on International Ocean Discovery
Program (IODP) Expedition 361. The location of Site U1479 is ideal for making
proxy records for both the surface and deep ocean, so it will be possible to
simultaneously examine the changes and linkages between Agulhas Leakage and NADW
production using a broad suite of geochemical tools. The project involves
extensive international collaboration with the scientists from the expedition
and will include training and mentorship of a diverse research team that
includes undergraduates, graduate students, a postdoctoral fellow and an early
career faculty member.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to detail the
relative timing of variability in Agulhas Leakage and North Atlantic Deep Water
(NADW) through the last glacial cycle (0-150 kyr) and over the mid-Pleistocene
transition (MPT, 0.7-1.3 Ma), an important time of reorganization of the climate
system that took place in the absence of changes in the underlying orbital
forcing. The variability of Agulhas Leakage will be studied using detailed
terrigenous clay provenance analyses, while the NADW variations will be studied
with Nd-isotopes in fish teeth and foraminifera coatings. The primary site
proposed for the combined deep and surface signal is IODP Site U1479, which is
currently bathed in NADW and located where the Agulhas rings are shed into the
South Atlantic, comprising the Agulhas Leakage. Additionally, clay provenance
proxies from Site U1474, which is located near the beginning of the fully-
constituted Agulhas Current, will constrain any end-member changes to the
terrigenous composition of the Agulhas endmember. Because the data for both sets
of proxies will be collected from the same samples, and also from the same
samples that are being processed for benthic isotope stratigraphy, the relative
timing of changes in the composition of the Agulhas endmember, the amount of
Agulhas leakage, and the changes in NADW will be co-registered. IODP Expedition
361 collected sedimentary records from the broader Agulhas Current System that
provide an unparalleled opportunity to examine in detail linkages between the
Agulhas Leakage and Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC) as well
as linkages between the Agulhas Current System and southern African
climates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.