* 1832256
* CCI Phase I: NSF Center for the Chemistry of Molecularly Optimized Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Stephen Craig, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,800,000.00

Synthetic polymers and plastics make up a $100 billion industry and impact
almost every aspect of daily life: from transportation to consumer products to
health care. These materials are made up of long, individual polymer molecules
that are connected in a network that forms the bulk material. In recent years,
chemists have learned how to produce remarkable properties in the individual
polymer molecules and control the connections between them. The Center for the
Chemistry of Molecularly Optimized Networks (MONET) is developing the knowledge
and methods to translate the remarkable properties now available at the
molecular level to new properties of polymer networks. It fuels innovation in
formulation and manufacturing, potentially leading to the development of tough,
longer-lived materials that reduce waste while being perfectly tailored to their
use. The broader impacts of the Center include interdisciplinary technical
training for young scientists across emerging areas of polymer chemistry, and
communication and entrepreneurship experiences that position Center trainees for
future careers. Finally, the Center partners with community colleges to increase
public awareness of the societal impact of science innovation while
simultaneously encouraging broader participation in the sciences by
communicating the range of career opportunities available to the diverse
community college population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scope of MONET comprises
quantitative structure-activity relationships that relate polymer network
toughness to the toughness of individual network strands, the molecular
architecture of the network, and the mechanism and spatial organization of
dynamic strand exchange reactions. These objectives are pursued through a unique
combination of methods, including precision polymer synthesis, single molecule
spectroscopy, coordination chemistry, photochemical switching, and the
development and application of new theoretical models and methods. In addition,
a prototype database and digital notation for polymer entry (GIGA - the Global
Index of Gel Attributes) is being established. The combined gains in fundamental
knowledge, technical capability, and informatics strategy address a major
chemical knowledge gap. MONET addresses the role of precisely controlled polymer
chain length, the molecular mechanical response of a polymer chain, and the
mechanisms by which polymer strands exchange in dynamic networks, as well as the
influence of molecular scale network defects on each. The knowledge gained
informs strategies to bring remarkable properties to polymer networks, by
treating them as complex but understandable chemical systems that can be
harnessed to produce currently inaccessible collective properties. Key broader
impacts of this award include the development of a polymer network database,
technical training and professional development for developing scientists, and
science communication to diverse audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.