* 1832728
* CDS&amp;E: Computational  Studies of Weyl Semimetals: Disorder, Correlations and Topological Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Sergey Savrasov, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 358,517.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational and
theoretical research and education towards discovering and studying the
properties of new Weyl semimetals. These are new types of materials that have
been recently proposed theoretically and are now beginning to be discovered.
They are very poor conductors in their bulk but have highly conductive metallic
surfaces. These materials are special in that their surface enjoys what is
called topological protection, meaning that it cannot be changed without
destroying the bulk material. In most materials, surfaces can be chemically
altered as they tend to pick up impurities from the environment, which in turn
interfere with how materials conduct electricity, a crucial feature for
applications in any electronic device. However, the topologically protected
surfaces of Weyl semimetals are robust to impurities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project aims to develop methods for finding new Weyl semimetals, and
for understanding their properties using computer-based simulations. The close
competition between various degrees of freedom of the electrons in these
materials makes their study particularly challenging, but also holds great
promise for new functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will lead to
new methods, algorithms, and software that will enhance and simplify our ability
to carry out material-specific studies and to promote the gradual improvement of
materials by computer-aided design, thus shortening currently expensive and
inefficient trial-and-error procedures. Developing scientific software tools
that incorporate computer programs into a user-friendly interface lowers the
barrier to entry for the computational exploration of the properties of quantum
materials. The development of these user-friendly interfaces will also
facilitate the teaching of elementary theories of topological materials at
advanced undergraduate and graduate levels, thereby enhancing University
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports the development of
computational approaches that are based on density-functional theory combined
with dynamical-mean-field and perturbation theories, which will allow finding
new topological semimetals and studying their single-particle spectra,
transport, magnetic, and superconducting properties. Guided by similarities
between crystal structures and topological features of known systems,
realizations of the band inversion mechanism between electronic states of
different parity, hybridization effects between partially filled strongly
correlated states with filled or empty topological energy bands, chemical
valence arguments and physical intuition, a high-throughput screening of
materials for their topological properties will be performed in the infinite
space of chemically allowed compounds using computer-based
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These findings will allow identifying new
topological materials, such as Weyl semimetals, and, in particular, those with
only Weyl nodes and no other Fermi surface states. Such discoveries could
motivate further experimental studies of the chiral anomaly and topological
superconductivity. Theoretical and computational approaches to predict and study
complex behavior in these systems would potentially influence the design of
quantum materials with unique characteristics that rely on topological
protection of states, which are at the frontier of materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will lead to new methods, algorithms,
and software that will enhance and simplify our ability to carry out material-
specific studies and to promote the gradual improvement of materials by
computer-aided design, thus shortening currently expensive and inefficient
trial-and-error procedures. Developing scientific software tools that
incorporate computer programs into a user-friendly interface lowers the barrier
to entry for the computational exploration of the properties of quantum
materials. The development of these user-friendly interfaces will also
facilitate the teaching of elementary theories of topological materials at
advanced undergraduate and graduate levels, thereby enhancing University
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.