* 1832939
* EAGER:  Collaborative Research:  Manganese Phototrophy in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Woodward Fischer, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2020
* USD 127,741.00

The rise of oxygen approximately 2.3 billion years ago was arguably the most
significant event in Earth's history. The rise of atmospheric oxygen led to life
as we know it today, including organisms that breath oxygen and multicellular
life such as plants and animals. This event is principally related to the
evolution of oxygen (O2) producing photosynthesis by Cyanobacteria. Photosystem
II (PSII) is the catalyst that uses light energy to remove electrons from water
and produce O2. The evolutionary route of PSII to produce O2 is uncertain. One
hypothesis, based on both the geological record and biochemical studies of PSII,
is a precursor photosystem was able to obtain electrons from the transition
metal manganese, instead of water. The proposed work tests this hypothesis using
modern Cyanobacteria and PSII, which may still be able to perform this reaction.
The work will help scientists understand the evolution of this important
process: the production of O2. It will also impact understanding of modern
manganese cycling on our planet, which affects the fate of many pollutants in
the environment. Students trained in this interdisciplinary research project
from both a geobiology program at a research intensive university and a
biological science program at a diverse regional Hispanic-serving primarily
undergraduate institution will attend common group and professional meetings and
develop mentor-mentee relationships across disciplines. Findings will also be
integrated into presentations and coursework at K-12 and the two universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns the hypothesis that the
"missing link" in the evolution of photosynthetic water-oxidation by Photosystem
II (PSII) was phototrophic Mn(II) oxidation, and examines Mn phototrophy in
Cyanobacteria to test this hypothesis. High-valent manganese species comprise a
critical pool of strong oxidants in the environment, involved in the cycling of
both carbon and metals. This work will add to the understanding of modern
biological Mn oxidation and the potential sources of high-valent Mn in nature by
examining bacterial Mn oxidation in Mn phototrophy. Phototrophic Mn oxidation
will be evaluated and linked to growth using whole cells of the genetically
tractable Cyanobacterium, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, and a mutant of this
organism impaired in photosynthesis. The stoichiometry and mechanism of Mn-
oxidizing phototrophy will be determined using purified PSIIs from these
strains. These studies have the potential to provide new insight into our
understanding of the evolution of oxygenic photosynthesis. The broader impacts
concern a research collaboration between a research intensive and primarily
undergraduate institution that is also minority serving. Students from the two
institutions will interact with each other and the research results will be
incorporated into presentations and courses at the undergraduate and K-12
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.