* 1832194
* LTER:  Long - Term Research at the Jornada Basin (LTER VII)
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2021
* Debra Peters, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 10/31/2021
* USD 2,254,000.00

In many parts of the world, including the southwestern United States, lands once
covered by grass are starting to look like deserts. As scientists learn more
about why this is happening, they are starting to realize that these lands do
not always become deserts. There are other possible outcomes, such as habitats
with lots of shrubs and with plants that spread rapidly from elsewhere (non-
native or "invasive" species). The goal of this project is to test new ideas
about what causes these sorts of changes. Scientists at universities and at the
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) will work together to run
experiments and collect data in the Chihuahuan Desert, where a lot can be
learned from areas that have been changing in different ways. The study is
especially valuable and unusual because it has been going on for more than 100
years. Scientists are not only interested in why changes are taking place but
also in how those changes affect "ecosystem function," which is the way that
plants and animals grow, multiply and interact with each other and with the
environment. Results will help scientists around the world predict and prevent
harmful impacts of environmental change. Part of the project will involve
training students to do research and become scientists. Many of these students
will be from nearby Hispanic-serving universities. Scientists on the project
will also reach out to students and teachers at local elementary, middle and
high schools. They will become engaged through exciting lessons, field trips,
and workshops. Discoveries from this project will be shared through workshops,
talks, websites, and mobile phone Apps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chihuahuan Desert
landscapes exemplify the ecological conditions, vulnerability, and management
challenges in arid and semi-arid regions around the world. The overall goal of
the Jornada Basin Long-Term Environmental Research (LTER) Program is to
understand and quantify the key processes and factors that generate alternative
states in drylands, and to predict future states and their consequences for the
provisioning of ecosystem services. Based on long-term databases from
Agricultural Research Service of the USDA beginning in 1915, studies will
include four types of dynamics: (1) a shift from perennial grasslands to
desertified shrublands, (2) a reversal to grassland states, (3) transitions
among shrub-dominated states, and (4) invasion by non-native grasses. These
transitions have profound implications for the processes reflected in the 5 core
LTER research themes. In this LTER renewal project, the "trigger-feedback-
heterogeneity" framework for understanding and predicting the dynamics of state
changes in dryland landscapes will be expanded to contribute to emerging
ecological theory on: (a) alternative states and resilience, (b) ecosystem
sensitivity to global change, and (c) cross-scale interactions. The novel
approach will integrate knowledge and long-term data on: (1) biological
processes, (2) spatial heterogeneity in the soil-geomorphic template, and (3)
variability in environmental drivers drawn from multiple lines of evidence
(i.e., observations, experimental manipulations, analytical and numerical
models, products from imagery, conceptual model reasoning, and theory). The
information management system will be expanded into a Data Science Integrated
System of drylands that will allow Jornada results to be translated to other
locations in the Chihuahuan Desert and to drylands globally. LTER research will
result in: (1) new understanding of state changes that lead to theory
development, testable hypotheses, and new experiments; (2) accessible data,
derived data products, and visualization tools applicable at multiple scales;
and, (3) explanatory and predictive relationships among drivers, patterns, and
processes that can be used to (4) predict dynamics of alternative states at new
locations or future conditions with assessments of their impacts on ecosystem
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.