* 1832886
* RII Track-4: Diffuse Optical Imaging for Early Detection of Diabetic Polyneuropathy
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Karissa Tilbury, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 162,450.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Diabetic polyneuropathy (DPN) is a common
diabetic condition that results in the loss of sensation in the lower limbs. If
left unchecked, this condition can lead to tissue trauma, ulcerations,
infections and ultimately amputation. Since small nerve fibers innervate small
blood vessels, early detection is possible by monitoring changes in tissue
perfusion and blood flow. In this project, the PI will combine diffuse optics
with laser-based imaging techniques to generate person-specific heat maps
capable of highlighting DPN markers that include tissue perfusion and blood flow
rates in feet. A model incorporating skin tones and disorders will inform the
imaging data to ensure the spatial heat maps are accurate and reliable for DPN
detection. This low-cost, non-invasive approach will provide opportunities for
routine monitoring, providing earlier detection of small nerve fiber damage and
reducing the risk of further complications. Additionally, this project
establishes collaborations between the Tilbury Biophotonics group at the
University of Maine with the BOTLab at Boston University which will result in
several studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Diabetic
polyneuropathy (DPN), a common diabetic complication, is the loss of sensation
particularly in the lower limbs and increases the risk of tissue trauma,
resulting in ulcerations, infections and increased risk of amputation. Current
screening approaches are unable to quantify early nerve damage despite the onset
of several early symptoms including: burning, itching, restlessness, and poor
thermal sensation. Current gold standard assays are due to cost and or degree of
invasiveness suggesting that a new approach is needed. Small nerve fibers
innervate both sweat glands and small arterioles and when damaged, both
perspiration and blood flow characteristics are altered. Several functional
small nerve fiber tests are based on the loss of perspiration and alterations of
the rhythmic blood flow characteristics; yet excitement of each approach is
dampened by low specificity or complications of skin tones and disorders. In
this proposal we will build a three-wavelength Time Modulated Spatial Frequency
Domain Imaging (TM-SFDI) and Laser Speckle Contrast Imaging (LSCI) system for
wide-field imaging of both blood flow rates and concentrations of oxy- and
deoxygenated hemoglobin. A 2-layer Monte Carlo method will minimize error due to
skin tones and disorders and will also inform the selection of optimal spatial
frequencies projected onto the tissue to maximize sensitivity of oxy- and
deoxygenated hemoglobin. Collectively, the TM-SFDI/LSCI system is a low-cost,
non-invasive approach for longitudinally monitoring
diabetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.