* 1832952
* CIF: Student Conference Travel Support for the 2018 North American School of Information Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Krishna Narayanan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The IEEE North American School for Information Theory is an annual event of the
IEEE Information Theory Society. 2018 marks the eleventh year of the event. The
School provides a supportive environment where foundations for learning and
long-term future scientific collaborations are established. The School delivers
interactive education for graduate students in the mathematical, engineering,
and computer sciences. It presents students the opportunity to meet with and
learn from senior researchers from academia and industry who present long-format
tutorials. In addition, student and post-doc participants have the opportunity
to present their own research results in poster sessions. The IEEE Information
Theory Society Padovani Lecture is delivered at the
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IEEE North American School for Information
Theory is hosted by different institutions each year, with the intent of
increasing the geographic diversity of the participants. Student attendance at
recent schools has varied from 40 to 80 student participants. Travel grants
broaden the participation of students at the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.