* 1832789
* 2018 Process Systems Engineering Conference, San Diego, CA
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Marianthi Ierapetritou, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2019
* USD 40,000.00

CBET - 1832789&lt;br/&gt;PI: Mario Eden&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will
provide partial travel support for 30 junior and 8 senior US-based researchers
to attend the 2018 Process Systems Engineering (PSE) Conference, that will be
held in San Diego, CA, from July 1 to 5, 2018. The primary goal of PSE 2018 is
to create an academic and industrial dialogue, a critical assessment of existing
enabling technologies, a discussion on research, education, industrial needs,
and a forum for new directions, challenges and opportunities in all areas of
process systems engineering. The PSE 2018 conference will feature 10 plenary
lectures, 22 plenary lectures by world-renowned experts, as well as contributed
paper oral and poster sessions. The conference aims at attracting 500
participants from around the world and over 400 contributed papers. A particular
emphasis has been placed on increasing the participation of graduate students
and postdoctoral associates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PSE 2018 will bring together
and foster interaction among world-renowned experts from academia and industry,
researchers and practitioners from government laboratories and several
industries, graduate students, and post-doctoral associates. One major outcome
of the PSE 2018 Conference will be to identify technology gaps and opportunities
for fundamental research. The development of a new generation of engineers that
are trained in this field is very important for the chemical process industries.
The conference will create a technical and scientific forum for a broad spectrum
of topics, including process and product design/synthesis, process dynamics and
control, scheduling and planning, supply chain management and logistics;
decision making under uncertainty, and education. Cross-cutting themes that will
be covered include multi-scale systems engineering, sustainable and renewable
systems engineering, modular process intensification, healthcare systems
engineering, industrial biotechnology, smart manufacturing,urban/building
systems engineering, big data science and engineering,human-machine interface
systems engineering, and safety-driven systems engineering. The conference will
serve as a vehicle for dissemination of the state of the art in the PSE field
through its fully indexed and citable proceedings that will include the plenary
and contributed papers, its website, and more importantly through the informal
discussions on research, education, training and industrial needs. The chemical,
petrochemical, pharmaceutical, manufacturing, and services/software industries
will benefit by the introduction of new approaches, problems and technologies
for discovery through computer-aided product and process design. Such
technologies will lead into better products, faster response to the demands and
more efficient utilization of the product and processing facilities, which has a
direct benefit to the US economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.