* 1832613
* Collaborative Research: Chemomechanical Degradation of Oxide Cathodes in Li-ion Batteries: Synchrotron Analysis, Environmental Measurements, and Data Mining
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Feng Lin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 392,562.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Rechargeable batteries are key to electric
automobiles and the integration of renewable energy. Mechanical degradation of
the ceramic electrodes is an issue that causes capacity fade of the battery
materials. Despite the steady progress in the battery technology, the
understanding of mechanical aging and failure mechanisms lags behind, mostly due
to the intrinsic complexity of electroceramic chemistry,
structural/compositional heterogeneity, and sensitivity on the environment and
operation conditions. This project seeks to elucidate the aging mechanisms of
ceramic battery materials. The research creates fundamental knowledge on the
material science of batteries via a close integration of novel experimental and
modeling approaches. On the education front, the multifaceted collaboration
between Purdue University, Virginia Tech, and SLAC National Accelerator
Laboratory provides unique training opportunities for the students in this
project. Efforts will continue to encourage underrepresented graduate and
undergraduate students to join the project. Outreach efforts in collaboration
with the Women in Engineering Program at Purdue University and Destination Areas
at Virginia Tech will continue to promote the participation of women in science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The overarching goal of
this project is to understand the defect inception, accumulation, and growth at
the interface or within the grains, and the inter-relationship of defect-
microstructure-performance of Li-ion batteries using the operando synchrotron
X-ray analytical techniques, environmental nanoindentation, and data mining. The
research effort includes (i) characterizing the local redox reactions, chemical
states of matter, and local composition over multiple length scales using
synchrotron X-ray analytical techniques, (ii) determining the intragranular and
intergranular defect growth and morphological evolution of the nanostructured
electrodes by state-of-the-art X-ray tomography and transmission X-ray
microscopy, (iii) identifying the dependence of the structural and mechanical
degradation of oxide cathodes on the state of charge, charging protocol, and
cycling history using in-house-developed environmental nanoindentation, and (iv)
identifying the composition-chemistry-morphology correlation through machine
learning and data analysis of the library of experimental output.. The research
draws a conceptually radical spectrum of the electro-chemo-mechanics and
establishes a scientific basis for developing ceramic oxides with resilient
electrochemical and mechanical performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.