* 1832809
* Understanding and Designing Novel Anode Materials for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Andreas Heyden, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL: As a result of the recent shale gas developments, there are
abundant supplies of natural gas in the U.S. and there is a critical need for a
highly efficient and environmentally friendly natural gas-to-electrical energy
conversion technology. Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) offer great promise for
such an efficient and cost-effective conversion, particularly for distributed
power generation. However, the state-of-the-art SOFC nickel cermet anodes suffer
from rapid performance degradation upon direct oxidation of hydrocarbon fuels.
The objective of this research is to create a scientific basis for the design of
novel SOFC anode materials that can maintain performance stability when directly
utilizing natural gas as fuel for electricity generation. The goal of this study
is to overcome SOFC anode deactivation issues, and consequently facilitate the
rapid application and commercialization of SOFC technology. Widespread
deployment of SOFCs will have beneficial economic and environmental impacts,
making energy conversion from abundant natural gas more efficient and more
environmentally benign. University students will be trained in the practice of
experimental and computational material science and engineering. Graduates
typically find employment in the advanced clean energy sector. Finally, the
public will be educated on the benefits of fuel cell technology through various
mechanisms such as interactive presentations at Science Cafes and an "Adventures
in Fuel Cells" summer program that specifically targets high school students
from rural areas and underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: In this study, ceramic oxides will be explored for overcoming the
coking and sulfur poisoning problems that limit the lifetime of conventional
nickel cermet SOFC anodes directly utilizing natural gas as fuel. Fundamental
understanding of the ceramic oxides will guide further development of mixed
ionic and electronic conducting ceramic materials for energy and engineering
applications. The collaborative efforts in this research are expected to advance
the fundamental understanding of high temperature oxide ion and electron
conductivity and surface chemistry occurring in technologically important energy
conversion devices. The focus will be on a molecular understanding of these
physical phenomena and how different B-site elements in a layered perovskite
oxide affect both bulk material properties such as oxide ionic and electronic
conductivity and surface properties such as electrocatalytic activity and
resistance to coking and sulfur poisoning. This research represents one of the
first case studies for deep integration of computational predictions with
experimental observations for high temperature materials in SOFCs. Students will
be educated through the project to become experts in the practice of
experimental and computational aspects of fuel cell technology. As a result,
graduates will be well prepared to create sustainable engineering solutions to
complex problems, contributing to the science and technology of energy
conversion and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.