* 1832334
* I-Corps:  Scaffolding the acquisition and development of computational algorithmic thinking capabilities in formal and informal learning environments
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Jakita Thomas, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project are two-fold.
First, by combining virtual assistants as facilitators, an integrated system of
scaffolds through the Design Notebook, and support for collaborative
interactions both within a learning environment as well as virtually, the
platform has the potential to provide a self-contained, self-paced, stand-alone
online platform focused on culturally- and socially-relevant game design that
has the potential to expose and support hundreds of thousands of learners who do
not currently have access to these types of opportunities, programs, or
platforms within their communities in the United States. Second, the platform
has the potential to support global collaborations between groups of learners
through its ability to showcase work and its virtual play-testing capabilities
that will allow users to give and receive substantive feedback about the design
of a game, and thus inform its iterative design, from
anywhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project proposes a unique online
platform with supporting scaffolds, that supports learners through game design
for social change virtually in similar ways as the SCAT (Supporting
Computational Algorithmic Thinking) project supported African-American middle-
school girls face-to-face (DRK-12 #1150098). SCAT and its scaffolds have been
shown to be effective not only at helping African-American middle-school girls
engage in Computing by designing games for social change, but also in improving
their perceptions of themselves as critical thinkers and game designers with an
intent to pursue game design or some STEM-related field as a result. As such,
the core technology of the platform is a stand-alone online platform that
scaffolds learners through designing and implementing games (video or mobile)
for social change as well as develops their computational algorithmic thinking
capabilities. It will be designed to leverage the affordances of the scaffolding
in the SCAT Learning Environment including the facilitator, Design Notebook, and
other Scholars. The platform will contain several key integrated sub-tools that
model and coach learners as they think through their designs, make connections,
make design decisions, collect feedback to inform the iterative design of their
games, ask questions of themselves and their peers, reflect on their
experiences, and showcase what they have created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.