* 1832997
* RII Track-4: Building Knowledge on Genotyping Seagrasses to Assess Competitive Interactions under Climate Change
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Edwin Cruz-Rivera, University of The Virgin Islands
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 170,846.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Biodiversity affects the proper functioning
of ecosystems, their resistance to environmental changes, and their ability to
recover after disturbance. One component of biodiversity, the diversity of genes
within populations, is receiving more attention following recient technological
advances enabling researchers to measure and map genetic diversity in nature.
Evidence has shown that this genetic diversity can be as important in
maintaining a healthy ecosystem as the number of different species interacting
in an area. This work will study how genetic diversity of an important
widespread seagrass species affects its competition with seasonally-abundant
algae under current and future expected environmental temperature changes.
Because seagrass beds are important to maintain coastal water quality, control
erosion, and as nursery grounds for commercially important species, this
research is relevant to the ecology, economics and food security of coastal
zones. The funding will establish an active collaboration between the researcher
and his graduate student from the University of the Virgin Islands (UVI, a HBCU)
and researchers at the University of California at Davis; and will take
advantage of the world-class Climate Change Research Facility at Bodega Marine
Laboratory. Additionally, this fellowship will facilitate the development of
techniques to assess genetic diversity of Caribbean seagrasses, which are facing
multiple environmental threats including possible displacement by a fast-
spreading introduced seagrass originally form the Red Sea an Indian Ocean. These
techniques will be leveraged to develop future proposals and provide
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students at
UVI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has
highlighted that intraspecific genetic diversity may be as important as species
diversity in mediating ecosystem function, resistance to disturbance and
resilience. Under the context of climate change, genetic diversity has also
received attention for determining adaptive potential of species to global
temperature increases. However, temperature also has a strong effect on species
interactions. To date, the combined effects of genotype and temperature on
interaction strength remain unknown. This work will evaluate the influence of
plant genotype in determining the outcome of competition between the seagrass
Zostera marina, an important ecosystem engineer, and the seasonally-abundant
green alga Ulva lactuca. By conducting experiments at the Climate Change
Research Facility of Bodega Marine Laboratory (BML) housed at the University of
California at Davis, this research will assess the outcome of competitive
interactions between Z. marina known genotypes and U. lactuca, under current and
future temperatures predicted by global warming models. The fellowship will
provide a transformative opportunity for the PI and a graduate student from the
University of the Virgin Islands (a HBCU) by establishing a synergistic
collaboration with experts at UC Davis and BML. In particular, the seagrass
genotyping techniques developed by collaborators at UC Davis will be adapted to
the study of Caribbean species, which are currently declining as a result of
multiple environmental stressors including potential displacement by the
introduced seagrass Halophila stipulacea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.