* 1832450
* Building Capacity: Catalyzing Change in Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Theodoros Koupelis, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,499,864.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at Florida International
University will advance the aims of the HSI Program by increasing the success of
students in calculus. Leveraging a partnership with Broward College, this
project will implement Modeling Practices in Calculus, a student-centered
curriculum in which students learn calculus by engaging in the authentic
practices of mathematicians. Such practices include working in teams, looking at
problems from different perspectives, and proficiently using terminology and
symbols. Learning assistants who are near peers will facilitate learning in the
classroom, enabling students to learn from mistakes, give and receive feedback,
and help one another learn. The project's research design includes longitudinal
measures of student success and the tracking of students who transfer from
Broward College to Florida International University. The project will directly
affect over 15,000 students enrolled at two HSIs, where over 80% of students are
from historically-underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims of the project include generating new knowledge about the effectiveness of
the Modeling Practices Curriculum and how this curriculum fosters learning for
highly diverse student populations. Further, it will generate knowledge about
faculty adoption practices and institutional change as it establishes an
institutional culture to sustain and expand the intervention. The research
design includes randomized-control trials as well as multivariate matching
methods to establish a strong evidentiary base for the impacts of the Modeling
Practices Curriculum and facilitate comparison of student outcomes, both
immediate and longitudinal. Over the period of funding, the project will host
eight professional development workshops for faculty. The implementation-tested
Modeling Practices Curriculum materials, instructional guides, and research
finding will be disseminated broadly, to two-year and four-year institutions
with diverse student populations that are seeking to enhance the learning of
calculus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.