* 1832507
* Building Capacity: A Faculty Development Program to Increase Students' Quantitative Reasoning Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Esther Wilder, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,800,000.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project will advance the aims of
the HSI Program by improving the ability of STEM faculty to teach quantitative
reasoning skills to undergraduates. This project is a collaboration between
three colleges in the City College of New York (CUNY) system: Lehman College,
Baruch College, and LaGuardia Community College. The project plans to implement
a large scale professional development project to improve the ability of STEM
faculty at all 24 CUNY colleges to teach quantitative reasoning skills. The
professional development program will provide faculty with knowledge of best
practices for teaching quantitative reasoning, so that STEM faculty from
mathematics, computer science, life sciences, physical sciences, and social
sciences can effectively integrate quantitative reasoning into their courses. As
a result, faculty will expand existing STEM courses to include data analysis
skills, including the ability to gather and interpret data, draw conclusions
based on numerical evidence, and communicate this information to others.
Materials developed by the project for use in the expanded courses will be
available via workshops or online, for use by other faculty and institutions.
The project aims to increase the number of students, particularly those from
underrepresented groups, pursuing a STEM degree. The project also aims to
enhance student quantitative reasoning skills, so that these students are better
prepared to enter the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective
of the project is to establish a faculty development program to train
instructors at HSIs in best practices for numeracy-building data analysis
research. The second objective is to implement a data analysis research
experience in STEM courses, designed to support improvements of the quantitative
reasoning capabilities, and the STEM education and career pathways of students.
Finally, the third objective is to evaluate the program's impact on students'
quantitative reasoning skills, their attitudes towards quantitative information,
and their subsequent STEM coursework and college success, including their
retention rates and their transitions from two-year to four-year institutions.
The research plan will include a mixed method study to analyze the outcomes of
the professional development activities and to investigate student outcomes from
the data analysis research experience. The project seeks to generate new
knowledge about best practices for implementing professional development that
builds STEM faculty expertise and teaching skills in data analysis, with the
overarching goal of enhancing the learning experiences of STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.