* 1832464
* Building Capacity: STEM Transformative Experiences Project
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2018,09/30/2023
* John Ruppert, St Peter's University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,464,942.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at Saint Peter's
University will advance the aims of the HSI Program by providing 45 high-impact,
off-campus internship experiences each year to low income undergraduate students
who are pursuing STEM degrees. Low income students can face financial barriers
that restrict participation in co-curricular internships, as well as cultural
and academic barriers that can lower self-efficacy and self-identity as a
scientist when participating in such experiences. To help students overcome
these barriers, the project will place students into STEM internships and
provide coordinated mentoring from a triad of mentors (a STEM faculty member,
the STEM internship coordinator, and the internship supervisor). The project
will develop, implement, assess, and evaluate the three major project
components: (1) partnerships with non-academic STEM institutions; (2) the triad
mentor networks; and (3) professional development activities to improve
mentorship. Expected project outcomes include increased student awareness of
STEM careers, increased student identity as a STEM practitioner, and
contribution of the experience to students' long-term career trajectories. The
internship and triad mentoring experiences are predicted to improve student
workplace performance and support sustainable partnerships between the
university and non-academic STEM institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will implement an iterative, design-based research model to create
faculty workshops, identify limitations based on the collected data, and modify
workshops as needed. This design and improve process may provide a deeper
understanding of how to effectively support faculty and students in mentored
STEM internships, particularly for students from groups that are
underrepresented in science. This research will be informed by data produced
from a combination of surveys, interviews, and focus groups specifically
targeting (1) barriers to success, (2) alignment between perspectives of
students and mentors, and (3) academic deficiencies related to internships.
During the project, both the academic and cultural results of project assessment
and evaluation will be used to improve project activities. These findings have
the potential to provide a design framework for effective mentoring of low-
income STEM students to improve retention, to elevate their career aspirations,
and to improve job placement. This project will also contribute to the knowledge
base on high-impact, deliberative active learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.