* 1832944
* RII Track-4: Time-Resolved Mossbauer Spectroscopy, a New Tool for Investigating Ultrafast Dynamics in Solid-State Photocatalytic and Photovoltaic Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Dugan Hayes, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 148,739.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Improving the function of solar harvesting
devices made from cheap, durable materials is necessary to make solar technology
an integral part of a clean, renewable energy strategy. The efficiency of a
photovoltaic or photocatalytic device is generally determined by events that
occur within the first few picoseconds to nanoseconds following absorption of
light, and thus a thorough understanding of electronic and chemical dynamics on
this ultrafast timescale is crucial for guiding the design of next-generation
materials. Transient absorption spectroscopy has long been deployed to this end,
wherein an ultrashort laser pump pulse synchronously launches processes in a
sample and a probe pulse reports on the state of the system at a later time. But
while this approach has proven enormously successful in providing molecular
movies of reactions in solution, laser-induced heating inevitably gives rise to
spurious signals in solid-state materials. This project aims to solve that
dilemma by pioneering an entirely new ultrafast X-ray technique that probes
atomic nuclei instead of electrons. Because this technique requires the
exceptionally bright X-ray pulses provided by large-scale storage ring light
sources, this work will be performed at the Advanced Photon Source at Argonne
National Laboratory. A residency at this world-class facility will provide the
University of Rhode Island research team the unique opportunity to demonstrate
TRSRM for the first time and track the formation of short-lived chemical species
in several solid-state solar energy conversion
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;Recent work in
ultrafast optical and X-ray transient absorption spectroscopy has highlighted
the deficiencies of these traditional approaches for studying photochemical
dynamics in the solid-state due to the presence of massive thermal artifacts
that arise from laser-induced heating. This project aims to develop and
demonstrate time-resolved synchrotron radiation M?ssbauer spectroscopy (TRSRM),
a novel and difficult X-ray technique that will provide an unambiguous probe of
excited state dynamics in a wide variety of solid-state photocatalytic and
photovoltaic materials, including hematite, iron titanate, and organolead halide
perovskites. M?ssbauer spectroscopy retains element specificity and
oxidation/spin state sensitivity of X-ray techniques while boasting
exceptionally narrow linewidths, straightforward assignments, and most
importantly for ultrafast implementation of the technique a relative
insensitivity to large thermal variations. TRSRM may also be performed under
electrochemical working conditions, an absolute requirement for investigating
the function of photoelectrochemical materials such as hematite. By providing
clear mechanistic insight into how these materials function, this work will pave
the way for critical assessments (and reassessments) of the chemical and
physical properties that enhance or diminish performance in many photoactive
materials and guide the efforts of materials engineers to improve solar energy
conversion efficiency through rational design. Because TRSRM can only be
performed at a time-resolved hard X-ray spectroscopy beamline, the research team
will travel to the Advanced Photon Source to prepare and execute the initial
experiments. Following successful demonstration of picosecond-resolved TRSRM,
the team will seek to identify not only transient species but also transition
states in solid-state materials through femtosecond-resolved TRSRM at hard X-ray
free electron laser facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.