* 1832177
* RAPID: Quantifying the Great Marsh Sedimentation Event 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2018,08/31/2018
* Duncan FitzGerald, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Toscano
* 08/31/2018
* USD 8,000.00

An unprecedented event took place on New England marshes between late December
2017 and January 2018 wherein football field-sized patches of marsh were
blanketed with 2 to 12 inches of ice-rafted silt and sand. This is hugely
significant because these marshes normally gain elevation through sediment
accumulation more slowly than local sea level is rising. Because marshes are
essentially flat, even a small rise in water level will affect a large area.
Ultimately, if the waters remain too deep, marshes will drown and switch to open
water, with loss of all ecosystem services and coastal protections they afford.
The large amount of sediment that was deposited in January, assuming the marsh
grasses can grow through it, will give the areas a boost in elevation, making
them more resilient to rising waters. The event occurred when two weeks of
extreme cold were followed by higher than normal astronomic tides, combined with
a powerful northeast winter storm. During the prolonged cold snap, tidal waters
froze to the bottom of creeks and bays, incorporating bottom sediment into the
ice, which thickened and trapped more sediment with each successive low tide.
When the storm surge occurred, the ice rafts floated up and onto the marsh
surface, where they became stranded, eventually melting and leaving the sediment
on the marsh. In a normal year, ice-rafting would bring about 5% of the annual
inorganic material deposited, but this single storm layer is estimated to be
equivalent to 71 years of normal accretion. Such infrequent, high sedimentation
ice rafting events may therefore be integral to sustaining marshes in New
England (as hurricanes can be to wetlands in the southern US); yet are rarely
documented. This project addresses this knowledge gap by mapping the area
covered in sediment using aerial photography ground-truthed with measurements of
thickness and coverage in the field, to fully quantify the amount of sediment
transported onto the marsh and its impact on marsh elevation. In addition to
quantifying the importance of winter storm processes to northern marshes, this
study will provide insights into marsh restoration strategies, such as
artificial elevation building through "thin layer deposition" whereby locally-
dredged sediment is sprayed on top of the marsh surface to build new marshes or
elevate existing marshes. The January 2018 event sedimentation provides a
natural laboratory to study how a Spartina patens-dominated high marsh will
respond to artificial sedimentation, and what thickness of sediment the marsh
can withstand. The study broadens participation in geoscience research, as it is
headed by an early-career woman researcher, and also forms an independent
research project for an undergraduate student, who will analyze sediment
samples, translate field data into maps, and combine these data with the aerial
photography to determine the impact of this event. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this study is to assess the extent and volume of the extreme
sedimentation event which occurred in January 2018 on the Great Marsh, MA. The
researchers will collect measurements of thickness and surface extent of the
deposit before the spring grass begins to shoot and obscure its coverage. They
will conduct aerial survey mapping to collect ortho-photographs capturing the
entire marsh region (~130 km2) at a resolution of 10 cm2 and will use a
combination of automated image analysis, manual digitization, and comparison to
historical images to map the new ice rafted sediment. Field-based ground-
truthing of aerial photos will involve a minimum of eight land to barrier island
transects (by foot) across the marsh to map and measure the sediment deposits.
Multiple sediment plugs of known volume will be extracted for grain size,
organic content and bulk density analysis. Sediment thickness and lateral extent
of the deposit, determined from the aerial photographs and field surveys, will
allow the researchers to estimate the total volume of sediment deposited during
this event, enabling a comparison to known accretion rates. The data collected
for this study will provide a record and a baseline for future investigations,
including analysis of storm conditions when the ice rafts inundated this marsh,
and correlation of vectors of transport to wind direction, water depth and marsh
elevation, as well as assessments of grass recovery following the sedimentation
event. The work will inform the proposed marsh restoration practice of "thin
layer deposition", by determining the thickness of introduced sediment layers
that can be tolerated by the marsh ecosystem as aids to accretion under
accelerating rates of sea-level rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.