* 1832294
* Examining groundwater-flood and soil moisture-flood relationships across scales using national-scale data mining, deep learning and knowledge distillation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Chaopeng Shen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2022
* USD 249,862.00

In many parts of the United States, it has been shown that groundwater levels
and soil moisture, which quantifies the wetness of the soil, are connected via
the mechanism of flood production. Water cannot infiltrate into the ground when
groundwater is close to the surface and is thus forced to quickly run off to
rivers, creating higher flooding risks. However, the relationship between
groundwater and floods has been found to be highly diverse and difficult to
predict. Depending on terrain, groundwater depth, and many other factors, floods
lead groundwater increase in some cases while groundwater can lead floods in
others. Previous research from selected experimental watersheds have not
resulted in a comprehensive and transferable understanding of the controlling
processes. This project will take a big-data, machine learning approach to
enhance our understanding of this relationship, allowing us to heuristically
exploit previously under-utilized groundwater data for flood predictions and
reducing damages. Using learning patterns from national-scale groundwater and
streamflow data, the machine learning algorithms will create plausible
groundwater-flood relationships. Taking advantage of the big hydrologic data
from available satellite missions, this project will create shared undergraduate
course modules to enhance student's ability to work with big data and increase
their awareness of global water issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
advances hydrologic science by answering the following overarching question: at
catchment scales, do groundwater levels in the catchment provide predictive
power for flood threshold functions and baseflow? We will address this question
in multiple small steps. We will identify the kinds of groundwater-rainfall-
runoff (GW-P-Q) relations that can be found over the Continental United States.
These relations are quantified by the correlations between water table depths
and flood thresholds (and baseflow) at different lags and time scales. We will
seek the factors dictate the type of GW-P-Q relations and whether these
relations are stable across seasons and years. We will employ two approaches: a
human-directed classification analysis, and a knowledge distillation scheme
based on deep learning (DL), a rapidly advancing group of techniques supporting
the recent surge in artificial intelligence. In the first approach, we will use
classification and regression tree to identify factors that could explain the
GW-P-Q relations. In the DL-based approach, we will train continental-scale time
series DL models using all available data to forecast discharge. This approach
addresses the issue with classification trees in which not enough data are
available for branch nodes. Through a novel knowledge distillation procedure, we
transfer the knowledge gained in the deep network to more interpretable formats,
including explicit mathematical formula. Results from the study will provide a
comprehensive understanding of GW-P-Q relations where regional patterns and
physical controls emerge. Besides gaining new knowledge, a significant by-
product is the trained DL models. They can be used as a flood forecasting tool
to integrate recent soil moisture and groundwater observations, which have not
been exploited until now. The educational activity will mesh with the research
activity by engaging undergraduate students in handling, visualizing and
interpreting big hydrologic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.