* 1832221
* LTER:  Climate drivers, dynamics, and consequences of ecosystem state change in coastal barrier systems
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2025
* Michael Pace, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 05/31/2025
* USD 6,025,552.00

The Virginia Coast Reserve (VCR) Long Term Ecological Research project is
dedicated to developing a predictive understanding of the dynamic landscapes of
coastal barrier systems. Healthy coastal ecosystems are the first line of
defense against sea-level rise and storms. Key components of those systems,
i.e., barrier islands, intertidal marshes, and lagoons with seagrass, reduce
erosion from storms, dampen wind and waves, and absorb flooding waters. Thus,
coastal ecosystems protect coastal communities. In addition, these ecosystems
provide benefits to society including support for fisheries, recreation,
tourism, and sequestration of carbon. Sea-level rise, storms, and temperature
extremes cause transitions among landscape components (e.g., changes between
uplands to marsh, bare to seagrass-dominated lagoons). These transitions occur
on time scales of years to many decades and influence the benefits of coastal
ecosystems. The vast Virginia Coast Reserve is the greatest expanse of
undeveloped coastline along the U.S. Atlantic seaboard. It provides a unique
setting to understand the dynamics of long-term coastal change. This model
system makes it possible to examine linkages among islands, lagoons, mudflats,
marshes, and uplands. Such linkages can rarely be made in other regions where
habitat fragmentation and human activities disrupt natural connections.
Understanding these ecosystem transitions individually, and how changes
propagate across the landscape through linked dynamics is a critical frontier in
predicting the long-term response of coastal systems to significant
environmental change. This project synthesizes long-term observations and
experimental data with shorter-term studies to provide novel insights on
ecosystem dynamics. These data promote the development and testing of
mechanistic models that can predict landscape level change and its ecological
consequences. With more than half the world's population living within 100 km of
the coast, and even more depending on coastal resources, ecosystem changes in
these regions have important consequences for coastal resilience. The VCR LTER
program informs coastal management, restoration, and conservation to enhance
coastal resilience to environmental changes through partnerships with management
agencies and The Nature Conservancy. It contributes extensively to the training
of Virginia teachers and the development of educational and outreach materials
that reach national and international audiences. Finally, it supports the
research training of undergraduates, graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.
The program networks with other LTER sites along the Atlantic coast to provide a
larger perspective on the eastern seaboard to managers, teachers, and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VCR research advances this understanding through
integrated studies of the ecological and physical (geomorphic, hydrologic)
processes that drive ecosystem state change dynamics. Changes may be linear, or
they may involve thresholds (tipping points) that lead to an abrupt, non-linear
transition to a different ecological state. Addressing the complexity and
interdependence of landscape components is critical to achieving a holistic
understanding of coastal dynamics and will advance general theory on ecosystem
state change and resilience. Research activities at VCR are organized around
four related thematic questions: (1) Drivers and Patterns of Long-term Change:
How have the distribution, spatial extent, and characteristics of ecosystems
changed over time and how are these changes related to climate trends and
variability? (2) Dynamics within Landscape Units: How do ecological and physical
processes interact to maintain ecosystem states or facilitate transitions to new
ones? (3) Dynamics between Landscape Units: How does connectivity influence
ecosystem state change? (4) Ecological Consequences of State Change: What are
the consequences of ecosystem state change for ecosystem function? VCR research
focuses on carbon sequestration and habitat provisioning as two functions that
are linked to important coastal ecosystem services. Collectively, this research
will increase our predictive understanding of how coastal ecosystems and their
functions respond to climate forcing at multiple spatial, temporal, and
ecological scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.