* 1832357
* Building Capacity: Guiding Critical Transitions to the Baccalaureate
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Di Xu, Riverside Community College District/Riverside City College
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,275,180.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new
knowledge on how to achieve these aims. This project at Riverside City College
will advance the aims of the HSI Program by developing and analyzing the impact
of six interventions for Riverside College Promise Program students who have
declared STEM majors. The interventions include a summer bridge program from
high school to college, home courses, college and career workshops, research
experiences, near-peer mentoring, and cross-enrollment courses. The project
seeks to increase retention within STEM programs at Riverside City College as
well as increase the transfer rates to baccalaureate STEM degrees at four-year
institutions such as California State University, San Bernardino and the
University of California, Riverside. Project collaborators from these
institutions will lead summer research for Riverside City College students;
faculty from the University of California, Irvine will conduct educational
research related to the project. Through interventions and partnerships, this
project seeks to increase undergraduate retention, enrollment, and graduation
and transfer rates in STEM degree programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will investigate the impact of a program and its sub-components on student
academic performance and STEM degree attainment. The project seeks to determine
the most critical components in improving student academic outcomes and
persistence, particularly for low-income and traditionally underrepresented
minorities. The project will also investigate factors essential to student
success in navigating the critical transitions from high school to two-year
college and from two-year college to four-year university. The project study
will include a quantitative research component that employs a rigorous quasi-
experimental design to understand the impact of the project on student academic
outcomes. The project will gather data on the impact of the interventions on the
rates of students earning a STEM baccalaureate degree. A qualitative research
component will produce an understanding about how each sub-component contributes
to an objective outcome measure and will ascertain perceptions about the sub-
component, student involvement levels, and potential implementation barriers.
Results of this research will be shared with other institutions seeking to build
STEM degree programs via interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.