* 1832737
* Workshop: Learning Hidden Linguistic Structure; January 3-7, 2019, New York New York
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 17,922.00

This workshop will bring together leading language researchers from two largely
disjoint scientific communities: Linguistics and Natural Language Processing
(NLP). The meeting will create a forum for intellectual exchange on
linguistically oriented computational modeling and facilitate building of
productive ties between the linguistics and NLP communities. To maximize the
accessibility of the workshop to the broader linguistics community and to
facilitate cross-disciplinary exchange, the workshop will take place in
conjunction with the annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of America and
will feature prominent invited speakers and panelists from the NLP community.
Cross-disciplinary research that integrates principles of linguistics and
findings from human language learning with cutting-edge computational methods
from statistical machine learning promises to lead to scientific breakthroughs
of mutual benefit to both research communities and to society more generally.
Application of computational and mathematical modeling methods from NLP promises
to enrich scientific understanding of the human language learning process and
how it depends on the information present in children and adults' linguistic
environments. The integration also has the potential to lead to new and improved
language technologies, such as machine translation and automatic speech
recognition systems that are playing an increasingly important role in modern
society by facilitating communication between speakers of distinct languages, by
increasing multilingual access to information and educational resources on the
web, and by producing new tools and resources for people with speech, hearing,
and language disabilities. In addition, the accessibility of the workshop to the
broader linguistics community creates a pathway into STEM for women in
linguistics that would not otherwise exist, providing educational, training and
research connections with the NLP community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme for
the workshop is "learning hidden linguistic structure", which is a topic chosen
specifically because there are strong but largely separate research traditions
approaching this fundamental learning problem in the two communities. Hidden
structure is a common component of linguistic theories and of theories of human
language learning, but much is still unknown about how such representations are
learned by children from their linguistic input. On the other hand, NLP research
has produced a wealth of computational techniques for modeling hidden structure
and its learning, but these models rarely incorporate linguistic principles.
Integrative research has the potential to lead to improvements in language
technologies, especially in low-resource settings where success depends most on
the capacity to generalize in linguistically appropriate ways from limited data.
It also has potential to lead to scientific breakthroughs in understanding the
sorts of computations and hidden representations that underlie human language
learning. The workshop will host invited speakers who will present on the theme
of "learning hidden linguistic structure" from interdisciplinary perspectives.
To further increase ties between the linguistics and NLP communities, there will
also be a special session with invited panelists on the topic of "What should
linguists know about NLP? ". Finally, to facilitate the training of linguists in
computational methods, the workshop will host two entry-level tutorials on
machine learning methods in NLP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.