* 1832544
* NSF Student Support for the 2018 ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Wei Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This grant provides support for 25 U.S.-based graduate students to participate
in the 24th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD
2018), to be held in London, United Kingdom August 19-23, 2018. KDD is the
world's premier conference in data science. It is a prestigious
interdisciplinary conference that brings together researchers and practitioners
every year, over 2,000 in recent years, from all aspects of data science, data
mining, and knowledge discovery. A strong representation of U.S. students and
researchers is essential in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in this important
area today and into the future. Since 2013, the KDD conference includes a
Broadening Participation in Data Mining workshop. As in various STEM fields,
increasing the diversity of participants in KDD research areas is a primary
goal. The grant will provide travel support for 25 students. The selection
committee will select recipients of the support based on merit and need and
place particular emphasis on diversity in the selection process. The KDD
technical program includes oral and poster presentations of refereed papers,
panel discussions, and invited talks by the world's leading experts. It provides
an international forum for presentation of original research results as well as
exchange and dissemination of innovative and practical development experiences,
which are particularly valuable for student participants. Besides the technical
program, the conference features workshops, tutorials, panels, posters, project
showcases, a data mining contest (KDD Cup), social networks and job matching
sessions, and a PhD forum. These will provide a comprehensive multi-facet
learning experience to students at all levels. Information on KDD 2018 can be
accessed at http://www.kdd.org/kdd2018/. Proceedings will be made available
through the ACM Digital Library.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.