* 1832295
* WORKSHOP:  Doctoral Consortium at the International Conference on Pervasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Fillia Makedon, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2019
* USD 27,040.00

This is funding to support a Doctoral Consortium (workshop) of approximately 10
promising graduate students from U.S. institutions of higher learning, along
with at least 3 distinguished research faculty as mentors, to be held in
conjunction with the Eleventh International Conference on Pervasive Technologies
Related to Assistive Environments (PETRA 2018), which will take place June 26-29
on the island of Corfu, Greece. The PETRA mission is to promote
interdisciplinary research on ways to use pervasive ambient intelligent
environments to improve the quality of life and enhance human performance with
greater capabilities. It is the only annual conference that brings together
theoreticians and practitioners from a wide variety of disciplines to focus on
the application of pervasive technologies to assistive environments. Outcomes of
this conference have a broad impact in diverse application areas such as
manufacturing, transportation, energy systems, security and safety, robotics,
healthcare, biomedicine, environment and conservation. PETRA brings together
very different types of technologies to also address important social and
healthcare issues for sensitive populations, such as the elderly, or persons
suffering from chronic conditions such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Cerebral
Palsy and other disabilities or traumas. The PETRA proceedings are published in
the ACM Digital Library, and the authors of the best papers are invited to
submit to special journal issues after the end of the conference. More
information about the conference may be found online at http://www.petrae.org.
The PETRA 2018 Doctoral Consortium will afford student authors of papers
accepted for presentation at the conference a unique opportunity to gain
additional exposure for their innovative ideas while also receiving
reinforcement for the importance and value of conducting research with societal
impact. The workshop will allow the junior participants to create a social
network both among themselves and with senior colleagues. The organizing
committee will make a concerted effort to attract participants who are women,
members of under-represented minorities, and persons with disabilities; to
further assure diversity, NSF funds will be used to support no more than 2
student participants from any one institution, and if 2 students are supported,
one of them must be a minority or person with disability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Doctoral Consortium, which will consist
of special sessions at the beginning, during, and at the end of the conference,
are to increase the exposure and visibility of the participants' work within the
community, to help establish a sense of community among this next generation of
researchers, and to help foster their research efforts by providing substantive
feedback and guidance in a supportive and interactive environment from a group
of senior researchers. The special program organized for the students includes
sessions between the doctoral students and the faculty mentors, in which the
students will discuss their work and ask questions; the faculty mentors will
provide constructive comments on the students' work and address their questions.
Students will participate in small group breakout sessions to discuss their
work, and the faculty mentors will provide guidance on how to proceed for
further journal publication. Students will also have the option to submit a
poster paper and to attend conference workshops on special topics. Short papers
on the participants' work will be published in the conference proceedings, and a
summary report on the event will be posted on the conference
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.