* 1832393
* Hazards SEES: Understanding Cross-Scale Interactions of Trade and Food Policy to Improve Resilience to Drought Risk
* SBE,SES
* 11/17/2017,07/31/2021
* Tom Evans, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,563,154.00

Food security in regions affected by drought is influenced by a complex set of
interactions between hydrological, agricultural, and social systems. Previous
models examining the impact of drought on food security have not incorporated
food trade and food movements at fine spatial scales, yet these components are
critical parts of regional food systems. In sub-Saharan Africa droughts and
floods account for approximately 80% of fatalities and 70% of the economic
losses that are due to natural hazards. Zambia is particularly vulnerable to
droughts, having high levels of malnutrition, poverty, income inequality,
exposure to HIV/AIDS and malaria, and low levels of educational attainment.
Zambia's agricultural production is rain-fed, which further increases
vulnerability in the region. With the extreme vulnerability of the region,
Zambia serves as an ideal place to study how the interactions between drought
risk, crop production, trade, and policy affect food security. By incorporating
the effects of trade and policy into predictive hydrological and agricultural
models, this project is improving existing early warning systems for famine
which rarely assess the capacity for a region to ameliorate drought via food
transfers and trade. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project's goal is to understand
the effect of drought hazards in subsistence agriculture using a novel
integrative framework that merges data, models, and knowledge of drought risk
and crop production; their interactions with the dynamics of trade-based and
aid-based responses; and their effect on household food security and
consumption. We are addressing three questions: 1) What are the spatio-temporal
scales of drought risk across Zambia and how does risk transfer into
agricultural impacts? 2) What is the role of trade and domestic food policy on
food security at local to national levels? 3) Can drought impacts be more
effectively reduced by integrating an understanding of policy and food transfers
into an agricultural drought early warning system? To answer these questions, we
are collecting biophysical data to characterize historical droughts and their
impacts on regional agriculture; examining household and market level data to
characterize food security outcomes, market prices, and food sourcing; using
complex network analysis to characterize food trade and flows; assessing market
integration associated with price fluctuations and infrastructure to determine
economic exposure and resilience at the household, community and district
levels; examining how policies at the national scale constrain decisions at the
local scale; and developing computational models for high resolution predictions
and to explore probabilistic solutions for resource allocation and risk
management. This project is the first to create an integrated model of food
trade, household consumption and crop production at such fine spatial scales
built on an empirical foundation in each dimension.