* 1832091
* WORKSHOP: Doctoral Consortium at AAAI Conference on Human Computation & Crowdsourcing (HCOMP 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Carsten Eickhoff, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2019
* USD 24,009.00

This grant supports participation of 8 promising doctoral students from
U.S.-based educational institutions in a Doctoral Consortium (workshop), along
with about 6 distinguished research faculty, to be held in conjunction with the
6th AAAI Conference on Human Computation & Crowdsourcing (HCOMP 2018), which
will take place July 5-8 2018, in Zurich, Switzerland, and which is sponsored by
the Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence. HCOMP is the
premier venue for disseminating the latest research findings on crowdsourcing
and human computation. While artificial intelligence (AI) and human-computer
interaction (HCI) represent traditional mainstays of this cross-disciplinary
conference, HCOMP believes strongly in inviting, fostering, and promoting broad,
interdisciplinary research. More information about the conference is available
online at http://www.humancomputation.com/2018/. The Doctoral Consortium will be
a research-focused full-day meeting immediately following the conference
technical program on July 8. It will enhance the scientific workforce in this
emerging research area by nurturing a group of promising young investigators
interested in human computation and crowdsourcing, allowing them: to attend the
conference; to learn of potential career paths within academia and industry; to
access an international network of researchers who can support their
professional development; and to see firsthand the interdisciplinary nature,
diversity and interrelationships of research in human computation. The faculty
mentors also will serve as the review committee for student applications. The
organizers will promote diversity by selecting no more than one or two students
from any one school, and by prioritizing the selection of women and
underrepresented minorities.

The full-day Doctoral Consortium will include activities to guide the research
of these promising young researchers. The Consortium will allow participants to
interact with established researchers and with other students, through
presentations, question-answer sessions, panel discussions, and invited
presentations. Each participant will give a short presentation on their research
and will receive feedback from at least one faculty mentor and from fellow
students. The feedback will be geared toward helping the student participants
understand and articulate how their research is positioned relative to other
work on human computation and crowdsourcing. Activities led by the faculty will
include a panel discussion to give students more information about the process
and lessons of research and life in academia and industry. To further integrate
the Doctoral Consortium participants into the conference itself, students will
have a chance to present their work in an interactive poster session, and their
papers will be posted online on the workshop webpage. These activities will
benefit the participants by offering each fresh perspectives and comments on
their work from researchers outside their own institution, both from faculty and
other students; providing a supportive setting for mutual feedback on
participants' current research and guidance on future research directions; and
enabling participants to form a cohort of new researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.