* 1832405
* Building Capacity: Polytechnic for All: STEM Undergraduate Success via an Inclusive Institution
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Angela Shih, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,479,959.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at California State
Polytechnic University, Pomona, will advance the aims of the HSI Program by
developing and implementing a multi-faceted approach to enhance student learning
and success in STEM. First, the project will compare the impact of two different
motivational interventions on student learning. One intervention targets
students' sense of how the course material is personally relevant or useful in
their lives; the other intervention helps students realize that worries about
belonging in college are normal, transient, and improve over time. Second, the
project will create opportunities for faculty to study, design, and use
inclusive practices, including active learning. Third, the project will study
the impact of a peer-led supplemental instruction program focused on second-year
engineering courses. The project activities and outcomes can advance our
understanding of how faculty learn to create an inclusive classroom. Moreover,
the project can illuminate the impact that different approaches to inclusiveness
have on students' academic success, motivation, and well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to promote creation of inclusive
classroom environments. The project will employ two motivational interventions
that seek to promote student STEM success in critical transition courses. One
intervention focuses on increasing students' understanding of how the content is
relevant; the other targets students' sense of social belonging in college-level
STEM courses. To assess the efficacy of the motivation interventions, the
project will use randomized, controlled trials to determine how the two
psychosocial treatments affect the academic success and well-being of students
enrolled in first year physics and calculus courses. The impact of faculty
professional development efforts will be examined with mixed methods approaches,
including pre-post surveys, teaching strategies inventories, and interviews. The
impact of the peer-led supplemental instruction program will be determined by
comparing outcomes for a matched set of students who do and do not participate
in the program. Measures for this facet of the project include course grades,
sense of self-efficacy, motivation, and content knowledge. This project will
generate new knowledge about how to implement inclusive STEM teaching reforms
anchored in an understanding of motivation and social-psychological factors that
lead to increased student success in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.