* 1832089
* HBCU: Excellence in Research: Analysis and Modeling of the Ocean Spray Effects on Tropical Cyclone Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Yevgeniy Rastigeyev, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,906.00

It is well-documented that hurricane track forecasts have improved substantially
over the recent decades, while forecasts of hurricane intensity change have
lagged. Hurricane intensity is sensitive to a variety of factors, such as wind
shear and the internal organization of the cyclone. One of the main
uncertainties in research on hurricane behavior is the role of ocean spray on
the system. Ocean spray affects the air-sea exchange of momentum, heat, and
moisture. Direct observations in these conditions are rare and very difficult,
so most of the understanding about ocean spray is from calmer conditions or
numerical models. In this project, the PI plans to come at the problem from the
perspective of fundamental physical conservation laws, progressively building a
more elaborate mathematical model of sea spray. The eventual societal impact of
this work would be through improvements in numerical weather models, which would
translate to better forecasts of hurricanes and their impacts. The project would
also represent the enhancement of research and education at a Historically Black
College and University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to develop a
mathematically rigorous and physically sound model of a marine atmospheric
boundary layer laden with evaporating sea spray and perform numerical and
asymptotic analyses of the model to create an efficient parameterization of a
sea spray effect on tropical cyclone dynamics and structure. The starting point
will be a set of fundamental conservation laws which will be applied to
systematically develop progressively more comprehensive models in such a way
that the influence of newly added physical factors is clearly identifiable.
Under the first objective of developing the model, the PI plans the derivation
of macro-scale, multi-fluid transport equations, formulation of the multi-phase
turbulence model, and analysis of the droplet population dynamics. The
asymptotic and numerical analysis of the model would be conducted by performing
regular asymptotic expansions, singular asymptotic expansions, and numerical
analysis of the model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.