* 1832011
* HBCU-Excellence in Research: Vertical Profiles of Aerosols and Their Radiative Impacts
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Vernon Morris, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,892.00

The research will seek to improve understanding of aerosol's impacts on climate
change and air pollution; this has implications for health as well as societal
impacts. In addition, a variety of education, field experiment and research
opportunities will be available for Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU) STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) undergraduate
students as after class research experiences. The project also provides support
and training for a HBCU graduate student and a postdoctoral fellow. Moreover,
there will be plenty of opportunities to introduce aerosol radiative forcing and
remote sensing as real examples in undergraduate and graduate geoscience courses
to help students to improve their research techniques and develop their theses
and dissertation topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerosols have cooling effect on
climate system through reflecting solar radiation. At the same time, some
aerosols e.g. black carbon, can absorb solar radiation, which cools the surface
but warms the atmosphere in the process. These effects of aerosols on radiation,
the temperature profile, along with the role of aerosols as cloud condensation
nuclei (CCN), impact the radiative balance through the direct radiative effects
of aerosols and indirect radiative effects on cloud properties and
precipitation. To estimate aerosol effects on radiative forcing, knowing
information about vertical distribution of aerosols is crucial since the
vertical distribution of aerosols has a significant effect on the sign of
radiative forcing. This research will develop a new aerosol vertical
distribution retrieval algorithm which can take advantage of broad ceilometer
networks on aerosol vertical distribution observations. Then the variability of
aerosol vertical distributions and the impacts on radiative forcing and heating
rate profile will be investigated. The investigated climate regions include
areas of rural, suburban-urban, urban, urban-dust and ocean areas from mid-
latitude to tropics. This research will investigate three scientific questions:
(1) What are the characteristics of aerosol vertical distributions at different
regions and seasons? (2) what are impacts of the aerosol vertical distribution
on radiative forcing? and (3) what are the characteristics of heating rate
profile associated with aerosols at different regions and
seasons?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aerosols direct and indirect effects on radiative
forcing is still one of the largest uncertainties in global climate models
(IPCC, 2013) and the uncertainty in the aerosol vertical distribution alone can
contribute as much half of the uncertainties of the global aerosols direct
effect. The information of aerosol vertical distribution is needed to quantify
the effects of aerosols on radiative forcing and how these in turn influence
climate and the hydrological cycle. This study will enhance our understanding of
aerosol vertical distributions though a new retrieval algorithm. It will improve
the study of aerosol direct effects on radiative forcing as well as the indirect
effects due to aerosol-cloud-precipitation interaction. It will aid to improve
aerosol parameterizations and then improve air quality prediction, weather
forecast and climate models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.