* 1832968
* CAREER: Discovering Upstream Effectors to Cell Fate Determination
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Peter Nemes, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 577,733.00

Non-Technical Paragraph&lt;br/&gt;During normal development of the vertebrate
embryo, cells of the embryo must develop into all the different types of tissues
of the organism, but the complete set of biomolecules contributing to tissue
formation is unknown. This project utilizes advanced instruments that have only
recently been developed in analytical chemistry to determine changes in small
molecules as individual cells form different types of tissues in the early
developing frog embryo, which is an important model of vertebrate embryo
development. The resulting data will provide previously unavailable insights
into basic biological processes important for the formation of cells, tissues,
organs, and organisms. These research efforts serve as the foundation for
interdisciplinary training of diverse participants at the host university, as
well as conferences, seminars, and national training centers such as Cold Spring
Harbor Laboratory, NY. This work will train a new generation of scientists in
both biology and chemistry, including many traditionally underrepresented
populations in science, to allow them to address current challenges but also to
ask new questions in these fields to better understand normal vertebrate embryo
development and diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Paragraph&lt;br/&gt;Decades of research has uncovered many genes and gene
products with critical roles during development of the vertebrate embryo, but
how small molecules (called metabolites) participate in cell developmental
processes is not fully known. The PI's laboratory recently discovered
metabolites capable of altering the normal dorsal-ventral fate of select stem
cells in the early frog (Xenopus laevis) embryo, demonstrating that these
molecules, too, are active players during patterning of the vertebrate body. The
overall goal of this work is to determine the mechanism of action underlying
metabolite-induced cell fate decisions. This will be accomplished through a
systems cell biology approach, in which the molecular state of metabolite-
injected cells will be characterized using unique single-cell mass spectrometry
technologies that were developed and validated in the PI's laboratory. The
project will identify how cell-fate altering metabolites perturb close-proximity
metabolic networks as well as key proteins of metabolism and known signaling
pathways of dorsal-ventral specification. Two single-cell mass spectrometry
instruments will be used to perform flux analysis for the injected metabolites
and to measure the relative translation of targeted proteins in fluorescently
tracked cell clones that form from the metabolite-injected cells in the living
frog embryo. The resulting data will identify gene candidates for functional
tests via gene knock-down experiments to validate the proposed mechanism of
action for metabolite-induced cell fate changes. Understanding small-molecule
effects on cell fate commitment raises broad implications in diverse areas of
the life sciences. The work will also train underrepresented groups in
techniques bridging biology and analytical chemistry.