* 1832290
* CRISP 2.0 Type 1: Collaborative Research: Economic Mechanisms for Grid Resilience Against Extreme Events and Natural Gas Disruptions
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Chiara Lo Prete, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 250,000.00

This Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes
(CRISP) project seeks to develop an evidence-based, economically sound and
validated approach to enhancing the resilience of US electricity grids,
accounting for their interdependence with the natural gas supply system. This
project develops a robust and comprehensive technique to quantify how different
types of actions and measures improve the resilience of an electric grid. Based
on a harm function that unifies existing resilience metrics, the effectiveness
of various network management options are quantified. Options include: changing
the structure of the electric grid, hardening some components, expanding gas
transmission and storage capacity, or boosting preparedness. This project also
examines the optimal mix of resilience investments. Models will be validated
using case studies in New England and Puerto Rico. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research is following a three step approach. In the first step, the researchers
develop a harm function that unifies existing resilience metrics. This function
is defined as the weighted sum of the outage time at different nodes of the
network. Based on this metric, measures to improve the resilience of the grid
can be rigorously quantified. In the second step, the researchers optimize
resilience investments using equilibrium models of electricity markets that
account for natural gas transmission constraints. In the third step, the
algorithms, models and mechanisms are validated examining natural gas and grid
test systems in the Northeastern U.S., with a focus on the New England region;
and 2) the power system of Puerto Rico, which provides a unique opportunity to
test and validate the methods in a real system undergoing an almost complete
rebuild after a major disruption. The results of this project will be of
interest to regulators concerned with long term investments in resilience that
are effective and based on sound economic principles and regulatory practices.
The techniques developed in this project will help electric utilities compare
the effectiveness of various measures and justify the corresponding operating
and capital expenditures to their regulators. The results will be disseminated
through undergraduate and graduate infrastructure courses and workshops for
utilities, ISOs and government agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.