* 1832186
* EAGER:  A Transformative Technology for Producing Transgenic Maize: Pollen Magnetofection
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2021
* R. Kelly Dawe, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 04/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Transformation, the generation of stable, transgenic lines, is a fundamental
tool in both basic and applied plant biology used for everything from testing
gene function to increasing crop yields and resilience to stress. In some plant
species, transformation is a routine procedure; however, several key crop
plants, including corn (maize), are very difficult to transform, and success is
limited to only a few varieties, severely limiting the study of gene function
and use of the most cutting-edge, genome editing technologies. New, accessible,
inexpensive methods to transform plants are needed to advance research and
accelerate crop improvement. This project utilizes simple magnets and DNA-
carrying particles to introduce engineered DNA into maize pollen, which is
easily collected, and then uses the transformed pollen to transmit introduced
DNA to the next generation progeny, the seed. Success of this method would
revolutionize maize research, allowing rapid and inexpensive modification of any
genetic stock by most labs, opening the door to one-step, precise genome
editing. Expanding this method to other species would speed up progress in
understanding plant genome functions in general and translation of that
understanding into improved commercial breeding lines. The project will also
help train graduate and undergraduate students in maize genetics, genomics and
cell biology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this EAGER project is to develop
magnetofection of maize pollen as a simple and rapid method for transformation.
Magnetofection, which uses magnetic force to propel DNA-carrying nanoparticles
into a cell, is a relatively new (and inexpensive) technology that has recently
been proved effective in the pollen of several plant species, most notably
cotton. However, the structure, development and physiology of maize pollen
appears likely to introduce significant hurdles for implementing magnetofection.
The project will utilize the relevant expertise of two maize research groups to
overcome these hurdles, and to characterize the outcome of transformation via
pollen magnetofection on a genome-wide scale. The experimental plan incorporates
three objectives that are calibrated to address the specific barriers to success
identified in maize pollen. Aim 1 will, in parallel, optimize transient
magnetofection of maize pollen in vitro, and determine the effects of such
treatments on pollen fecundity (i.e., ability to produce seeds). Aim 2 will use
the results from Aim 1 to guide implementation of a stable transformation
protocol. Aim 3 will use standard genetic methods alongside next-gen sequencing
to characterize transgene heritability and genome-wide structure in stable
transformants. Any successful transformation protocol would be validated in both
labs, and thereafter rapidly released to the maize community via preprint
server.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.