* 1832733
* The Emergence of Ferroic Phenomena and Size-Effects in Fluorite-Based Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jennifer Andrew, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 575,026.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;The push for miniaturization of memory
devices in the electronics industry has driven significant interest in the size-
dependent properties of nanoparticles and films that provide the required
performance for these devices. One key property that enables these devices is
ferroelectricity, where a material stores energy upon exposure to an electric
field, which can be used to save electronic information. However, this
ferroelectric behavior tends to disappear as materials and devices shrink. The
search for ferroelectricity in the smallest of nanoparticles has spanned several
decades with limited success. Instead, a loss of ferroelectric behavior has been
observed for small particle/grain sizes in traditional materials. However, there
are promising new materials, including those containing the element hafnium,
that have recently displayed ferroelectric behavior at very small sizes. This
project seeks to elucidate the emergence of this ferroelectric behavior with
decreasing size in hafnium-based nanoparticles. This research is accomplished by
fostering collaboration and diversity with a team of graduate students and
faculty spanning materials science and chemical engineering. In addition, this
work involves high school students and undergraduate students, aiming to broaden
participation through the inclusion of underrepresented groups. A seminar series
that promotes and highlights diversity is underway to help increase retention of
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS:&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to utilize novel
synthesis methods to synthesize hafnia and hafnia-based nanoparticles. Recent
computational work has predicted that the ferroelectric orthorhombic phase will
be stabilized due to surface energetics for particles between 3 to 5 nm or 8 to
16 nm for hafnia and hafnium-zirconium oxide, respectively. This research seeks
to experimentally validate these (and other) hypotheses and demonstrate ferroic
properties in both free-standing and consolidated nanoparticles of hafnia-based
systems. In addition to novel synthesis, advanced characterization will be
employed to confirm crystal structure and electronic properties at both local
and bulk length scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.