* 1832740
* Group Travel Grant for the Doctoral Consortium of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Xiaoming Liu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 11/30/2018
* USD 20,620.00

This grant partially supports the participation of students from US institutions
in the Doctoral Consortium at the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR) 2018 in Salt Lake City, UT. CVPR is the premier annual
conference in computer vision with over 5000 senior, junior and student
participants from all the world. The broader impacts of this project include
supporting the career development of some of the brightest junior researchers in
computer vision, contributing to the research community in general by drawing
attention to an important aspect of graduate student development, potentially
increasing the number of active researchers and educators in STEM, and ensuring
that the computer vision community, through its recent graduates, makes fast
advances in solving problems that will benefit society as a whole. The Doctoral
Consortium aims to have representation from a diverse group of participants in
terms of gender, ethnic background, academic institution, and geographic
location.

NSF support covers some of the costs for 19 selected US-based graduate students
to attend the Doctoral Consortium and CVPR conference. The Doctoral Consortium
is to highlight the work of senior PhD students who are within six months of
receiving their degrees (including recent graduates), and to give these students
an opportunity to discuss their research and career options with faculty and
researchers who have relevant expertise and experience. The opportunity to
receive advice on their research work and career plans from experts from
different institutions, and with potentially different perspectives, is often
not available internally at one's own institution. Participants and recipients
of travel support are selected by the 2018 CVPR Doctoral Consortium co-chairs.
Travel awards partially cover any admissible conference-related costs such as
registration, airfare, lodging, and board. This year's Doctoral Consortium
features a poster session, one-on-one mentoring, and panel discussion. The last
of these components was introduced in last two year's event and was well
received.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.