* 1832795
* EFRI C3 SoRo: Muscle-like Cellular Architectures and Compliant, Distributed Sensing and Control for Soft Robots
* ENG,EFMA
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Jeffrey Trinkle, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project will create a systematic and scalable approach to the design and
construction of soft robots. Soft robots have many potential advantages over
traditional rigid robots, such as being able to interact safely with people and
their surroundings. This project will accelerate the deployment of practical
soft robots by exploring modular configurations inspired by natural muscles.
Muscular structures can achieve extraordinary feats of dexterity and
manipulation even in the absence of a rigid skeleton, with elephant trunks,
cephalopod tentacles, and mammalian tongues as prominent examples. Biological
muscles operate with hundreds to thousands of individual actuating units and
multiple channels for sensing. This research will take inspiration from the
structure of biological muscle to construct dexterous, flexible and highly
controllable actuators, with distributed sensing, computation, and communication
integrated throughout.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project draws inspiration from
biology for the investigation and development of a new class of soft robots that
are modular and hierarchically arranged. Soft, muscle-cell-like units will be
developed that can be inexpensively fabricated at a range of sizes, and
implemented en masse to produce customized compliant and continuum robotic
structures. Methods will be explored to utilize simple linear actuators to
produce complex spatial deformation. Implementation of passive stiffening
elements, such as fibers, throughout the soft structures will be evaluated for
improving output motion and stiffness relative to what can be produced by the
soft structure and actuators alone. The research team will also investigate
sensing, power, and control of these systems through the development of electric
and magnetic field-based sensors that obviate the need for extensive wiring.
Finally, the research team will investigate the modeling and control of the
soft, muscle-like structures in order to enable effective planning and execution
of mechanically complex manipulation and locomotion tasks. The proposed new
approaches for wireless power, sensing, and control of soft robots have the
potential to be broadly applicable to many soft robotic architectures and to
change the approaches commonly utilized in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.