* 1832961
* RII Track-4: Uniqueness and Quantitative Uniqueness of Solutions to Partial Differential Equations
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jiuyi Zhu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2022
* USD 166,612.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics provides essential
tools for the description and investigation of numerous real-life problems. Rate
of change, which is the derivative in mathematics, is fundamental in these
problems. Partial differential equations (PDEs) are differential equations that
relate unknown multivariable functions and their partial derivatives. They
describe a wide variety of seemingly distinct physical phenomena such as sound,
heat, electrostatics, electrodynamics, fluid dynamics, elasticity, or quantum
mechanics. Because of this, PDEs play a prominent role in many disciplines
including engineering, physics, economics, and biology. One of the central
problems in the study of PDEs is about uniqueness and its quantitative
properties. The fellowship builds a collaboration between Louisiana State
University (LSU) and University of Chicago (UChi) by enabling the PI to make
extended research visits to UChi. This project will lead to advancements in
understanding uniqueness of PDEs, stimulate the PI's research capacity,
strengthen the research program in PDEs and analysis at LSU, and benefit its
undergraduate and graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to investigate the
quantitative and qualitative properties of uniqueness of solutions to PDEs.
Providing quantitative and qualitative information for the solutions is
essential in the study of PDEs, which lies in the core of mathematical analysis.
Often the most effective way to obtain such information is to first explore the
quantitative and qualitative properties of solutions of the equations and then
to develop algorithms in accordance; this is a beneficial alternative to the
challenge of instead solving PDEs computationally with sufficient accuracy.
Quantitative uniqueness, a recent fast-developing area, describes the
quantitative behavior of the strong unique continuation property. The proposed
research is to study the quantitative uniqueness for elliptic PDEs with singular
weights. The outcome will provide a deeper understanding of the strong unique
continuation property for this category of PDEs. It is important and interesting
to study how exactly the information on a small open set propagates to any other
open sets in the domain, which quantifies the weak unique continuation property.
Such exploration will lead to many applications in inverse problems and control
theory. The PI will explore how the coefficient functions determine the
uniqueness and how the shape of the domain influences the uniqueness of
solutions for parabolic PDEs. The project will contribute the fundamental
understanding of elliptic and parabolic partial differential
equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.