* 1832190
* Collaborative Research: Mentoring the Next Generation of Parallel Processing Researchers at IPDPS and other IEEE-CSTCPP Sponsored Conferences
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Trilce Estrada-Piedra, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 04/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

From their attendance to conferences, students can form professional connections
and establish collaborations, market themselves to potential employers, get
exposed to a wider network of mentors, and find inspiration for novel research
avenues. Student mentoring programs play an important role in providing younger
attendees with the necessary tools to take advantage of their participation at
conferences. Student programs have emerged in several leading conferences, but
are still far from being widely adopted. In particular the International
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS) has been hosting a PhD
forum and student program for over a decade. This program has evolved into a
comprehensive training workshop that includes sessions on career planning and
hands on tutorials on writing and presentation skills; it also provides
effective opportunities for student networking. This project seeks to expand the
IPDPS mentoring and outreach model into other conferences that fall under the
broad field of parallel and distributed processing. Parallel and distributed
processing has become increasingly important for a variety of disciplines where
traditional computational methods lack the mechanisms to deal with large data
volumes or expensive computations. As stated by NSF's mission, this project
supports education and diversity, while promoting the progress of science by
mentoring the next-generation workforce in the high performance computing
discipline.

This project has two concrete goals: 1) supporting student participation at the
32nd IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium. IPDPS is
an international conference for engineers and scientists from around the world
to present their latest research findings in all aspects of parallel
computation. 2) promoting the adoption of student mentoring programs in other
IEEE TCPP conferences, such as: AICCSA, DCOSS, DS-RT, e-Energy, HiPC, ICCABS,
ICPADS, NAS, PACT, PERCOM. The beneficiary conferences are required to
facilitate an introductory session where students network with peers and
mentors. Additionally, conference organizers are provided with the logistic plan
of IPDPS?s PhD Forum and are encouraged to have similar proven activities;
including a poster session and mentoring workshops. Only students currently
studying at U.S. universities are eligible to receive support from this NSF-
funded project. This project targets especially students that typically cannot
attended these conferences without financial support, such as undergraduate
students, graduate students in their first years, and students attending their
first conference. In order to increase the diversity of attendees, the project
strongly encourages the participation of females and other underrepresented
groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.