* 1832198
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Fuel Use in Traditional Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Alexia Smith, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2020
* USD 31,695.00

Dr. Alexia Smith and Lucas Proctor, of the University of Connecticut, will use
archaeobotany to study how periods of social and political change affect
peoples' energy use and fuel consumption. The collection and burning of wood,
plant, or dung-based fuels is an essential daily task in the lives of people
living in non-industrial societies, on par with the acquisition of food and
shelter. Archaeologists have often noted that deforestation quickly follows the
emergence of socio-economically complex societies and early states as a result
of increased fuel needs. As populations grew and economic activities
intensified, maintaining an adequate supply of fuel resources would have been
increasingly important. This study examines how fuel economies change in
response to a shift towards increasing socioeconomic and political complexity.
While the developed world no longer relies on wood or dung fuels, many areas of
the developing world still depend on access to forests and pasturelands to
supply their daily energy needs. By exploring how people in early complex
societies coped with fuel needs and fuel scarcity, this research will contribute
to national and global discussions about the role of energy resources in
sustainable economic development. An understanding of how socioeconomic factors
affect how people collect and use fuel resources over long periods of time is
essential to the development of forest conservation and environmental policies
that can balance energy needs with the preservation of natural
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers use archaeobotany, the study of
how plants and people interact, and geoarchaeological techniques, to identify
and interpret fuel remains from three archaeological sites located in Northern
Mesopotamia that date to the Late Chalcolithic (ca. 5300-3100 BC) and Assyrian
(1300-611 BC) periods. The Late Chalcolithic in this region saw the emergence of
the first socio-economically complex villages and cites, while the Assyrian
period witnessed the development of the expansive Assyrian Empire, which
fundamentally transformed land use patterns across the region and local
administrative control of resources. Combining multiple lines of evidence from
carbonized seed and wood remains, microscopic calcitic ash residues, and
ethnoarchaeological data, will provide a rigorous evaluation of what fuel types
were used at each site, whether different fuels or different wood species were
preferred for certain tasks or by people of different statuses, and how fuel
affected land use practices. The results of this project will contribute to
three larger collaborative research projects that bring together international
researchers and local archaeologists from Iraqi Kurdistan, Syria, and Turkey in
order to study the early development of social complexity in an area of
endangered cultural heritage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.