* 1832210
* LTER:  From Microbes to Macrosystems:  Understanding the response of ecological systems to global change drivers and their interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2025
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 02/28/2025
* USD 5,676,437.00

For thirty years the Harvard Forest Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) program
has been dedicated to understanding New England's forests. The heart of the
program is a group of scientists and students who do experiments and measure the
many ways that forests change over time. They are especially interested in how
forests are linked to society. In the next six years they will study how forests
respond to changes in climate, the spread of invasive species, and use of land
by humans. Scientists will start some new studies and continue others, all
connected by what they'll reveal about how and why forests change over time.
Many of the studies have been designed in partnership with natural resource
professionals to ensure that they help solve real-world problems. Scientists
will mentor college students from many backgrounds, who will work together in
interdisciplinary teams. The students will learn new skills and collect
important data. Public school teachers and students in their classrooms will
also be engaged through activities at Harvard Forest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data
from a network of permanent forest plots will continue to document long-term
changes in forest characteristics and provide validation sites for three eddy-
flux towers, multiple remote sensing observations, and an integrated modeling
framework. This network will be augmented by a new system of soil ecology plots
and a 35-hectare stem-mapped forest dynamics plot. Collectively, the plot-based
studies will be used to describe the drivers of primary production, composition,
and structure across broad scales of space and time. To understand the
consequences of observed trends in climate and atmospheric chemistry, the LTER
program will continue to support a long-running suite of soil warming and
chronic nitrogen addition experiments. In addition, paleoecological studies,
based on analysis of pollen in lake cores and of tree rings, will be coupled to
simulation models to test hypotheses related to the long-term influence of
climate on forests. The researchers will build upon their 20-year history of
studying hemlock-decline due to an invasive insect by including observations of
the changes in belowground microbial communities, stream biochemistry, and the
regional pattern of hemlock loss based on a 30-year Landsat time-series. Studies
to understand the consequences of invasive insects will be expanded to the newly
arrived emerald ash borer and the reemergence of gypsy moth. The Harvard Forest
continues to maintain some of the world's canonical studies of human land-use
impacts on forest ecosystems, spanning the persistent legacies of colonial
agriculture to the modern land-use regime. LTER studies of land-use impacts will
be expanded to the scale of New England, using diverse remote sensing platforms,
forest inventory databases, and spatial modeling, to understand how the spatio-
temporal patterns of land use affects forest dynamics. Finally, the LTER program
will continue to support the development of a regional simulation framework that
projects the individual and interactive effects of global change drivers on the
New England landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.