* 1832012
* Workshop: Respiration Regimes in River Networks: A cross-biome perspective; September, 2018; Valais, Switzerland
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* James Heffernan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2019
* USD 49,907.00

This workshop aims to understand how and why the breakdown of organic material
(heterotrophic respiration) varies over time in streams, and how and why this
timing differs among streams and rivers of different sizes and in different
parts of the world. Recent development of inexpensive oxygen sensors have
allowed the widespread collection of multi-year continuous records of oxygen
concentration, which can be used to precisely measure the timing of respiration.
Organic matter may be produced in the stream by algae and other aquatic plants,
or may be produced by terrestrial plants, and later be delivered to streams and
rivers as falling leaves, as eroded particles of soil, or dissolved in water
that flows from hillslopes to channels. These organic matter sources support the
growth of animals higher in the food chain, such as insects and fish, and also
provide energy for microorganisms that remove pollutants. The balance of
photosynthesis and respiration in streams also influences the production of
greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide. Because organic matter can enter
streams in many different ways, and because different kinds of organic matter
break down at different rates, the timing of energy supply to streams also is
likely to differ among streams, and to respond to many different aspects of
environmental change. This award will support strengthen and broaden the
scientific workforce by supporting participation of US scientists from different
career stages, regions, and backgrounds in an international conference that
addresses topics at the leading edge of environmental data science; will
strengthen existing connections between US and international scientists and
establish new ones; and will increase the use of a newly-developed online portal
(StreamPULSE; data.streampulse.org) for storage, sharing, and analysis of stream
photosynthesis and respiration data to an international workshop to develop and
test ideas about the connections between the timing of organic matter supply and
the timing of its decomposition, and how environmental change may alter these
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this conference is to simultaneously
advance the conceptual and technical understanding of respiration and
heterotrophy in streams and rivers. First, this conference will produce a
conceptual model of aquatic heterotrophy that links forms, mechanisms, and
timing of organic matter input to temporal patterns in respiration, drawing on
case studies from intensive study of organic matter and respiration dynamics at
diverse sites around the world. Second, this conference will evaluate
statistical methods to improve the estimation and interpretation of respiration
dynamics from continuous time series of oxygen and other variables including
carbon dioxide. Finally, we will integrate these technical and conceptual
advances by empirically linking the dynamics of respiration to remotely-sensed
estimates of organic matter supply in forested
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.