* 1832963
* RII Track-4: Developing and Investigating Organic-Inorganic Hybrid Ultrathin Solid Electrolytes with NREL for Lithium Ion Batteries
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Ling Fei, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2022
* USD 249,201.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the market for lithium ion
batteries (LIBs) keeps expanding, the importance of battery reliability and
safety continues to rise. Commercially used organic liquid electrolytes in LIBs
remain a huge safety issue due to their high volatility and flammability. Solid-
state electrolytes have attracted great attention as the potential replacement
due to their nonflammability, leakproof feature, and resistance to damage caused
by dendrite growth. There are two main types of solid electrolytes with
complementary properties: solid polymer electrolytes (SPE) and inorganic solid
ceramic electrolytes (ISE). This project plans to develop ultrathin ISE/SPE
hybrid electrolyte films with laminated bilayer configuration and to study their
ISE/SPE interface properties and how these properties influence lithium ion
transport and conductivity. The outcomes of this project will greatly advance
the knowledge of design and fabrication of solid electrolytes with nanoscale
engineered structures and properties for safer LIBs. The training and hands-on
experience on cutting-edge technologies and the collaborations established via
this program will directly benefit the PI?s continuing research plan on hybrid
electrolytes and greatly enhance the research capacity of UL Lafayette.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SPE have the
advantages of simple fabrication process and good flexibility but are inhibited
by low ionic conductivity, low thermal stability, and poor oxidation
resistivity. ISE have relatively high ionic conductivity and high thermal
stability but very low flexibility. Given the complementary properties of SPE
and ISE, there have been prior efforts to develop SPE and ISE composite
electrolytes with either filler in bulk structure or ISE/SPE laminated multi-
layer configuration. It has been found that SPE/ISE interface properties are key
influencers of the lithium ion transfer path and conductivity. A good
understanding of ISE/SPE interfaces behavior from this work will provide
guidance on the design and development of solid hybrid electrolytes materials
for practical LIBs application. In this project, a laminated bilayer
configuration with one large interface area will be used as a model for the
ISE/SPE electrolyte interface study since filler-bulk type electrolytes have too
many complicated interface interactions to fulfill the purpose. Two other
dominant factors that impact electrolyte performance include film thickness and
film evenness. This project will utilize a unique combination of two technical
fabrication processes (air-controlled electrospray and magnetron sputtering)
that not only significantly lowers the electrolyte film thickness and improves
film evenness, but also allows the flexibility to prepare different types of
solid electrolytes based on the application?s specific need, such as directly
deposited solid electrolyte on electrodes (particularly important for 3D
batteries) or free-standing thin electrolyte films. Results and scientific
discoveries from this project are of significant meaning for both fundamental
knowledge advancement and applied technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.