* 1832167
* Excellence in Research: Investigation of Small Molecule Adsorption and Conversion on the Semiconductor/Ionic-Liquid Interface and Application to Sensing and Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kevin Riley, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2023
* USD 831,977.00

The detection of small gas molecules is extremely important in industrial,
environmental, and other applications. Developing sensors that can measure
levels of critical gases with greater sensitivity and selectivity is of great
importance in efforts to reduce the amounts of these gases in certain
situations. Sensitivity refers to being able to measure very small amounts of
the gases and selectivity refers to being able to detect a particular gas when
there are many other gases present. In this project funded by the Office of
Integrative Activities (OIA)and the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Wang, Riley, and Sunda-Meya are
using electrochemical, computational, and microscopy methods to develop new
sensors, based on ionic liquids, that can measure gas levels with very high
sensitivity and selectivity. An ionic liquid is a room-temperature liquid that,
instead of neutral molecules, contains ions (charged molecules). The sensors
that are being developed to fit into very small devices and can be used in many
different places and applications. In addition to the development of sensors,
new methods for investigating the strengths of bonds that hold gas molecules
together are being designed. The broader impacts of this work are many, as the
newly developed sensors can aid in monitoring, ameliorating, and eliminating
gases that are harmful to people and the environment. One of the key features of
the project is the direct involvement of undergraduates, giving them
opportunities to learn many aspects of research in the physical sciences,
organization of data, and preparation/presentation of scientific results and
conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project entails both theoretical and
experimental studies aimed at investigating the structures of
semiconductor/ionic liquid (SC/IL) interfaces, effective selective adsorption on
these interfaces, effects of adsorption on adsorbant bond strength, and
understanding of the molecular mechanisms involved therein. This is a
fundamental study with strong implications for any future projects involving
miniaturized sensors, gas separation, or high-performance catalytic conversion
utilizing ILs and/or SCs. This systematic research is being conducted using
state-of-the-art electrochemical, spectroscopic, surface science, and
computational chemistry methods. The main goals of this project are to achieve a
greater fundamental understanding of small molecule adsorption at IL/SC
interfaces and to explore new chemistry and physics on these interfaces. ILs
generate a very unique solid-like interface; consequently, they can generate
extremely high electric fields and induce exceptionally large charge densities
at the solid/liquid interface. The electric double layer (EDL) charge density
can be much higher than traditional field-effects and allows for new levels of
electrostatic modulation to be accessible. The pure ionic structure of IL itself
also brings an electrostatic environment, which can potentially be manipulated
for facilitating certain small molecule activation. However, electrified
IL/electrode interfaces, especially SC's, with adsorbed gas molecules have not
been either theoretically or experimentally studied. Here the strong interaction
granted by SC with the tunability of IL interfaces are exploited in order to
achieve and evaluate gas adsorption that is both sensitive and selective by
systematically studying adsorption behavior in the IL
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.