* 1832976
* RII Track-4: Finding Order in Chaos: a Systematic Approach to Turbulence Control for Drag Reduction
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jae Sung Park, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2022
* USD 177,433.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent flows play a crucial
role in nature and engineering across a range of important areas, from climate
to aviation to cardiovascular disease. In particular, turbulence is one of the
most important phenomena in engineering because turbulent flows are
significantly responsible for flow resistance in various designed systems such
as in the automotive and aerospace industries. However, despite the critical
implications of turbulent flows and decades of research focused on controlling
these flows for energy savings, turbulence control is still scientifically
challenging due to the chaotic nature of turbulence. This project will probe the
chaotic nature of turbulence, on the premise that prevailing theories based on
statistical randomness are conceptual barriers to future breakthroughs. To this
end, the PI's mathematical and computational methods will be integrated with
experimental techniques using state-of-art facilities at the University of
Minnesota. This systematic collaborative approach will be employed to transform
understanding of turbulent flows, opening up the possibility of substantial
energy savings. This project will establish a long-term collaboration between
the PI's home institution of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the
University of Minnesota to advance the fundamental understanding of turbulent
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ubiquitous in nature, turbulence is regarded as
the greatest unsolved problem in classical physics and mathematics. In addition,
turbulence is one of the most important phenomena in engineering because
turbulent flows are significantly responsible for drag, which is directly
related to energy consumption. However, controlling turbulence has thus far been
an insurmountable challenge due to the random characteristic nature of turbulent
flows. The goal of this research is to advance a first-principles systematic
framework for discovering and predicting highly organized turbulent dynamics,
with a longer-term goal of exploiting this framework for improved turbulence
control and increased energy efficiency in many flow processes. The objective is
to build on recent advances in the dynamical understanding of turbulent flows to
find and exploit a predictive model for rigorous flow control. The research
takes a systematic approach to transform our understanding of turbulence. The PI
will use a computational and mathematical framework to characterize organized
turbulent dynamics between the ordered flow structures, working in collaboration
with a team at the University of Minnesota whose facilities provide an excellent
research environment for experimental validations of the ordered flow structures
and the predictive model. The PI will utilize, refine, and further develop a
systematic approach to discover a predictive model of turbulent flows,
identifying evidence of organized turbulent dynamics. Ultimately, the PI will
utilize knowledge gained during the fellowship to improve and develop facilities
at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to sustain a long-term research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.