* 1832225
* A Historical Geography of People and Plants in Florida
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2024
* Gail Hollander, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2024
* USD 115,878.00

This study will investigate how late nineteenth and early twentieth century
tropical plant exploration and experimentation undertaken by the U.S. Department
of Agriculture (USDA) related to U.S. foreign policy goals, and how it
contributed to shaping ideals about Florida's frontier settlement. The project
will contribute to a general understanding of how science shapes and is shaped
by larger national political and economic initiatives. The project includes
integrated educational activities such as the development of a public exhibit;
the creation of a web-based learning module available to anyone interested in
this material; the training of undergraduate and graduate students in conducting
historic-geographic research; and community engagement. Societal outcomes from
these projects include contributing to the education and training of minority
students for careers in agriculture and other sciences, and promoting broader
public understanding of the contributions of racial and ethnic minorities to
U.S. science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the case of U.S.
Department of Agriculture (USDA)'s early tropical plant exploration and
experimentation, this study brings the American tropics into the analyses of
science, foreign policy, and American frontier settlement. The project will
theoretically and empirically advance several fields of inquiry including
geographies of science, black geographies, political ecology, and historical
geography. It will produce new knowledge about African Diasporic contributions
to agricultural and botanical sciences and about the influences of racial
stereotypes on historical agricultural development. Specifically the study's
objectives are: 1) to review and analyze USDA scientists' practices of tropical
plant collection, experimentation, and introduction; 2) to understand the role
of the USDA's tropical plant exploration and introduction efforts in
constructing Florida's tropical region as a desirable space for white
settlement; and 3) to analyze how nineteenth and early twentieth-century
interlinked ideas of race, U.S. empire, and scientific knowledge shaped and were
shaped by the USDA's tropical plant projects. Using both archived materials and
published historical documents the investigator will analyze the
representational and embodied practices of key individuals and the policies and
politics of their associated institutions. The historical period under
investigation begins with the USDA's move toward overseas exploration and plant
importation, around 1890, and ends in 1945 when the geopolitical context of US
foreign policy shifted significantly. Archived materials from a variety of
public and private holdings will be a primary source of data, including field
collecting journals, scientific diaries, official reports, correspondence,
photographs, sketches, maps, government policies, memoranda, and
directives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.