* 1832815
* Meeting: The path less traveled: Reciprocal illumination of gecko adhesion by unifying material science, biomechanics, ecology, and evolution; Jan 3-7, 2019, Tampa, Florida
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Timothy Higham, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

Geckos have captured the imagination of the public and scientists for centuries.
They can stick to smooth surfaces, and even walk inverted. The remarkable gecko
adhesive system has become a model for evolutionary innovation and synthetic
design. Gecko research over the past two decades has been as diverse as the
group itself, including ecological, evolutionary, morphological, biomechanical,
and material science foci. Indeed, interest in gecko-inspired adhesives has
exploded since 2002, but progress is now slowing because dialogue and
collaboration between materials scientists and engineers on one hand, and
biologists on the other, is less intense than it should be. As a result, the
former lack the knowledge of the "real world" in which these lizards employ
their adhesive mechanism, and the latter have only just begun to recognize that
the findings of biomimeticists and engineers can inspire new avenues for their
own investigations. The symposium will explore the ways in which fundamental and
applied approaches can reciprocally illuminate answers to challenging questions
in gecko biology and gecko-inspired design of synthetic adhesives. The emergent
collaborations and insight will fuel a new research path that will lead to the
design and formation of products that will benefit society. In addition, the
current understanding of gecko diversity will expand, leading to a deeper
appreciation of these unique animals. The list of speakers transcends career
stages, gender, and nationality, leading to the training of diverse STEM
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Study of the gecko adhesive system requires
integration across scales and clearly highlights the benefits of an integrative
approach. Although much progress has been made over the past 15 years, the field
has fallen short of a true integrative approach. What are now needed to propel
the field forward are connections and collaborations between ecologists,
evolutionary biologists, morphologists, biomechanists, and material scientists.
The symposium is designed to address grand challenges in the areas of research
devoted to organismal biology, as follows: Understanding the organism's role in
organism-environment linkages (by addressing physical, physiological and genetic
factors that constrain or promote adjustment to changing environments over
different time scales); Exploring the functional diversity of organisms (by
fostering collaborations between applied researchers and organismal biologists
to advance bio-inspired technology); Integrating living and physical systems
analysis (through cross-disciplinary inspiration, and the development of
sustained collaborations); Understanding how genomes produce organisms (by
understanding regulatory networks, integration and feedbacks that produce
particular phenotypes, and mechanisms and feedbacks that mediate environmental
effects on phenotypic expression and performance). The symposium will
incorporate emerging areas pertinent to gecko adhesion, such as genomics,
biochemistry and behavior, thereby expanding the reach of current research and
application. The breadth of the contributions in this symposium and
complementary sessions will foster advances on several
fronts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.