* 1832144
* Excellence in Research: The impact of online comparison websites on the remittance industry
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Angelino Viceisza, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,597.00

This proposed research project will use experimental methods and surveys to
investigate the effects of on-line comparison shopping on choice of companies
and fees charged for migrants sending money to their home countries. Even though
migrant remittances serve as an important source of financial flows to the
developing world, hence a major source of economic growth and global
development, the cost of remittances tend to be very high averaging about 8% of
the amount transmitted. It is hypothesized that on-line comparison shopping will
allow consumers to choose companies that provide lower cost with better services
and as a result, prices for these services are likely to fall. While this is a
possibility, there is limited empirical evidence of this issue mainly because of
lack of data. The proposed research will combine economic theory, structural
modelling, field experiments, and survey data to investigate these issues. The
PIs will survey 400 migrants from different countries who use these on-line
comparison shopping websites to determine what impacts on-line comparison
shopping have on choice of company and the impact of these comparisons on the
cost of sending money. The results of this research will have important impacts
on the cost of sending migrant remittances, possibly increase the volume and the
number of market participants, as well as significantly contribute to global
development. The results will also establish the US as the global leader in
migrants' transfer markets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed research project
will use a variety of methods to study the causal impacts of on-line comparison
shopping for migrant remittance services on the choice of companies by migrants
and the cost of such services. This study will be one of the first to attempt a
rigorous assessment of the causal impact of comparison websites on both the
demand and supply sides of the industry by combining (1) theory, (2) field
experiments, (3) survey data, (4) structural modeling, and (5) policy
evaluations. The PIs seek to extend research on the impacts of information and
communication technologies on consumer behavior to an unexplored market---the
remittance industry. By surveying a sample of 400 migrants at multiple points in
time and exposing them to randomized information treatments, the PIs will
identify the causal impact of "price comparison" on migrant choices. The PIs
will then use a structural model to conduct counterfactual policy evaluations to
assess the potential supply-side impacts as well as welfare effects of these on-
line comparison shopping experiments. The findings of this research will inform
the policy debate surrounding ways to reduce cost in the migrant remittance
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.