* 1832829
* GOALI - Collaborative Research: Chemically Induced Stresses and Degradation Mechanisms in Ceramic Materials for Li Ion Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Brian Sheldon, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project focuses on surface damage layers that
form on many of the oxide materials that are used in lithium-based batteries.
Most of the research is designed to understand the formation of these layers,
and to create strategies that can mitigate related degradation mechanisms in
battery materials. The specific findings from this project will help to increase
the lifetime of lithium-based batteries that are used in a variety of
applications. Through the GOALI partner (General Motors), the work will
contribute directly to industrial research on improved electrodes for high
energy density lithium ion batteries for electric vehicles with zero emission.
Knowledge transfer is occurring through both public dissemination and direct
interactions with researchers at General Motors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: Many of the battery materials that can potentially improve the
performance of lithium-based batteries are ceramics where surface damage layers
(SDLs) cause serious limitations. For example, chemically and electrochemically
induced structural changes that form surface films on layered cathode particles
lead to substantial impedance rise and limited cycle life - to the extent that
SDLs render these materials unusable after cycling. In all of these surface
films, it is important to realize that a variety of factors lead to significant
mechanical stresses, where the corresponding elastic energies interact with
chemical and structural changes in ways that have not been addressed in most
prior research. The need to develop fundamental knowledge about chemo-mechanical
effects in SDLs and surface coatings is the primary motivation for the proposed
research. Efforts at Brown University employ precise in situ measurements of
stresses along with other experimental methods to develop novel approaches for
probing a variety of complex phenomena where stress interactions with
fundamental mechanisms are poorly understood (e.g., defect coupling,
multicomponent diffusion, etc.). Interpretation of these data relies on building
multiscale models informed by atomic scale simulations at Michigan State
University. Students and faculty from both Universities are working directly
with Dr. Yan Wu and other researchers at General Motors, in ways that expand
educational outcomes and enhance knowledge transfer to industry. Via these
direct interactions with industrial collaborators, the resulting new knowledge
will be applied to commercially viable systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.