* 1832388
* Building Capacity: Transforming STEM Undergraduate Education through Academic Literacy, Mentoring, and Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Mark Appleford, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,745,818.00

The Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions
Program (HSI Program) aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build
capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new
knowledge about how to achieve these aims. This project at the University of
Texas at San Antonio (UTSA) will advance the aims of the HSI Program by
developing new curricula and methods of instruction that increase student
persistence and success. The project will implement a faculty development
framework that helps faculty: 1) connect their course content to students'
background knowledge; 2) demonstrate connections between lower level and upper
level courses; and 3) help students develop professional identities that can
lead them into STEM careers. The project will focus on developing students'
ability to understand the complex language of science, including words and
visual representations, such as graphs, charts, and diagrams. Expected outcomes
are that faculty will develop expertise in innovative, evidence-based teaching
approaches that enhance student learning, and that students will develop
marketable skills needed for success in STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this project is to develop new methods of instruction and
associated curricular change with an explicit focus on the intersection of
academic literacy and content competencies. This goal will be achieved through
the application of evidence-based teaching approaches, coaching of STEM faculty
to improve student learning, and by providing student mentoring and professional
development experiences. The project includes the following specific tasks: 1)
Developing and improving undergraduate STEM students' integrated understanding
of academic literacy and core competencies; 2) Creating interdisciplinary
professional development lesson study groups of instructors to engage in
sustainable instructional and curricular change; 3) Aligning STEM curricula
between lower and upper division courses; 4) Developing a near-peer mentoring
program for sophomore and junior level STEM students; 5) Providing research
opportunities and professional development activities for STEM students; and 6)
Evaluating the relevance and effectiveness of the institutional curricular
redesign. These proposed activities focus on the critical transition between
lower and upper level undergraduate courses, a key transition for student
retention and graduation in STEM. In addition, innovative cross-disciplinary
partnerships will be established between collaborating STEM and Education
faculty. These partnerships will create lesson study groups of instructors that
draw explicit attention to the role of academic literacy in the development of
strong university-level STEM teaching and learning. The proposed plan builds on
the dedication of UTSA to increasing diversity in the STEM workforce. This plan
is an integrated approach to increase the number of undergraduate
underrepresented minorities who graduate from the UTSA Colleges of Engineering
and Sciences. It is expected that the program will benefit STEM undergraduates
at UTSA by increasing their retention rates, critical thinking skills,
professional knowledge, self-efficacy, graduation rates, and professional and
workforce preparedness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.