* 1832688
* CRISP 2.0 Type 1: Collaborative Research: Distributed Edge Computing to Improve Resilience of Interdependent Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Roshanak Nateghi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 12/31/2022
* USD 461,314.00

This Critical Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes
(CRISP) research advances the body of knowledge on interdependent infrastructure
resilience of systems through utilizing distributed assets to minimize cascading
failures under extreme events. It is hypothesized that the domino effect of
service disruptions is rooted in the vulnerability of the backbone-versus-edge
relationship among the systems. For example, a backbone component in one system,
such as natural gas-fueled power plants, is only at the end of the supply chain
of natural gas (termed as the edge). Consequently, a backbone failure in one
system (such as natural gas pipeline outage) can create the domino effect of
failures through the entire interdependent systems. One way to alleviate this
backbone-vs-edge tension is to bring assets to the edge (referred to as
distributed resources), hence releasing the reliance of one infrastructure
system on the others. This research will establish a new framework to
effectively coordinate among the distributed resources, without requiring
centralized coordination. Such a framework will be tested under various hazards
including urban droughts, hurricanes and earthquakes. In addition, economic
benefits of the added resilience will be quantified to help policy makers with
more efficient solutions for improving resilience without sacrificing economic
growth. The research will be widely disseminated to scientific communities and
public via publishing in scientific outlets as well as leveraging press releases
and media tools. Moreover, this research-integrated program and commitment to
enhanced diversity promises to inspire underrepresented groups in STEM, and
train the next generation of interdisciplinary scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
effectively control distributed resources across multiple interdependent
systems, a novel distributed optimization algorithm will be established. Most of
the existing distributed optimization algorithms cannot deal with complicated
(and possibly non-convex) network constraints. To bridge this knowledge gap,
there is an algorithm which leverages successive convex approximation, coupled
with suitably designed message passing protocols, to allow an optimization
problem to be solved in a distributed manner at a large number of computational
nodes (i.e., the distributed resources), connected by a network with arbitrary
topology and time-varying links. This is particularly useful in modeling outages
in physical or communication networks, such as electricity network
interruptions. To quantify the benefits of the distributed assets under extreme
events, a multi-dimensional resilience quantification framework will be
developed to simultaneously characterize multiple performance metrics of systems
as opposed to measuring a single performance metric which is the prevalent
approach today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.