* 1832642
* CRISP 2.0 Type 1: Accelerating restoration through information-sharing: Understanding operator behavior for improved management of interdependent infrastructure
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Melissa Kenney, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Rapid restoration of infrastructure services following a disaster is fundamental
for community recovery. Restoration delays may be created when infrastructure
sectors are interdependent and when their operators, potentially lacking
knowledge of other systems' conditions and restoration plans, mutually wait for
others to act. For interdependent infrastructure recovery, the decisions made by
the operators has been overlooked in research, yet it is an important factor in
quicker recovery times. To improve recovery of interdependent infrastructure
systems, there is a fundamental need to broaden the current perspective to
include 1) how individual operators make recovery decisions for their
infrastructure systems, and 2) how to improve these decisions. This Critical
Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure Systems and Processes (CRISP) project
compares the effectiveness of a variety of interventions, including information
sharing, in reducing restoration times. The project uses interdependent chilled
water, information technologies, and electric-power infrastructures at the
University of Maryland as an initial case study. To explore the usefulness
beyond the case study, a collaboration with a U.S. military installation will
evaluate the co-management opportunities, given the models, to improve
infrastructure recovery time. Graduate students will also be mentored and
trained in these approaches to facilitate a multidisciplinary understanding of
linked physical and decision structures to improve infrastructure recovery after
a failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce insights into how
operators use information to make decisions in the context of interdependent
infrastructure. Technically, the research employs novel tools by integrating
regulatory analysis, semi-structured interviews, fault tree analysis, agent-
based modeling, and serious gaming, to determine how information, and other
nudges and regulatory interventions, alter decisions, and ultimately
infrastructure recovery processes. The modeling and serious gaming approaches
are strongly grounded in an understanding of the physical behavior, observed
operator behavior, and governing decision rules and heuristics of operators.
Unique to this study is the intersection of interdependent infrastructure
modeling and decision science. This interdisciplinary research seeks to develop
a new theoretical understanding of interdependent infrastructure informed by
operator behavior and to identify practical interventions that improve the co-
management of these interdependent systems. Further value is added by comparing
computer simulated infrastructure recovery models that produce a "theoretical"
optimum to an operator-revealed "practical" optimum via serious gaming. This
presents a significant advance to the interdependent infrastructure field by
evaluating the divide between current academic optimization recovery models and
actual operator recovery behavior given inducements for better decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.