* 1832098
* Excellence in Research: Development of High Resolution Coherent 2D Rovibrational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Peter Chen, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,924.00

Professor Peter Chen's research team at Spelman College is developing a new high
resolution spectroscopic technique to study molecules in gaseous mixtures in
real time. The new spectroscopic method Professor Chen works on monitors very
small signal shifts caused by the change in a gas mixture. It could be useful in
many different areas, such as studying combustion systems, materials synthesis
processes, and catalysis. The resulting information could be used to discover
and identify new species produced during chemical reactions and provide
information needed to understand reaction mechanisms. Consequently, it can lead
to improved ways to reduce pollution, improve efficiency, and lower costs for
manufacturing, automobile transportation, energy production, etc. Professor Chen
works closely with a group of undergraduate students at Spelman College and
prepares them for graduate studies in the STEM fields. He in particular
encourages African American women students in research by providing them with a
stimulating, cutting-edge undergraduate research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technique that is being developed is based
upon a new high resolution form of coherent multidimensional spectroscopy that
uses rovibrational resonances and nonparametric four wave mixing processes. The
shift from electronic enhancements to vibrational enhancements makes it easier
to detect all species present in the sample. Advantages for using new
nonparametric techniques are explored. New methods are also being developed that
use the resulting multidimensional patterns to distinguish among signals from
different species while also providing information on their structures.
Professor Chen has established a strong record of recruiting and involving
undergraduate students, many from underrepresented minority groups, on his
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.