* 1832510
* SUGI: Sustainable Urbanization Global Initiative Food-Water-Energy Nexus Coordination
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Joshua Tewksbury, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 10/31/2022
* USD 816,490.00

This project, led by the Future Earth Global Secretariat Hub at the University
of Colorado, is to coordinate and support the Belmont Forum's Collaborative
Research Action Sustainable Urbanization Global Initiative on the Food-Energy-
Water Nexus. The Initiative involves fifteen major, international,
transdisciplinary, research teams with operations in North America, Europe,
Asia, Latin America and Africa: all working towards solutions on urban
sustainability challenges that intersect with key aspects of food, water and
energy systems. Twelve of the fifteen projects have a US partner or are US led.
Activities organized and carried out by the University of Colorado Future Earth
Hub provide connections and support that enables cross-project integration as
well as training scientists in best practices in transdisciplinary research.
Work also includes providing mechanisms for working across projects to
strengthen research outcomes, supporting cross-team synthesis activities, and
developing integrated multi-media communications campaigns to deliver targeted
communication products to key audiences. Broder impacts of the work include
increasing the diversity of university students engaged in sustainability
science by providing them with a multiple year program of engagement with
Belmont Forum-funded food-water-energy nexus research groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Colorado Hub of the Future Earth
Secretariat is an organization that helps support and coordinate the work of
transdisciplinary research teams. This project builds on the Hub's already-
developed organizational structure and successes in coordinating and translating
research science in sustainability into impactful traditional and innovative
multimedia public outreach materials. For this project, the Hub will bring its
organizational and staffing strengths to bear on coordinating activities and
providing important synthesis venues for the fifteen research teams involved in
the Belmont Forum's Collaborative Research Action Sustainable Urbanization
Global Initiative on the Food-Energy-Water Nexus. The Colorado Hub of Future
Earth will provide organizational support for workshops and other in-person
interaction events to enhance internal research team and cross-project
communications to ensure the research being carried out has maximum impact and
there is transmission of information and findings between research teams.
Coordination efforts involve surveys to identify challenges and issues that
resonate within and between groups to promote shared learning. Resulting
webinars and workshops create a learning forum that involves and benefits all
parties. The Hub also provides training in best practices in transdisciplinary
research and the co-development of research and policy. The Hub, in its
facilitation role, will also support up to five synthesis grants, with each
award supporting up to three synthesis meetings. In the final year, a capstone
meeting of the research teams will be held where they will report on and
integrate key research findings and lessons learned. The capstone event will
also be used to assess, from the perspective of each team and on the part of the
project overall, the effectiveness of the program and its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.