* 1832486
* Reconstructing Ancient Human and Ecosystem Responses to Holocene Climate Conditions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Joseph McConnell, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/28/2023
* USD 393,713.00

This research project will reconstruct Holocene climatic conditions to better
understand human adaptation and response to past environmental variability. The
investigators will use an array of archaeological materials and atmospheric
proxies from Northern Rocky Mountain ice cores to better understand human use of
alpine environments during periods of dramatic environmental change. This
project will provide new insights into what the large-scale environmental
changes were, how such changes impacted humans, and what strategies humans used
to respond and adapt to these changes. The project will involve a collaboration
among tribal communities, universities, agencies, and land managers, with
students from tribal colleges and universities being educated and trained to
help constitute the next generation of researchers, natural resource managers,
and educators. Tribal elders, tribal community members, and students will be
brought together to discuss the significance and meaning of the archaeological
artifacts from the context of tribal oral traditions and histories and to
document and share the findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The diverse assemblages of
plant, animal, geologic, and archaeological material rapidly emerging from
melting ice-patches in higher-elevation areas can provide a wealth of
information about past environmental conditions and human use of alpine
resources. Coupling biological and geochemical records preserved in ice patches
with evidence from archaeological sites presents a rare opportunity to document
and evaluate human response and adaptation to large-scale climate patterns and
pronounced climate events. The investigators will focus on four core questions:
(1) What is the long-term climate history of high-elevation regions? (2) How did
changes in climate and environmental conditions influence human and animal use
of the alpine zone? (3) What were the long-term strategies of indigenous North
Americans in response to extreme droughts and cold, wet periods? (4) What do the
array of materials exposed from melting ice patches reveal about human capacity
for change? These questions will be addressed by evaluating archaeological
artifacts, ancient wood, and environmental and climatic proxies (e.g., oxygen
isotopes, black carbon, continental dust, charcoal, and pollen) found frozen in
ice-cores within ice-patches. The ice-core reconstructions will be compared with
records of past hydroclimatic changes from adjacent lake-sediment sites. A
subregional index of intensity of human use will be developed by documenting
temporal intervals of increased presence/absence and abundance of archeological
materials. The project's research outcomes will provide new information about
human response to dramatic climate and environmental change, thereby advancing
basic understanding of the resilience of socioecological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.