* 1832865
* EAGER:Capturing Stray Magnetic Fields for Ubiquitous Wireless Power
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/02/2018,08/31/2019
* Shashank Priya, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 95,164.00

Abstract: Nontechnical: Small magnitude magnetic fields arise from the current
flow in the power transmission cables, wires connected to appliances (such as
electric kettle, washer, dryer, etc.) and electronic devices. Electric
transmission and distribution facilities, as well as residential wiring and
appliances, account for background magnetic fields in the home. In homes not
located near high-voltage power cables, this background field is small but
directly beneath the power cables, the fields are much stronger. This background
magnetic field can be converted into useful electricity by using the principle
of magneto-mechano-electric conversion. Generated electricity can be stored into
supercapacitor or rechargeable battery and used for various purposes such as
powering sensors and mobile devices. The project will utilize piezoelectric -
piezomagnetic materials that are coupled together in a laminate composite
structure to provide conversion of magnetic field into electric field. As a
demonstration, the project will target powering wireless sensors mounted on
unmanned aerial vehicle flying over the power transmission lines. Several
fundamental advances will be made in optimizing the energy conversion process
including (i) design of the composite structure that results in magnetic flux
amplification and reduction of demagnetization field within given shape and
volume, (ii) understanding of the physical interactions occurring at varying
length scales and addressing them in design of energy converter, (iii) full
system modeling to reveal the role of materials, structure, and electrical
variables and using the model to improve the system efficiency. These
advancements in describing the dynamic magnetic field energy conversion process
from sources such as power transmission cables, household appliances, and
residential wiring will provide opportunity for developing new generation of
wireless power sources. The knowledge generated from the project will be
summarized into interdisciplinary web-based tutorial which will be offered to
public through Energy Harvesting Society website. Summer camp comprising of
lectures and laboratory tours for underrepresented high school students and
teachers will be implemented in collaboration with the Center for the
Enhancement of Engineering Diversity. International collaboration with Korea
Institute of Materials Science will be established to expedite the development
of wireless power source technology.

Technical: The overarching objective of this project is to quantify the
magnetic-to-electric energy conversion capability of proposed piezoelectric -
piezomagnetic composite. In doing so, comprehensive synthesis - structure -
performance relationships will be established for composites operating under
varying magnetic field environment. Analytical modeling based upon constitutive
equations, phenomenology and micromechanics will be used to understand the
parametric response with emphasis on elucidating the role of interfacial
coupling term. Finite element model will be used to design the composite
architecture with matching mechanical impedance and optimum flux concentration
with reduced demagnetization effect. Optimized composite structure will be
fabricated using additive manufacturing based process. Dynamic impedance
matching circuit will be designed to transfer power with high efficiency from
the converter to storage media (supercapacitor or battery). Field testing will
comprise of real-time energy harvesting from transmission cables. Combined these
results will assist in evaluating the limits on power density and efficiency
(output electrical energy/input magnetic energy) of magneto-mechano-electric
conversion mechanism.