* 1832803
* Oxide Ion Conduction Mechanisms in Bismuth Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* David Cann, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 08/31/2023
* USD 640,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Emerging applications in the broad area of energy
systems require new materials that have high ionic conductivities, chemical and
thermal stability, and are composed of environmentally benign and inexpensive
materials. This project is focused on developing an understanding of the
relationship between the oxygen conductivity of bismuth-containing ceramics and
the local atomic structure that controls the mobility of oxygen. This research
will involve the synthesis of a number of ceramic compounds, measurement of
their ionic conductivity, and characterization of their local structure using
neutrons and X-ray scattering. With improvements in the properties guided by
these findings, there are many energy-related applications that can be
considered such as intermediate temperature solid oxide fuel cells, which have
great potential as a cost-effective, clean power source. The research in this
four-year project adds valuable expertise in the development of new energy
materials and forms the basis of two doctoral theses, one in chemistry and the
other in materials science. In addition, the project incorporates a high-impact
K-12 outreach activity by hosting two high school students into the laboratory
as part of an existing program, the Summer Experience in Science and Engineering
for Youth (SESEY) at Oregon State University (OSU). This project also explores
commercialization activities through a professional development program called
Lens of the Market (LoM) which is supported at OSU through an National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award in Innovations in Graduate Education
(IGE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This project builds upon recent
developments on the defect chemistry and structural analysis of bismuth
perovskite materials with an aim to develop a fundamental understanding of the
dominant ionic conduction mechanisms in two bismuth perovskite systems, sodium
bismuth titanate (NBT) and barium titanate-bismuth zinc titanate (BT-BZT). Both
of these material systems have recently been shown to exhibit ionic conductivity
values comparable to yttria-stabilized zirconia at temperatures below 600
degrees C. The overarching objective of this project is to identify the unique
local structural distortions in bismuth perovskites that enable high oxygen
conductivities in these materials. The specific research activities include the
following objectives: (i) to systematically synthesize and process NBT and BT-
BZT-based ceramics to control the level of oxygen stoichiometry, (ii) to
characterize the electronic properties of NBT and BT-BZT-based materials, with a
focus on the ionic conductivity, and (iii) to characterize the local structure,
average structure, and oxygen non-stoichiometry of NBT and BT-BZT-based
materials, with the focus on how doping and processing conditions influence this
behavior. A greater understanding of the oxide ion conduction mechanisms will
help guide the development of new materials for emerging energy
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.