* 1832344
* CONFERENCE: 2018 The 16th International Conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and Minichannels (Dubrovnik, Croatia, June 10-13, 2018)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,09/30/2020
* Yoonjin Won, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 09/30/2020
* USD 12,000.00

The 16th International Conference on Nanochannels, Microchannels and
Minichannels (ICNMM) to take place in Dubrovnik, Croatia June 10-13, 2018, is
intended to provide a platform for researchers to exchange information and
identify research needs in this emerging area encompassing many engineering,
basic sciences, and bio-medical disciplines. Both fundamental aspects including
transport studies at the nano, micro, and mini scales as well as practical
applications including thermal management, energy conversion, lab on a chip, and
biomedical devices are included. The insights obtained from the close
interaction allowed by this conference will pave the way for the implementation
of novel methods for transport physics in a range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICNMM conference is one of the premier
annual events for researchers in fields related to
transport&lt;br/&gt;phenomena. The conference (1) advances the fundamental
understanding of transport physics; and (2)&lt;br/&gt;discusses the fundamental
physics related to modern electronic devices, biomedical, and
energy&lt;br/&gt;applications. In particular, the plenary speakers for this
conference represent a broad spectrum of fields including two-phase transport
physics, transport phenomenal in micro and nanofluidic systems, and
electrokinetic systems. The conference also includes nine confirmed Keynote
presentations, covering a broad variety of disciplines and
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.