* 1832889
* RII Track-4: Linking Chemistry to the Mechanics of Dynamic Hydrogel Interfaces
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jonathan Pham, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 223,144.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft hydrogel interfaces are
essential for high-technology applications, from synthetic tissues and medical
adhesives, to commodity products, such as contact lenses. However, the majority
of hydrogels are limited to static properties, hindering advanced material
functions. This award supports fundamental research that aims to advance
knowledge on how to control dynamic interfaces enabled by dynamic bonds in
hydrogels, and relate macroscopic to microscopic mechanical behavior. The
project takes advantage of expert resources and facilities at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), where the PI and his collaborators will focus on
synthesizing new dynamic hydrogels and characterizing their mechanical
properties. The resources available in soft matter at MIT will play a critical
role in synthesis and characterization of these hydrogels. In addition to
advancing scientific knowledge, successful development of dynamic hydrogels is
expected to afford a platform for new biomaterials to advance national health.
New lasting collaborations will be developed between the PI and hosts, which
will strengthen partnerships between the University of Kentucky (UK) and MIT,
leading to a stronger program in soft materials at
UK.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Soft polymer interfaces
underpin many important applications, from hydrogel medical adhesives and
synthetic tissues to contact lenses. However, they are largely limited to
materials with static properties, hindering advanced functions where smart,
responsive, or transient interfaces are desirable. The proposed research aims to
advance our knowledge on how to control interfaces of soft hydrogels with
dynamic properties, enabled by ligand-metal crosslinking dynamics. We expect
interfacial behavior to be governed by the time-dependent formation of bonds,
near-surface viscoelasticity of the bulk material, and the molecular
architecture and composition of the gel relative to the crosslinking dynamics.
To address this hypothesis, the PI will cultivate lasting collaborations with
experts at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in hydrogel synthesis
with metal-ligand crosslinking and non-Newtonian mechanical characterization. As
part of this project, the PI and a student will be trained in necessary
synthesis methods, as well as unique rheological methods. The results obtained
on the chemistry and macroscale rheology will be coupled with interfacial
mechanics experiments to develop a link between the chemistry and mechanics of
dynamic hydrogel interfaces. The skills gained by the PI will become extremely
valuable as new chemistry and molecular organizations are explored to expand the
versatility and control of dynamic hydrogel
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.