* 1832772
* Recruiting and Fostering Students through Field Geoscience
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Louise Kellogg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,999.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. Over a five-year period, this
S-STEM project at the University of California at Davis will fund 50
undergraduate and 21 graduate scholarships for geoscience students in the fields
of Geology and Coastal and Marine Sciences. To recruit students into
geosciences, the project will partner with eight area community colleges.
Starting with this group, the project will systematically support students
beginning with their first experience in field-based science. The project has a
progression of follow-on experiences, including an undergraduate field course,
research experiences, internships, and/or entry into graduate school. In
addition to the undergraduate scholarships, the project will include "Jumpstart
Scholarships" to first year graduate students. The broad range of opportunities
for field-based experiences will serve opportunities to mentor students and
enable student to get involved in increasing levels of research. The expectation
is that the financial, academic, and personal support for students will lead to
increased recruitment, retention, and graduation in geoscience fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve dual goals: education and
research. The education goal is to recruit and retain highly qualified, low-
income students in geosciences. The project aims to achieve this goal by
supporting students from gateway geoscience courses to undergraduate majors, and
into graduate school or geoscience professions. The research goal is to test:
(1) whether undergraduate field instruction can enhance content understanding
and student engagement; and (2) whether the novelty of working in a field
environment is an impediment to low-income and other underrepresented students,
and how such novelty space can be reduced. The second question addresses
research suggesting that the novelty of being in an unfamiliar field environment
can negatively impact student experiences and learning. The project will assess
whether this novelty-related anxiety may challenge low-income and other
beginning geoscience students, and what interventions can mitigate novelty
anxiety. This project has the potential to increase and broaden participation in
geoscience, thus enhancing the future workforce of geoscience researchers,
teachers, and industry professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.