* 1832140
* Excellence in Research:  Contribution of Terrestrial Bacteria to Iodine Biogeochemical Cycling
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Courtney Robinson, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 722,326.00

Iodine is an essential element needed in trace amounts by living organisms to
maintain health and proper physiological functions. Living organisms acquire
iodine through their diet in most cases and iodine is made available through
biogeochemical cycling of this element. Most of what is known regarding the
biogeochemical cycling of iodine comes from studies of seawaters and the
atmosphere. While marine systems are a major global source of iodine, they do
not account for total global iodine production. This research will help explain
how bacteria in soil and sediments also contribute to global iodine cycling by
studying genes potentially associated with iodine modification and by using
laboratory techniques that replicate how different bacteria in terrestrial
environments may work together to accomplish modifications of iodine compounds.
Additionally, the outcomes of this research will improve the ability to predict
how well certain bacteria will be able to modify radioactive iodine compounds.
This has implications for the health of numerous ecosystems and populations that
are currently threatened by radioactive iodine contamination. This project is a
collaboration between Howard University and Alabama A&amp;M University
researchers and students (both undergraduate and graduate), and scientists at
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory. Outreach activities in association with
this project include presentations on environmental science and research
techniques, as well as tours of research labs for students at the Howard
University Middle School for Mathematics and Science. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
assessing the activities of bacterial communities in biogeochemical cycling of
iodine this project will: 1) use functional genomics and metagenomics approaches
to identify bacterial genes that contribute to the iodine redox cycle,
iodination of organic compounds and accumulation of iodine and 2) develop and
characterize re-engineered ecosystems derived from multispecies biofilm-based in
vitro models for intracommunity interactions to investigate the activities of
these bacteria in enriched communities, in isolation and in engineered
communities. The results of this project will reveal the diversity of
terrestrial bacteria that contribute in a variety of ways to global cycling of
iodine and the underlying mechanisms, including microbe-microbe interactions
and, potentially, previously uncharacterized biochemical pathways that drive
these processes. This study represents the first multi-target, molecular and
culture-based investigation of iodine cycling at both single species and
multispecies levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.