* 1832178
* LTER: Georgia Coastal Ecosystems - IV
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2025
* Steven Pennings, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 01/31/2025
* USD 5,968,377.00

The Georgia Coastal Ecosystems (GCE) Long Term Ecological Research (LTER)
program, based at the University of Georgia Marine Institute on Sapelo Island,
Georgia, was established in 2000 to study long-term change in coastal
ecosystems. Estuaries (places where salt water from the ocean mixes with fresh
water from the land) and their adjacent marshes provide food and refuge for
fish, shellfish and birds; protect the shoreline from storms; help to keep the
water clean; and store carbon. The GCE LTER researchers study marshes and
estuaries to understand how these ecosystems function, to track how they change
over time, and to predict how they might be affected by future changes in
climate and human activities. They accomplish this by tracking the major factors
that can cause long-term change in coastal areas (e.g. sea level, rainfall,
upstream development), and measuring the effects of these factors on the study
site. They also conduct focused studies to assess how key marsh habitats will
respond to major changes expected in the future, including large-scale
experiments to evaluate the effects of a) increases in the salinity of the water
that floods freshwater marshes (mimicking drought and/or sea level rise), b)
changes in water runoff from land into the upland marsh border (mimicking
drought or upland development), and c) exclusion of larger organisms in the salt
marsh (mimicking long-term declines in predators). During this award they will
initiate additional studies to systematically evaluate how coastal wetlands
respond to disturbances. Disturbances, or disruptions in the environment, are
particularly important to understand in the context of long-term background
changes such as increasing sea level, and GCE researchers are working to assess
the cumulative effects of multiple disturbances on the landscape. The GCE
education and outreach program works to share an understanding of coastal
ecosystems with teachers and students, coastal managers, citizen scientist and
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GCE-LTER project has four goals. 1)
Track environmental and human drivers that can cause perturbations in our focal
ecosystems. This will be accomplished this through continuing long-term
measurements of climate, water chemistry, oceanic exchange, and human activities
on the landscape. 2) Describe temporal and spatial variability in physical,
chemical, geological and biological characteristics of the study system (coastal
wetland complexes) and how they respond to external drivers. This will be
accomplished through field monitoring in combination with remote sensing and
modeling. 3) Characterize the ecological responses of intertidal marshes to
disturbance. This will be accomplished by ongoing monitoring and experimental
work to evaluate system responses to major perturbations in three key marsh
habitats (changes in inundation and predator exclusion in Spartina-dominated
salt marshes; increases in salinity in fresh marshes; changes in runoff in high
marshes), by implementing standardized experimental disturbances along salinity
and elevation gradients, and by tracking responses to natural disturbances. 4)
Evaluate ecosystem properties at the landscape level (habitat distribution, net
and gross primary production, C budgets) and assess the cumulative effects of
disturbance on these properties. The project will also develop relationships
between drivers and response variables, which can be used to predict the effects
of future changes. This will be accomplished through a combination of data
synthesis, remote sensing and modeling. The GCE "Schoolyard" program provides
K-12 teachers with research experience that they use to develop classroom
activities. The GCE will distribute a popular children's book (now in its second
edition) with accompanying lesson plans, and will produce a comic book with
associated educational content. They will promote two citizen science web
applications focused on the salt marsh. The GCE will provide research
opportunities through internships for a diverse group of undergraduates, and
will run web-based courses that provide interdisciplinary training for graduate
students. The GCE will partner with the Georgia Coastal Research Council to
exchange information with managers and promote science-based management of
coastal resources. GCE data, reports and other information is broadly available
on the GCE website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.