* 1832813
* RII Track-4 Biomass Burning Aerosols in the U.S. Southwest: Hygroscopic Properties from Emissions to Aging
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Christian Carrico, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 09/30/2022
* USD 196,830.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Wildland fire is an increasing global issue
and particularly urgent in the western U.S. Due in part to continued increasing
temperatures and drought in the nation, the average U.S. acreage burned in
wildfires has increased by approximately a factor of 2 since the year 2000 in
comparison with the time range of 1960-2000. Beyond tragic loss of life and
property associated with extreme events of the past two decades, wildfire trends
also prompt growing concerns with health impacts from biomass smoke. Notably,
the high concentration of particulate matter, also known as aerosols is of
particular concern for human health effects, atmospheric visibility impacts, and
the planetary radiation budget. Smoke aerosols are highly diverse in terms of
their size, chemical composition, shape and optical properties. This research
examines these properties in laboratory combustion experiments using relevant
fuels as well as ambient measurements of smoke aerosols. A particular focus is
how these particles interact with atmospheric relative humidity, which changes
these optical properties. In the end, parameters measured here are important to
understanding the magnitude and extent of smoke impacts; these are also key
inputs needed in computer models that predict smoke impacts on air quality and
the climate system. The study under this fellowship will allow unparalleled
opportunities for the career advancement of the PI and a
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Biomass burning
aerosols increasingly degrade global air quality and remain poorly constrained
with respect to climate effects. The Southwestern U.S. lacks detailed
measurements of fundamental smoke properties for relevant fuels, for both
endemic and invasive species. This project addresses these gaps with laboratory
experiments on biomass burning emissions with a focus on aerosol water uptake,
or hygroscopicity. The research focuses on laboratory aerosol measurements of
biomass smoke?from emission to aging exploring the dynamics between aerosol
hygroscopicity, optical properties, and chemical composition. Specific goals of
this research are: (1) Explore the connection of aerosol hygroscopicity to fuels
and soils, (2) Refine a new technique for measuring humidity dependence of
aerosol light extinction using the Cavity Attenuated Phase Shift-Single
Scattering Albedo (CAPS-SSA) method, (3) Use other advanced aerosol measurement
techniques to describe a framework that drives smoke aerosol properties. An
array of techniques will be employed to provide unique insights to biomass smoke
microphysical properties. These include several contributed by New Mexico Tech
(controlled RH nephelometry, multi-wavelength nephelometry, and a photoacoustic
extinctiometer) that will be combined with resources at Los Alamos National Lab
(LANL). The latter includes photoacoustic spectrometry, particle size
distribution methods, and advanced aerosol techniques such as aerosol mass
spectrometry and a photochemical aging reactor. A main collaborative task is the
development of a new instrument, a humidified CAPS-SSA. In conjunction with
traditional humidity controlled nephelometry, this will allow probing of the RH
dependence of light absorption and SSA. The latter determines whether aerosols
cause a net cooling or warming impact. This study also includes analysis of
plants and soils to determine key drivers of hygroscopicity. Ultimately, the
results enable development of a predictive framework of key aerosol properties
from smoke, fuel, and soils composition, combustion properties and aging.
Wildfire trends as well as the Southwest U.S. region's changing forest
ecosystems, a hydrological connection, and scarce data in this region make this
an important topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.