* 1832725
* Workshop on Ecology and Evolution of Infectious Disases; University of California, Berkeley; June, 26-30, 2018
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Wayne Getz, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 99,972.00

This award will support a workshop on Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution of
Infectious Diseases at the University of California, Berkeley, USA. The workshop
has two objectives. The first objective is to review recent progress in ecology
and infectious disease research and identify key gaps in data, information, and
knowledge. The second objective is to identify research priority areas and
discuss possible mechanisms for joint, international cooperation on research and
education activities in ecology and infectious disease research. This is
important since infectious diseases do not recognize international borders. The
emergence and re-emergence of human, animal and plant infectious diseases around
the world have been a major concern for various economic sectors (e.g., crop
production, livestock production, forestry), biodiversity, and public health and
security. Broader impacts from the workshop include publishing a paper on the
current status, gaps, and research priorities in ecology and evolution of
infectious diseases, training opportunities for US faculty and students, and
network building opportunities for researchers and institutions from the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of large-scale epidemics of infection diseases
(e.g., H5N1, H7N9, Ebola and Zika) in the past two decades have resulted in
substantial losses of human life, as well as in increased economic burdens.
Researchers who have been at the forefront of research, education, surveillance,
control and prevention of many infectious diseases, will be brought together for
this workshop to communicate and synthesize current knowledge of epidemiology,
ecology and evolution of infectious diseases. By identifying and assessing major
gaps in data, information and knowledge in the EEID, this workshop is going to
contribute to the global community's effort and advance our ability and skills
in predicting and mapping hot-spots, hot-moments, emergence, spread, and
persistence of infectious diseases in the near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.