* 1832788
* A Planning Grant to Support Intergenerational Mentoring Among African American Women in the Engineering Academy
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Stephanie Adams, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 01/31/2020
* USD 38,515.00

Engineering affects the health and vitality of a nation unlike any other
profession, and the future of engineering and the global competitiveness of the
U.S. is inextricably connected to broadening the participation of
underrepresented groups at all highest levels of society. African American women
are among the least represented among engineering faculty, and a demographic
that faces unique challenges that affect their retention in the academy. The
outcomes of this project will advance our understanding of the inhibitors and
promotors of success among African American women among the engineering faculty
across all ranks. Funding from this project will be used to host a series of
activities for African American women, engineering faculty, some of which
include: a half-day workshop held in conjunction with the 2019 annual meeting of
the American Society of Engineering Education (ASEE); a research study to
validate and elucidate the current literature on the challenges, obstacles and
facilitators of success in light of those that African American women,
engineering faculty face on a daily basis; and a proposal for a subsequent two-
day workshop. The workshop will provide an opportunity for one of the most
underrepresented populations of engineering faculty to come together in a safe
space to: discuss common challenges they experience; reflect and brainstorm
strategies to aid in their success; launch a national network among African
American women faculty to encourage and support their advancement in the academy
and into national engineering leadership positions; and develop a mentoring
network among colleagues with similar personal experiences and interests. The
formation of a national network will provide a context of mentoring, role
modeling, and other forms of psychosocial support that contribute to retention
of underrepresented engineering faculty?something that is necessary for building
the diverse technical workforce that maintains our global competitiveness and
national prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadening participation of
underrepresented groups in engineering across higher education is a national
priority, and the success of African American women faculty in engineering
programs is essential in making progress in this area of interest. While
existing literature is replete with the unique challenges to retention that this
demographic faces across academic ranks, scholarship on intergenerational
mentoring provides a basis for this proposed workshop that focuses on issues of
retention and success among African American women engineering faculty across
academic ranks. Using a convergent parallel mixed methods research design, this
study will use qualitative and quantitative evidence to fully understand
individual factors, environmental factors, institutional practices, procedures,
and policies may adversely affect the persistence of African American women,
engineering faculty. As a result of this project, workshop and subsequent
research we will be armed with the necessary information to develop a consortium
for African American women faculty in engineering, and a blueprint for creating
an education research agenda focused on broadening participation and ensuring
successful advancement of African American women faculty in engineering. This
study will serve as the basis for a larger follow-up study. The insights from
this study will advance multiple bodies of work
simultaneously.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.