* 1832110
* Excellence in Research: Developing a Robust, Distributed, and Automated Sensing and Control System for Smart Agriculture
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Abolghasem Shahbazi, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 800,278.00

To accommodate rapidly growing food demands and increase the quality and
quantity of agricultural production, it is necessary to improve farming
management practices and technological developments in agricultural fields. This
project will synergize expertise in Control, Robotics, Remote Sensing, and
Agricultural Engineering to develop new approaches for automated monitoring of
smart agricultural systems as an important class of cyber-physical systems
(CPSs). This award supports fundamental research to develop innovative
techniques for smart agricultural systems by employing a distributed airborne
networked sensor system for a team of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) to survey
a farm. Unlike traditional crop management methods that use ground operators or
vehicles for monitoring farms, the proposed approach for airborne monitoring of
agricultural fields minimizes deployment of on-the-ground operations, avoiding
damaging crops on healthy parts of the farms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this project are (1) developing a distributed airborne monitoring
system for surveying farms to detect possible zones of crop damage or nutrition
deficiency, and (2) implementing and demonstrating the developed methods for
coordination of UAVs for agricultural applications over the North Carolina
Agricultural and Technical State University (NC A&amp;T) farm. To achieve these
objectives, an optimal planning technique will be developed for coordinating
UAVs while incorporating their physical constraints and safety considerations,
ensuring a complete survey of the farm and respecting sensing requirements. An
automated decision-making technique will be developed to process the collected
imagery information and detect the problem spots in the farm and their size and
severity. Integrated with the proposed research is an innovative education and
outreach plan that will engage a diverse range of students, farmers, and local
community members in STEM-relevant activities and agritechnological aspects of
this project to increase public awareness on using new technologies for further
development of precision agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.