* 1832831
* Summer 2018 Causal Inference Workshops
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Alexander Volfovsky, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 04/30/2019
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides partial support for new researchers to attend two
conferences on causal inference in summer 2018: The Atlantic Causal Inference
Conference (ACIC) held in Pittsburgh, PA on May 22-23, 2018 and the Causal
Workshop at the Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI) held
in Monterey, CA on August 6-10, 2018. Both conferences serve as flagship
gatherings of leaders in reasoning about causes of observed effects. In recent
years, causal inference has seen important advances, especially through a
dramatic expansion in its theoretical and practical domains. Machine learning
methods have focused on ultra-high-dimensional models and scalable stochastic
algorithms, whereas more classical causal inference has been guiding policy in
complex domains involving economics, social and health sciences, and business.
Through such advances, a powerful cross-pollination has emerged as a new set of
methodologies promising to deliver more robust data analysis than each field
could individually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary purpose of the two
conferences is to advance the study of causal inference and to bridge gaps
between different communities within causal inference, by promoting interaction
and networking among new researchers. At both conferences, the supported
participants will present their research via invited and contributed talks or
via poster presentations. Since the conferences draw on causal inference
communities in statistics, biostatistics, computer science, and other
disciplines, these conferences present a great opportunity for new researchers
to see the breadth of opportunities for research and collaboration in this area.
More information is available at the conference web
sites:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ACIC: https://www.cmu.edu/acic2018/
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UAI:
https://sites.google.com/view/causaluai2018&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.