* 1832904
* EAGER: CHS: Examining Self-Harm and Suicide Contagion Risks of Viral Social Media Challenges on Youth and Young Adults
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Kapil Chalil Madathil, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 03/31/2021
* USD 58,053.00

This project will study potentially harmful social media challenges, in which
participants record themselves engaging in specific activities, share the
experience in social networks, and encourage others to participate. Some
challenges have positive effects. For example, the ALS Ice Bucket challenge
involved people dumping a bucket of ice water over their heads to raise
awareness of and funding for Lou Gehrig's disease. Others, however, encourage
people to engage in behaviors that risk physical or psychological harm. For
example, the Cinnamon challenge involves eating a spoonful of cinnamon, which
can cause severe respiratory distress, while the Blue Whale challenge encourages
a series of increasingly self-harmful behaviors culminating in suicide. Although
there is much folklore and hearsay around such harmful challenges, actual
studies and data about them are sparse. To address this, the project team will
conduct a series of interview studies along with quantitative analysis of social
network data around the Cinnamon and Blue Whale challenges. Analyses will
examine both individual-level and message-level factors that lead people to
participate in and spread these challenges. The results will inform the
development of preventative measures to mitigate the spread of harmful viral
Internet challenges. Findings will also provide a better understanding of how to
protect vulnerable individuals who are exposed to the challenges from both the
direct potential risks of participating and indirect potential risks (e.g.,
through the normalization of self-harm and peer pressure to engage in
it).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address a number of specific research
questions, including: 1) better assessing the extent to which viral social media
challenges have caused real harm and pose a public health risk to social media
users, and 2) identifying characteristics of both the messages containing these
challenges and the individuals receiving and spreading them that predict risk,
adoption, and spread of the challenges. The work is organized into two main
thrusts. In the first, the team will conduct semi-structured, retrospective
interviews with approximately 30 adolescent and young adult social media users
(ages 13-25) and/or their families, who report being harmed or committing self-
harm after engaging in social media challenges prevalent at the time of the
studies. The questions will be structured to assess factors known to contribute
to self-harm contagion effects (such as graphic depiction of the challenge, peer
pressure, and support for self-harmful activities), as well as to probe people's
own motivations and decision-making around participating in such challenges. The
second main thrust involves larger-scale quantitative analysis of digital trace
data about self-harmful challenges from five popular social media sites. This
portion of the study will first include constructing and cleaning the dataset
(both in terms of protecting personal information and capturing data relevant to
the challenges). Next, the researchers will employ qualitative coding of how the
challenge messages deviate from the Suicide Prevention Resource Center's
evidence-based safe messaging guidelines. These analyses are intended to
identify strategies that authors use to spread the challenges as well as the
potential risk each poses. Finally, computational modeling will relate message
characteristics to measures of message reach such as likes, views, and shares.
Together, these research activities will provide much-needed empirical evidence
of real-world social media behavior and individual decision-making around these
harmful challenges. The data can be used to inform theory development regarding
the spread of viral challenges, as well as interventions to mitigate their
future harms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.