* 1832967
* RII-Track 4: Investigation into Structure-Magnetism Correlations in 4d/5d Transition Metal Halides using Combined X-ray and Neutron Diffraction Techniques
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Weiwei Xie, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2020
* USD 175,230.00

Non-Technical description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum materials, in which the
extraordinary effects of quantum mechanics can induce unique and unexpected
behaviors, are the key to revolutionizing the future energy and information
technologies. This proposal aims to establish a strong research program in
inorganic materials at Louisiana State University (LSU) with the goal of
addressing challenging issues to discover new quantum materials with exotic
physical properties. By applying a fundamental understanding of the
relationships among crystal structures, physical properties, and chemical
bonding, we will synthesize and characterize novel quantum materials with the
goal of understanding how magnetic properties are related to their chemical
composition and atomic structure. This fellowship will provide a unique
opportunity for the PI to learn neutron diffraction techniques at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory (ORNL). This will allow for a new direction in materials
research at LSU with a focus on finding new quantum materials from a chemistry
perspective and facilitating interdisciplinary study of quantum materials in
physics and chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, the importance of spin-orbit coupling
(SOC) to generate the electronic ground state in 4d/5d-based compounds have
emerged and many novel routes to a variety of unconventional physical states
have been revealed. For example, like quantum materials, like quantum spin
liquids, Weyl semimetals, and axion insulators, which have strong spin-orbit
coupling may have applications in data storage and memory, electronics, and
quantum computing. This project aims to design, synthesize, and characterize
molecule-based inorganic 4d/5d transition metals halides with the goal of
understanding how magnetic properties are related to their chemical composition
and atomic structure, and of facilitating technological applications over time.
Currently, major experimental and theoretical efforts have been solely
undertaken to search for novel spin-orbit coupling systems in various d5 systems
where S=1/2. We will investigate structure-magnetism interactions and understand
the intrinsic interplay of electronic, spin, and orbital degrees of freedom
arising from a complex balance of electron-electron correlations (U), spin-orbit
coupling (SOC), and crystal-field theory (CFT). This effort will be achieved by
combining experimental results, chemical bonding and molecular orbit diagrams to
provide valuable input to both theory and experimentation in the study of
transition metal halides and oxides with various d electronic configurations.
The collaborative work among scientists at Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL)
and LSU in materials science will further support the proposed program. The
outcome, of this research could open a route into an uncharted world of quantum
magnetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.