* 1832141
* Excellence in Research: Navigating the Double Bind: Assessing the Development and Contribution of Identity Shifting to the Recruitment &amp; Retention of Black Women in STEM Educat
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Naomi Hall-Byers, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 493,708.00

Researchers at Spelman College and Winston Salem State University propose to
explore identity shifting among Black women from a psychological perspective.
Prior research has shown that identity shifting is a coping strategy that Black
women use to mitigate the negative experiences of discrimination, and most of
these studies have used a quantitative approach or a communication perspective.
Thus, the study will expand the psychological literature on identity shifting to
focus on Black women in STEM education. The proposed project involves two sets
of studies, and the researchers will use a survey method approach to examine
identity shifting. Two studies in Set 1 will test the validity and reliability
of a new tool for measuring identity shifting among Black women undergraduate
and graduate STEM students. Set II will conduct a daily diary study based on the
results of Set I to explore the experiences of discrimination and identity
shifting. The research is expected to inform interventions to increase and
broaden participation of Black women in STEM education and the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific study objectives are to (1)
validate a measurement of identity shifting for Black women undergraduate and
graduate STEM students and (2) explore the daily experiences in graduate school
of discrimination and identity shifting among Black women STEM students. The
primary theoretical frameworks utilized in the research include Black feminist
thought and phenomenological variant of ecological systems theory (PVES). This
framework posits that a Black woman?s identity is shaped by her experiences and
that she simultaneously aspires to make sense of her identities.
Intersectionality serves as a basis for the present study. A survey design will
be used to answer the following research questions: (1) How relevant, reliable,
and valid is the new Identity Shifting Scale for Black women? (2) Can the
Identity Shifting for Black Women Scale provide adequate sub-scales resulting
from factor analysis testing? (3) When compared with the identity management,
stigma consciousness, gendered racism, acculturation, and stereotype
expectations and concerns, does the Identity Shifting Scale for Black Women have
convergent validity (how well the scale relates to other related measures)? How
does discrimination, interpersonal contact anxiety, positive interactions, and
support influence identity shifting processes among Black women STEM graduate
students? Through the survey design approach, Black women students' experiences
of identity shifting will be captured. The results can be used to inform
programmatic decisions in graduate programs and facilitate interventions that
promote healthy identity development among Black women in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.