* 1833143
* EAGER: A New Class of Room Temperature THz Detectors and Spectrometers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Mahmoud Fallahi, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 191,988.00

Terahertz radiations are gaining significant interest in a wide range of
applications including communication, medical diagnostic, defense and non-
invasive identification of chemicals and biological compounds. One of the unique
properties of terahertz radiation is the ability to pass through a range of
materials, thus making it possible to "see through" many packaging materials
such as paper, plastics, and wood. Despite significant progress in the field,
terahertz detectors still have major limitations in speed, detection frequencies
and operating temperature. The aim of this EAGER proposal is to develop a novel,
potentially disruptive method through nonlinear frequency conversion for the
detection of far-infrared and terahertz radiations. The research will provide
theoretical and experimental foundations for design and development of high-
speed, room temperature integrated terahertz receivers with significant societal
impact. The broader impact of the research focuses on the education and training
of graduate and undergraduate students in both theoretical and experimental
areas of optoelectronic research. The research will broaden participation of
women and underrepresented minorities through internship and summer REU
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terahertz waves, with a frequency range of
0.1/10 THz are nonionizing radiations with significant advantage in non-invasive
detection and identification. The aim of this EAGER research is to create a
fundamental understanding of a novel, potentially disruptive approach for the
detection of far-IR and THz radiation over a broad spectral range. The design is
based on cavity-enhanced unbalanced frequency mixing of the terahertz signal
with a single-mode laser pump, nonlinear frequency conversion via sum frequency
generation through a periodically-poled lithium niobate (PPLN) nonlinear
crystal. The result is the generation of a new output signal in the optical
frequency having the signature of the terahertz radiation that will be
efficiently detected using widely available high speed, low-noise silicon or
InGaAs PIN detectors. The intellectual merits of this high-risk high-reward
exploratory research is the development of a new class of efficient, CMOS-
compatible receivers and spectrometers in the hard-to-detect frequencies. The
research effort will include detailed modeling combined with experimental
validation of frequency and power conversion as well as sensitivity and noise
evaluation. The findings provide new knowledge and findings at the intersection
of electronics, optics and photonics, and hybrid
integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.