* 1833455
* Meeting: Weaving the Future of Animal Behavior; (2018-2021); Phoenix, AZ
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jennifer Fewell, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 188,364.00

The future of Animal Behavior research depends on the next generation of
scientists and leaders. This project is to jump-start a new initiative that
advances animal behavior science by supporting early-career investigators and
promoting their science. At the core of the initiative is a new series of
professional-development workshops for early-career scientists to be held
annually as part of the Animal Behavior Society (ABS) meetings. In addition, a
new committee of established investigators will promote early-career scientists
by nominating workshop participants for awards and organizing symposia that
highlight their research at international conferences. The committee will also
forge stronger connections between the Animal Behavior Society and other
professional societies, such as the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology, by organizing similar symposia and workshops at their annual meetings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project begins with a symposium for 35 early-career
scientists in May 2019, followed by the formation of peer-mentoring circles that
meet biweekly via conference calls to support these researchers throughout the
subsequent year. Professionals who specialize on career development of women and
minority scientists will organize this initial symposium, and will
simultaneously train the members of the new committee to run similar workshop
and peer-mentoring circles at the 2019 and 2020 ABS meetings. The new committee
will also propose symposia that highlight the research of workshop participants
at the 2020 ABS and 2021 Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB)
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.