* 1833323
* EAGER: III-Nitride Solar Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Nadia Elmasry, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 05/31/2022
* USD 168,030.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;There are currently several approaches to improve the
cost of photovoltaic (PV) devices in terms of dollars per watt ($/W). Silicon
solar cells, the most common device structures, are approaching theoretical
limits of both performance and efficiency. The most promising approach to drive
down the cost of solar energy is the use of multi-junction solar cells (MJSCs)
due to their efficient use of the solar spectrum. Solar cells made from indium
gallium nitride (InGaN) can have a huge impact on the technology and
understanding of the basic properties of photovoltaic devices. The portion of
the solar spectrum that an InGaN alloy absorbs can be tuned by varying the
relative fraction of indium and gallium. The development of InGaN to a larger
range of compositions will lead to wider applications of III-Nitrides as solar
cells. The ability to use one material system made of very thin InGaN layers,
grown on cheap sapphire substrates for the integrations of MJSCs will reduce the
cell manufacturing cost. By improving the overall MJSC efficiency and
incorporating them into solar panel production, the cost per watt of individual
panels, and thus the total system cost will be reduced. The aim of this EAGER
project is to explore and develop In(x)Ga(1-x)N-based solar cell structures that
absorb a larger portion of the solar spectrum with efficiency that is comparable
to the current III-V compound cells. Both single and multi-junction solar cells
will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project
focuses on the development of solar cells based on InGaN material system to
achieve high efficiency III-Nitrides solar cells, single junction and multi-
junction solar cells. The aim is to develop InxGa1-xN-based solar cells that
absorb a larger portion of the solar spectrum with efficiency that is comparable
to the current III-V compound structures. Both single and multi-junction solar
cells will be explored and developed. The project will investigate methods to
achieve this goal including: 1. Utilizing InxGa1-xN films with high In-content,
x up to 45%. 2. Develop solar cells with several hundred nanometers of InxGa1-xN
to fully absorb the incident radiation. The research will train one graduate
student at North Carolina State University to acquire interdisciplinary research
experience and become an expert in the field of alternative energy and solar
cell technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.