* 1833781
* Bridging the Natural Sciences and Liberal Arts to Increase Retention, Graduation, and Career Preparedness
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Aubrey Cahoon, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 06/30/2024
* USD 650,000.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need in the Department of Natural
Sciences at The University of Virginia's College at Wise (UVa-Wise). Throughout
its five years, this project will fund 25 scholarships for students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry, and
Environmental Sciences. The need for a well-educated STEM workforce guides the
aims of the project to recruit and support two cohorts of S-STEM Scholars with a
novel set of seminar courses focused on first year and transfer student success,
chemistry, and writing in the natural sciences. The project aims to increase
participation of first-generation students, which comprise half of the students
at UVa-Wise, many of whom are from Wise County, VA where less than 15% of adults
aged 25 and above have a four-year degree. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to generate knowledge about best practices for increasing retention and
graduation rates, and preparing students for STEM graduate programs or careers.
To achieve these aims, the project will develop, implement, and evaluate the
impact of three seminar courses. The General Chemistry Recitation Seminar will
evaluate if participating Scholars have higher scores on national exams and
retention rates in Chemistry courses compared to a control. The Seminar in
Writing in the Natural Sciences is a new writing-intensive course that will be
evaluated to determine if students have improved scientific writing skills and
increased preparation for the writing demands of a future scientist. The
Research Experience Seminar in Environmental Genomics or Environmental Chemistry
will evaluate if research with faculty mentors and training in research-grade
instrumentation results in further pursuit of independent research, and
continuation into STEM graduate studies and careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.