* 1833505
* RAPID:   Collaborative Research:  Testing Near-term Ecological Forecasting Throughout Emerging Extreme Drought
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Neil Cobb, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 04/30/2019
* USD 37,830.00

Tree die-off in response to drought, warmer temperatures, and pests and
pathogens is occurring globally. These die-off events have altered forest and
woodland ecosystems. This includes changes in water and energy fluxes and losses
in ecosystem services in many areas. The ability to predict how forests will
respond to drought is key for applying rapid land management actions to mitigate
undesired outcomes. One goal of this research is to improve mortality
predictions for pi?on pine (Pinus edulis) in response to drought. This will be
achieved through a watering experiment and a regional survey during an emerging
snow drought in the US Southwest. Multiple predictions of pi?on mortality in
response to drought have already been developed. Another goal of this research
is to use near-term ecological forecasting to test these different predictions.
Throughout the drought, forecasts of the likelihood of tree mortality based on
these different predictions will be done at intervals of 1 week to 1 year. This
project will engage the public, land managers, and scientists through a website
that is updated weekly with tree mortality forecasts. This project will develop
and implement a teaching module to enhance undergraduate curricula and provide
education training for a postdoctoral researcher. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
emerging frontier of ecosystem science in the face of environmental change is to
predict not just ecological responses to trends but to predict extreme
ecological events to extreme climate events. Among the most important and
extensive of such events is tree die-off in response to drought, warming and
associated pests and pathogens. Although much research has focused simply on
what exceeds thresholds for tree mortality, yielding numerous potential
predictive relationships, none of these relationships have been tested with
near-term ecological forecasting. Further, field experiments that have attempted
to impose drought largely have been ineffective at improving predictions or
testing near-term forecasts due to the challenges of effectively mimicking a
severe drought or simultaneous mortality of treated and controls plots. There is
thus a critical need for an experiment that takes advantage of a developing
extreme drought to test multiple alternate hypotheses in a near-term ecological
forecasting context. This project will rapidly implement experimental and
monitoring measurements concurrent with the severe snow drought emerging across
the southwestern US to test multiple predictions of tree mortality for pi?on
pine (Pinus edulis), the most intensively studied tree species for drought-
induced mortality. Near-term ecological forecasting will be updated at intervals
of 1 week to 1 year throughout the drought, based on the frequency of available
input data. Through improved mortality predictions and advancements in near-term
ecological forecasting that can encompass extreme ecological events, this
research will be a critical step towards developing forecasts that provide the
information needed for rapid land management actions and account for longer-term
implications such as carbon management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.