* 1833056
* RII Track-4: Predicting Beaver Colonization of the Arctic and Creation of Tundra Stream Oases
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Kenneth Tape, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 03/31/2021
* USD 200,382.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;The arctic tundra biome has been fluctuating in response
to climate change during the last century. Wildlife, such as moose, snowshoe
hares, and now beavers, have exploited the increase in their shrub habitat by
extending their range from the boreal forest into the arctic tundra. Inundation
from beaver ponds causes permafrost thaw, potentially altering streams and
surrounding ecosystems more rapidly than climate change alone. To this end,
satellite imagery from the last half-century will be used to detect the
formation of beaver ponds and their subsequent impacts to the tundra
environment. This project also uses satellite imagery to map the current habitat
of beavers, moose, and snowshoe hares in the arctic tundra. This will be
combined with models of future arctic climate and tundra vegetation to predict
the future distribution of beavers and their impacts, as well as moose and
snowshoe hares. Dr. Tape and a postdoctoral researcher will spend six months
working on this project at Northern Arizona University with Dr. Scott Goetz and
Dr. Logan Berner, who are experts in satellite image analysis. This is a
valuable opportunity for Dr. Tape to work alongside these scientists and to
develop useful spatial analysis tools to advance his career. Dr. Tape and his
post-doctoral researcher will return to the University of Alaska Fairbanks with
newfound expertise to bolster their careers and the research capacity in Alaska.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;Existing vegetation,
permafrost, and freshwater model projections understandably do not include
beavers, because they are not yet recognized as part of the arctic tundra
environment. Given the profound impacts of beavers in other ecosystems, the
arrival of beavers and their dramatic modifications to the tundra environment
may signal a benchmark in the trajectory of arctic riparian and freshwater
ecosystems that has gone unnoticed. This project uses a novel method involving
remote sensing of beaver pond formation. The scientific goals of the proposed
work are: (1) to use remote sensing to quantify beaver shrub habitat
requirements at known beaver sites prior to their colonization using Landsat
vegetation indices; (2) to identify potential beaver habitat across the
uncolonized North Slope of Alaska by combining shrub habitat requirements for
beavers and regional Landsat imagery; (3) to evaluate impacts of beaver
colonization on vegetation and surface water using satellite imagery; and (4) to
map future moose and snowshoe hare habitat on the North Slope of Alaska by
combining known shrub habitat requirements and regional Landsat imagery. The
project offers an exciting opportunity for a postdoctoral researcher and Dr.
Tape to develop their tools for spatial analysis of time series satellite
imagery with oversight from colleagues Dr. Scott Goetz and Dr. Logan Berner at
Northern Arizona University. Dr. Tape and his postdoctoral researcher will
return to the University of Alaska Fairbanks, increasing the visibility,
perception, and research capacity in Alaska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.