* 1833839
* Math Acceleration for STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Gwen Gilinger, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 12/31/2023
* USD 998,375.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program will support the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at the Community College of
Baltimore County (CCBC) Essex and Catonsville campuses. This project aims to
award a total of 250 semester-long scholarships, to at least 50 academically
talented STEM undergraduates with financial need. The objectives are to: a)
recruit, enroll, graduate and/or transfer increased numbers of students in
targeted STEM associate degree programs; (b) develop a community of students and
faculty with related interests, and create a support system that will encourage
social and academic interaction through teambuilding exercises, study groups,
and research projects; and (c) strengthen ties with local industry and four-year
institutions to ease transfer from CCBC students into the workplace and/or
further education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to generate new
knowledge about the role of math acceleration on associate degree completion,
transfer, and baccalaureate degree attainment of STEM students. It is guided by
scholarly literature about student success that emphasizes the role of a faculty
mentor to provide academic and professional advising for each awardee. The
targeted degree programs include Math, Biology, Chemistry, Environmental
Science, Geospatial Applications, Engineering and Computer Science. Scholar
selection criteria and faculty mentors in these programs have been identified,
along with plans for the successful transfer of awardees to four-year
institutions or the workplace. Awardees will work with the Growth Sector firm to
secure an optional internship provided by business, government, or academic
research partners. A half-time Student Support Specialist will provide wrap-
around services including referral to other resources. Recruitment efforts focus
on high school students in Baltimore County Public Schools and currently
enrolled CCBC students in their mathematics and introductory science courses.
The project encourages awardees to transfer to a four-year institution for a
baccalaureate degree in one of the identified fields by designating up to 20
percent of the scholarship funds to follow students who have earned an associate
degree or 45 credits from CCBC when they transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.