* 1833581
* EAGER: Magnonic logic devices with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Alexander Kozhanov, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2020
* USD 80,000.00

Current development of novel computing devices based on magnetic materials is
aimed at improving efficiency and adding new functionalities to existing
semiconductor based logic devices. One of the promising candidates, magnonic
logic device, utilizes waves of magnetization in nano-structured magnetic
materials to transfer and process information, and perform logic operations.
Interaction between two or more waves in junctions of wave carrying magnetic
wires is used to perform logic operations. Building such device requires the
ability to guide waves in magnetic wires of various shapes as well as forming
magnetic wire junctions. Any deviation of a magnetic wire shape from a straight
wire results in unwanted wave reflection and scattering that significantly
limits capabilities of magnonic logic devices. The proposed project will perform
a feasibility study of using novel magnetic materials that have potential to
overcome such limitations. It is proposed to evaluate feasibility of using
ultra-thin magnetic films with preferred out-of-plane magnetization. These
materials should allow for building magnonic logic devices with unrestricted
geometries of magnetic information-carrying busses and logic junctions. The
proposed research will have a broader impact in the field of microwave
electronics and magnetic memory technology. In addition, the proposed research
will be a unique training ground for future physicists and engineers. Georgia
State University is the minority serving institution which graduates the largest
number of minority students (primarily African-American) than any other public
or private school in the country. This program will facilitate graduate and
undergraduate student education in the areas of magnetism, optics and
nanotechnology and provide a wide variety experimental skills among which
nanofabrication will have most broad applications
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on the feasibility
study of the magnonic systems based on ferromagnetic materials with
perpendicular magnetic anisotropy. Perpendicular magnetic anisotropy will ensure
the out-of-plane magnetization of structures resulting in support of isotropic
forward volume magnetostatic spin wave modes. The project aims at investigating
forward volume magnetostatic spin wave propagation in structured ferromagnetic
films with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and evaluating feasibility of using
these structures for magnonic logic devices. Multi-layered magnetic materials
exhibiting perpendicular magnetic anisotropy will be used. Spin wave dispersion
in these material systems is not significantly affected by spin waveguide shape
variation. Therefore, propagation of spin waves will not be altered by the mode-
mismatching induced by spin waveguide shape variation. Magnonic logic devices
based on the proposed structures will demonstrate stable operation in absence of
biasing magnetic fields while uniform external magnetic fields can be used to
reconfigure their operation. The proposed project will result in fabrication and
characterization of structured multilayered films with perpendicular magnetic
anisotropy leading to the fundamental understanding of magnetization dynamics in
these systems. That includes assessing losses via ferromagnetic resonance
measurements, and measuring spin wave propagation in variable shape spin
waveguides and spin waveguide junctions. Microwave vector spectroscopy combined
with magneto-optical Kerr microscopy experimental techniques will be
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.