* 1833975
* Support for Academically Talented STEM Scholars at the University of North Dakota
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Xiaodong Zhang, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 04/30/2024
* USD 649,791.00

This project contributes to the national need for a highly-qualified STEM
workforce by helping high-achieving, low-income STEM undergraduates with
demonstrated financial need earn a STEM degree at the University of North
Dakota. Over its five-year duration, this project will provide one- to four-year
scholarships to 31 students pursuing bachelor's degrees engineering, chemistry,
biology, or aviation. By reducing or eliminating unmet educational costs, the
scholarships can enable the Scholars to spend more time on their studies, as
well as engage in experiences such as research projects and internships that are
relevant to their long-term career interests. This project aims to create a
professional development environment that promotes students' academic and
professional success, so that the Scholars graduate with the skills needed to be
successful STEM professionals or to obtain advanced STEM degrees. Consequently,
the Scholars will be immersed in co-curricular training activities to promote
learning and hone problem-solving skills. In addition, scholars will have access
to academic support services and workshops with industry representatives or
experts in career development. Results of project research and evaluation will
contribute to the knowledge base about effective recruitment, retention, and
graduation of undergraduate STEM students in rural
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the priority of North Dakota
and the nation to retain undergraduates in STEM, thus producing scientifically
literate citizens who can contribute to the security, technology development,
and economic health of the state, the region, and the nation. The outcomes of
the project will contribute to the knowledge base about: (1) effective
strategies for recruitment and retention of academically talented students from
low-income and rural backgrounds to a STEM program at a rural four-year
institution; (2) academic and professional development activities that promote
student persistence and retention in STEM disciplines; (3) factors influencing
STEM-related skill development and self-confidence for students from low-income
backgrounds; (4) motivations for this group of students to study STEM; and (5)
factors influencing STEM students' decision to pursue non-STEM careers. Many
low-income students in North Dakota are of Native American descent, and it is
expected that this project will elicit evidence-based strategies for retention
and success of this group of students. In addition, this project has the
potential to broaden participation of rural students and Native Americans in
STEM fields. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.