* 1833904
* Community Research and Cognitive Reframing for a Community Retained in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Sara Goodman, St. John Fisher College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 649,994.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at St. John Fisher College
(SJFC). Throughout its five years, this project will fund thirteen scholarships
for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in biology or chemistry. This
project aims to develop a distinctive model for developing mindfulness and
growth mindset in addition to creating meaningful connections between STEM
students and their communities. Specifically, in partnership with six Rochester-
based organizations, this project will develop SJFC's infrastructure for
integrating mindfulness/mindset training, community engagement, and research
support within and across STEM programs of study. With over 60% of SJFC alumni
employed in the greater Rochester area, this project will strengthen SJFC's
capacity to increase the number of diverse, well-qualified STEM graduates who
can meet workforce needs and contribute to the economic recovery of the Finger
Lakes region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create a supportive
community and deliver targeted programming so that at least 85% of the Scholars
persist beyond the first year and graduate in STEM within five years. The
interventions that will be implemented include mentoring, academic support,
cohort-based activities, learning communities, cognitive reframing, career
exploration, community-based research, and internships. Scholars will be
supported to develop contemplative practices (mindset and mindfulness) that can
increase cognitive capacity and release mental anchors (e.g., fixed mindset;
stress) that negatively impact learning. The project's research will advance
understanding of mindset training, mindfulness pedagogy, and community-based
experiences that are designed to create a supportive internal and external
community for students. Through dissemination, the project will contribute to
the body of research on interventions addressing risk factors for STEM
persistence, including Pell and first-generation status, gateway courses,
undeveloped STEM identity, and a fixed mindset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.