* 1833198
* I-Corps:  A sustainable foam from shrimp shells
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to replace
plastic structural foam from non-sustainable sources with structural foam made
with up-cycled shrimp shell waste. Polymer foams are an important component of
many modern technologies from construction to automotive as well as packaging
and sporting goods. Non-sustainable structural foam is a $350 billion/year
market comprised mainly of polyurethane and polystyrene (styrofoam).
Polyurethane and polystyrene require 500 years to degrade and create 30% of
land-fill waste. It has been predicted that by 2050 there will be more plastic
than fish in the ocean. Natural materials are an attractive alternative for
producing polymer foams, but often they lack the required mechanical properties
or appropriate processing. Our technology transforms the biopolymer, chitin,
contained in seafood waste into foam using a water-based environmentally
friendly process. The resulting natural foam is less costly to produce and
closely matches the properties of polystyrene and polyurethane foams.

This I-Corps project will examine costumer discovery data from potential
customers in various structural foam markets to find the best market fit and
identify the unfulfilled needs for sustainable structural foam. During the
regional I-Corps course, we completed interviews with surfboard shapers,
surfboard manufacturers, professional surfers, and other sustainable industry
experts related to surfboards who have validated the value of having sustainable
and biodegradable foam for use as the core material in surfboard construction.
We plan to further explore other potential industrial applications for our
sustainable and biodegradable foam. We will interview project and business
managers from innovation research departments within industries such as
packaging, transportation, and construction to determine product-market fit for
these applications. The goal being to find the best fit for the technology in
the global polymer foams market.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.