* 1833129
* Developing and Evaluating a Toolkit and Curriculum for Teaching and Learning Data Visualization
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Chaoli Wang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Visualization is an indispensable method for analyzing data across STEM fields.
Although visualization research has advanced for at least thirty years,
visualization education at the undergraduate level has lagged behind.
Visualization textbooks only emerged in the past decade, and few pedagogical
software tools are available to assist the teaching and learning of data
visualization. This project aims to develop a toolkit that will engage college
students in learning visualization concepts and algorithms. This toolkit, called
VisVisual, consists of four tools: VolumeVisual, FlowVisual, GraphVisual, and
TreeVisual. Together, these tools cover scientific visualization (scalar and
vector field visualization) and information visualization (graph and tree
drawing). The modular design will allow instructors to incorporate only relevant
components into their teaching. To support active learning, each tool will
provide instant feedback to students and an auto-grading component will check
for student understanding. Assessment and evaluation data will be gathered to
understand how students use the tools and the impact of the tools on their
learning. This information will guide improvements to VisVisual and the
development of additional visualization tools. It is expected that improving
students' ability to visualize data will increase their interest in STEM and
attract some of them to the scientific field of data science and
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VisVisual will focus on helping students
learn concepts and algorithms in scientific visualization and information
visualization. To promote data visualization education, curriculum materials to
support the use of VisVisual will be developed and openly shared, including
lesson plans for a data visualization course, test questions, datasets, and web-
based tutorials. It is expected that providing the VisVisual software along with
the curriculum materials will increase its use by educators across the world.
The effectiveness of VisVisual will be evaluated by data obtained from a
controlled user study in which students complete assigned tasks and answer
questions related to those tasks. To compare performance differences between
subject groups or parameter settings, the researchers will apply Student's
t-test, analysis of variance, and other statistical analyses. Information about
students (e.g., type of institution; major) will be obtained and multivariate
analysis of variation will be used to determine how these individual factors
affect performance. This information will be used to better understand the role
of VisVisual components on students' understanding of the concepts that they
explore using VisVisual. Planned outreach to the K-12 community will introduce
teachers and students to the principles of visual design and the important role
it plays in data science. VisVisual will be freely available on the project
website, thus enabling wide dissemination. A workshop at a national meeting is
planned, to help computer science faculty learn how to use it in their
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.