* 1833931
* Achievement in STEM through a Program of Immersive Research Experiences and Support
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Christine Engongoro, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Fordham College at Rose Hill
(FCRH). This project will respond to the urgent national need for a talented and
diverse STEM workforce by increasing the persistence and graduation rates of
students who enter college with an interest in STEM. Over the next five years,
this project will directly support 60 to 100 academically-talented FCRH
students. (The number of Scholars that can be supported depends on the level of
the Scholars' financial need.) By completing a robust research plan, this
project should increase understanding about which interventions best support
student success, for whom they work, and under what circumstances are they most
effective. The investigators will share their findings broadly to encourage
others to learn from the results obtained through this research project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enroll five cohorts of 12-20
academically-talented incoming FCRH first-year STEM majors. Students who are
selected will have significant financial need and include individuals from
traditionally under-represented backgrounds in STEM, including women, under-
represented minorities, students with disabilities, students who are the first
in their families to go to college, and students from educationally-
disadvantaged backgrounds. During their first year, these students will be
awarded scholarships of up to $10,000 to reduce their otherwise unmet financial
need. In addition, they will participate in a coordinated offering of three
high-impact practices designed to support their success in STEM: 1) A pre-
enrollment summer academic and career-focused orientation program; 2) A year-
long Introduction to Research course that will engage students in original
research; and 3) A full-time summer research internship. After the first year,
continuing scholarship recipients will engage in a fourth high-impact practice
by serving as peer mentors for the remainder of their undergraduate studies and
attending the program's community-building events. Few, if any, existing studies
have investigated the impact of a multi-phasic, coordinated program on promoting
STEM success. The project team will fill this gap by conducting a well-matched,
quantitative/qualitative longitudinal analysis of attitudes that predispose
students for STEM success, including self-efficacy, self-concept, science
learner identity, and STEM career aspirations. This study will also examine
academic metrics of success, including course grades, overall grade point
average, and progress toward degree. In addition, the study will measure social
belonging to assess the impact of this S-STEM program on students' STEM
identity. By supporting diverse cohorts of students to graduation, this project
will help to strengthen our nation's STEM workforce and, thus, enhance its
competitiveness and preeminence in STEM fields. The knowledge gained from this
project will inform the Fordham community and will be disseminated widely within
the STEM education research community. The results are expected to be
generalizable to other institutions that seek to surmount barriers to
undergraduate student success in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.