* 1833108
* RII Track-4: Advanced Techniques for Assessing Toxicity and Chemical Uptake in Plants in Water Reuse Situations
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Erica Marti, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 09/30/2021
* USD 189,945.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water shortages are becoming more
frequent, and this lack of freshwater is expected to increase due to population
growth and long-term drought. Alternative water supplies such as treated
wastewater or stormwater runoff can help cities meet their drinking water and
agricultural water demands with water that is available locally. However, there
are some challenges associated with using these alternative water supplies. One
is the formation of harmful substances that result from chemical disinfection
(disinfection byproducts or DBPs). A second challenge is the uptake of
chemicals, including DBPs, into the edible portion of plants when alternative
waters are used for agricultural irrigation. The research addresses these two
issues that are at the intersection of food, water, and health. The project will
1) assess new bioassays to measure the toxicity of DBPs in the alternative water
supplies, and 2) investigate a novel use for laser ablation electrospray
ionization mass spectrometry (LAESI-MS) to detect chemicals taken up into plants
that were irrigated with treated wastewater or stormwater runoff. Future
benefits include rapid and comprehensive bioassays to screen the toxicity of
disinfected water and a better understanding of the risks of using alternative
water supplies for agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water shortages are a continual concern, and
this lack of freshwater is expected to increase due to population growth and
long-term drought. Alternative water supplies (i.e., treated wastewater or
stormwater) can help cities meet their drinking water and agricultural water
demands with locally-sourced water. However, using these alternative water
supplies poses some challenges: 1) the formation of toxic and/or carcinogenic
disinfection byproducts (DBPs) and 2) the uptake of chemicals, including DBPs,
into the edible portion of plants. This project addresses these interrelated
challenges and consists of hands-on skill training (i.e., toxicity bioassays,
laser ablation electrospray ionization mass spectrometry; LAESI-MS), as well as
research studies over two summers at the host institution, George Washington
University (GWU). The research involves the intersection of critical issues:
food, water, and health. The first project lays the groundwork for developing
rapid and comprehensive bioassays to screen the toxicity of disinfected water.
Bioassay screening is necessary to cope with the large number of known (500+)
and unknown DBPs and to provide a meaningful approach for understanding the
toxicity of disinfected water. The second project uses LAESI-MS for direct
molecular analysis of living plants. This would be the first use of LAESI-MS to
analyze chemical uptake and metabolite transformation in plants irrigated with
reclaimed water. This technique could significantly reduce sample preparation
time, and it would allow researchers to monitor chemical transformation over the
lifecycle of the plant, which is not possible using the standard process (i.e.,
plant harvesting).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.