* 1833772
* Biology and Environmental Science Scholars Program to Support Achievement and Persistence in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jonathan Baker, Chaminade University of Honolulu
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2024
* USD 999,457.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Chaminade University of
Honolulu. Throughout its five years of funding, this project will provide 18
scholarships to students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology or
Environmental Science. This project will provide these Scholars with culturally
relevant STEM education around the theme of island resilience and sustainability
and support their academic achievement and persistence in STEM. The project aims
to develop a cohort of graduates who are prepared to enter the workforce in STEM
disciplines connected to regional needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
project are to: 1) mitigate students' financial and academic barriers to STEM
participation; 2) acknowledge and address cultural barriers to students' STEM
participation; and 3) develop and evaluate new curricular and extracurricular
activities that reflect students' needs, challenges, strengths, and cultural
expectations. The knowledge gained through this project will enhance
understanding of culturally-grounded curricular and academic support approaches
to enhance student success. Faculty mentors will provide Scholars with academic
support, life coaching, and advocacy. Scholars will participate in academic
enrichment activities including tutoring, intensive advising, academic
monitoring, academic crisis mitigation, and cohort learning communities.
Scholars will have research internship opportunities focused on water
sustainability. The project will develop activities to engage Scholars' families
and connect to the community; these activities will be designed to decrease
'outsider status' and increase Scholars' sense of belonging within higher
education and STEM careers. To support these goals, the project will redesign
Biology and Environmental Science courses and pilot a novel 'mountain-to-ocean'
four-year, culturally-based curriculum designed to increase retention,
performance, cultural identity, and self-efficacy. This project will generate
knowledge about student outcomes related to: (1) increasing the cultural
relevance of the four-year degree process; (b) implementing and assessing
blended indigenous and Western science approaches; and (c) maintaining
connections to place and culture. This project aims to implement culturally-
relevant, island-focused STEM educational experiences and foster collaborations
among major stakeholders that include STEM faculty, campus administrators, and
community leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.