* 1833138
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Jasleen Kaur Sahni, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 05/31/2019
* USD 25,000.00

The 2018 SIGCOMM conference takes place from August 20 to August 24, 2018 in
Budapest, Hungary. This award assists 20 US-based graduate students to attend
this conference. Participation in conferences such as SIGCOMM forms a central
part of the graduate school experience as it provides students with an
opportunity to interact with senior researchers from academia and industry and
exposes them to leading-edge research in the field. SIGCOMM, sponsored by the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) stands unique in its emphasis on
interactions between networking researchers at an international level. Attending
SIGCOMM presents an excellent opportunity for US graduate students to connect
with a thriving international research community. In 2014-2015, SIGCOMM added
additional programming to enrich the student experience. A mentorship program
has run in the past four years assigning junior students with a more senior
mentor at the conference. In 2015, the introduction of "preview sessions" gave
students a chance to get briefed on topics prior to attending main session
talks. The response to both of these has been extremely positive and the
continuation this year of the mentorship program and topic preview sessions will
help ensure students are engaged and get maximum benefit from attending the
conference. Students supported by this award will be able to attend the main
conference and associated workshops at SIGCOMM 2018. The travel grant co-chairs
are committed to encouraging the participation of women and under-represented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impact: This project integrates
research and education of students through exposure to a premier technical
meeting in computer networks and communications. Students will have the
opportunity to observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior
researchers in the field both in the main conference and the associated
workshops. The proposed student participation will have a positive impact on the
quality of their research. Women and other minorities are highly encouraged to
participate. The SIGCOMM conference has developed into a top-tier international
conference, presenting a tremendous opportunity to students to expand their
breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical
perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.