* 1833718
* Community-Engaged Scholars in Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Alark Joshi, University of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 650,000.00

This project aims to contribute to the national need for highly qualified
computer scientists. It will do so by supporting the success of twelve
academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in Computer Science. These students will receive four-year
scholarships and participate in a suite of activities designed to promote the
Scholars' engagement in the departmental, professional, and local communities.
Project activities will include a pre-freshman immersive head start program,
cohort enrollment in common courses, and mentoring by previous graduates of the
computer science program. The Scholars will take a series of courses designed to
support their academic and professional success. These courses include a first-
year course that introduces Scholars to campus and community resources, a junior
career-preparation course, and a computer science-focused service learning
course. By alleviating the Scholar's need to work while in college, the
scholarships will enable full participation in the project's opportunities for
social connectivity, community engagement, and professional development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that participation in the project
activities will result in: higher retention and graduation rates of Scholars
relative to their peers; improved perception of the Scholars about the field of
computing and their own self-efficacy; and better preparation of the Scholars
for computer science careers. Data on retention and graduation rates of the
Scholars will be compared with those of the other students who entered the
Computer Science major as first year students in the same year as scholars.
Scholars will also participate in qualitative interviews that explore their
experience in the Computer Science department and the activities supported by
this project. Finally, scholars will participate in a series of surveys
including a baseline survey with each cohort and surveys to evaluate each of the
program activities. It is expected that the program activities will positively
affect the scholars' perceptions of computer science and their overall
experience. The project has the potential to advance knowledge about how
providing students with structured opportunities to serve their communities can
help computer science programs to retain, support, and educate students,
including those from underrepresented populations. The curriculum developed by
the project will be available for use by other institutions, thus broadening the
potential impact of the project on computer science education. This project is
funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income,
academically high-achieving students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about academic
success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-
income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.