* 1833431
* CONFERENCE:  2018 Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Gordon Research Seminar
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Alex Holehouse, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 03/31/2019
* USD 6,050.00

The 2018 Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Intrinsically Disordered Proteins
(IDPs) in Les Diablerets, Switzerland on June 30 to July 1, 2018. The third of a
series of biannual conferences, the 2018 IDP GRS, which is primarily attended by
graduate students and postdocs, will bring together trainees from a wide range
of disciplines to explore the outstanding biological, biophysical, and
technological challenges associated with the study of IDPs in the context of
cellular organization. The GRS provides an ideal setting to facilitate
international and interdisciplinary collaboration. It will also provide key
networking opportunities, as well as allowing a range of different perspectives
to be discussed and compared - a key aspect for such a broad and diverse
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 IDP GRS is focused on understanding how and
why intrinsically disordered proteins and protein regions (IDPs) can mediate
cellular function. The program will feature ten oral presentations accompanied
by informal and formal discussions, as well as two poster sessions in which all
participants are expected to participate. The meeting will feature a small
number of attendees (up to 60 participants). The presentations will be divided
into four sessions. The first session (IDPs and Macromolecular Assemblies) will
be devoted to understanding emergent function of IDPs, including their ability
to drive the formation of membrane-less organelles. The second session
(Diversity of IDP Cellular Function and Regulation) will focus on how IDPs can
mediate intermolecular interaction. The third (Sequence Determinants of IDP
Function) will consider the fundamental relationship between amino acid sequence
and an IDP's behavior in vitro and in vivo. The final session will be a
mentorship and career panel featuring faculty from a range of institution types.
In addition to this formal career panel, we have several additional faculty
mentors and individuals from industry, who will be in attendance to further
enhance the career planning aspects of the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.