* 1833402
* ERA-CAPS: Designing C4 breeding strategies using genetic enablers of C4 evolution
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Daniel Voytas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 501,568.00

Photosynthesis is the process used by all plants to synthesize food from
sunlight, carbon dioxide and water. Whereas most plants use a mechanism of
photosynthesis called C3, the most productive plants on the planet use a C4
mechanism (C3 and C4 respectively refer to three-and four-carbon molecules
involved in photosynthesis). In addition to being more productive, C4 plants
grow faster and require less water and fertilizer, suggesting it would be of
value if more crop plants used the C4 mechanism. Converting C3 plants to C4
photosynthesis, however, has been frustrated by the fact that molecular
mechanisms enabling C4 photosynthesis are poorly understood. In the land plants,
C4 photosynthesis arose independently more than 60 times, and in the mustard
family alone there are C3 plants, C4 plants and C3-C4 intermediaries. C3 species
will be crossed with C3-C4 intermediaries, and genetic approaches will be used
to help understand key genes and molecular mechanisms enabling the C4 trait.
Knowledge gleaned will be used to engineer the C4 trait in C3 plants. Such a
conversion will undoubtedly increase crop yields and reduce the need for inputs
such as water and fertilizer with broad impact for society and agriculture.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C4 photosynthesis is used by the most productive crops and
native vegetation on the planet. However, the molecular mechanisms and the
genetic architecture underlying this complex trait are poorly understood,
impeding efforts to introduce this desirable trait into C3 crops. Recently,
significant progress has been made both in understanding the mechanisms that
prime species to evolve C4 photosynthesis as well as the evolutionary
trajectories that then lead to the full C4 trait. Synthetic evolution and gene
editing will be used to experimentally recapitulate the initial steps that
establish the C4 trait. The hypothesis will be tested that establishment of a
rudimentary photorespiratory carbon pump reduces the carbon dioxide compensation
point and induces a primordial C4-like carbon cycle. Inter-species crosses will
be conducted between C3 and C3-C4 intermediate Brassicaceae species to identify
key anatomical and biochemical enablers of C4 evolution by quantitative
genetics. Lastly, genome editing and wide intra-species crosses will be used to
introduce C4 enablers into C3 Brassicaceaen models and crops such as oilseed
rape. This project will train a postdoctoral fellow on the application of the
latest gene editing and synthetic biological approaches to identify unknown
components of C4 intermediacy and photosynthesis. Further, knowledge gained will
be used to test whether components of C4 intermediacy and photosynthesis can be
introduced into C3 plants, with the ultimate goal of increasing crop
yields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.