* 1833743
* Collaborative Research: Human-Centered Computing Scholars: Need-based, Extensive Support Through Degree Completion
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Krystal Williams, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 07/31/2022
* USD 75,375.00

Development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce remains an
important national priority. At present, this need is especially pressing in the
areas of computer/ information science and engineering. Research has shown that,
in comparison to students in other STEM fields, more computing/information
science students are from families with incomes in the bottom 25% of the
population. This five-year project will address the need for highly-qualified
computer/information professionals by supporting thirty high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need who are pursuing doctorate
degrees in computing fields. By providing up to five years of scholarship
support, as well as mentoring and professional development support, the program
aims to overcome four barriers faced by low-socioeconomic status students in PhD
programs: (1) financial concerns; (2) negative psychological effects; (3)
inadequate advisement; and (4) unequal socialization efforts. The project
expects that the graduates will enter STEM jobs in industry, government, or
academia within 12 months of graduation. Thus, this project will help to develop
a diverse, highly-qualified computing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project builds upon previous NSF awards and existing resources for student
recruitment, community building, and STEM workforce development. This project
includes newer programming in which Scholars will form a unified cohort as the
backbone of their support, supplemented by faculty mentoring, relevant academic
and professional development workshops, external support, demographic-specific
support for intersectional identities, and sustained engagement past the PhD
through an online career tracking portal. Faculty development activities are
also included to help improve the climate for diverse students and faculty
within the Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Department.
The objectives of the project are to 1) improve the retention and graduation
rates of low-income students in PhD programs in the CISE Department, 2) equip
Scholars to obtain STEM employment within 12 months of graduation, and 3)
improve the culture and climate for diversity and inclusion for PhD students
within the CISE Department. The project will advance knowledge concerning
computer science identity and research identity, while also addressing gaps in
the literature regarding the measurement of computer science identity of
graduate students. This project will also generate new knowledge concerning how
graduate students' economic status and college campus climate relate to both
computer science and research identities. This information can help institutions
better understand associations between these critical factors and student
outcomes to improve graduate education in computer/information science and
engineering. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.