* 1833181
* CAREER: Seeing the invisible: Locating hydrogen atoms in protein crystal structures
* BIO,MCB
* 11/06/2017,05/31/2020
* Ho Leung Ng, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 05/31/2020
* USD 359,165.00

Protein enzymes are the amazing catalysts, essential for the existence of living
systems. They are also used extensively in biotechnology industry. They
dramatically increase reaction rates, are exquisitely specific and they function
in water. The ability to harness enzymes for use in the chemical industry would
be a major advance. Unfortunately, one of the most important components of
proteins, their hydrogen atoms, are invisible. The long-term goal of the
proposed work is to solve this problem and make the location of hydrogen atoms
more accessible to researchers. The results will advance efforts to design new
catalysts by enzyme engineering. To support the adoption of methods to be
developed, a public web server to process user submitted data will be
implemented. Additionally, the project strengthens collaborations and training
opportunities between the University of Hawaii and world-class facilities at the
Department of Energy. The project will also provide new curriculum, outreach and
student research opportunities that are integrated in the research plan. Special
emphasis is placed on supporting Native Hawaiian and minority STEM students in
collaboration with campus student support programs. A new research project-based
undergraduate protein biochemistry course will be developed. Student work on
expressing, purifying, and crystallizing different ferredoxin mutants add to the
research efforts. Ng will serve as a mentor and speaker to minority STEM support
programs, conduct outreach activities at local high schools through the Crystal
Growing Challenge and train teachers to lead students to explore conditions that
maximize the growth of ferredoxin crystals.

The research uses novel experimental and computational methods to attain its
goal of identify and locating hydrogen atoms in protein structures by applying
the proposed computational approach, HyPO (Hydrogen Prediction and Observation)
to X-ray and neutron diffraction data. Traditionally, crystallographers
determine whether an atom is present in a crystal structure by visual comparison
with a contoured electron density map. HyPO takes a fundamentally different,
quantitative approach by answering the question: What arrangement of atoms is
most probable given a map? The combination of HyPO and powerful new neutron
sources at collaborating Oak Ridge National Laboratory will make neutron
crystallography more accessible to structural biologists. HyPO will be used to
analyze ferredoxin, a key enzyme in photosynthesis whose hydrogen atoms have
never been directly observed. HyPO analysis will be applied to the determination
of neutron structures of ferredoxin to define how ferredoxin transfers
electrons. New insight into the role of hydrogen atoms in ferredoxin will have
important applications in other electron transfer proteins and to protein in
general.