* 1833015
* RII Track-4: Experiments on a High Intensity, Coherent Plasma Laser through Stimulated Raman Backscattering
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jun Ren, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 183,362.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A laser (Light Amplification by
Stimulated Emission of Radiation) is essentially an amplifier, whose operation
depends on pumping energy into the electrons of atoms in a gas, liquid, or solid
substance called the lasing medium. The production of very high-power (on the
order of a few billion watts), ultra-short (a few billionth of a second) laser
pulses places stringent demands on the lasing medium. Scientists have used
elegant optical techniques and plasmas (ionized gas) that can operate at extreme
intensities to develop high-power pulsed lasers. However, further advancement
requires understanding processes within the amplifying medium and overcoming
technological challenges that limit the output power. This project focuses on
achieving increased output power of plasma based ultrafast lasers by combining
the expertise and instrumentation available at Delaware State University with
those of the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL). The fellowship grant
from the National Science Foundation (NSF) Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) provides the Principal Investigator (PI) and her
students the support needed to pursue an integrated effort involving
experiments, theory, and simulations. The project offers a unique opportunity
for an early career researcher and students from Delaware State University, a
member of the Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), to train at a
premier national facility in building a table-top high-power plasma laser.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this EPSCoR Research Fellowship is to achieve ultrashort (20-30 femtosecond)
pulses at petawatt/exawatt/zettawatt peak power in a table-top plasma-based
laser. The experiments will use Stimulated Raman Backscattering (SRBS), in which
amplification of a seed laser pulse power occurs via excited plasma Langmuir
waves in a configuration of counter-propagating pump and seed beams. The seed
laser will be shipped from Delaware State University and the experiments will be
performed at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) using a pump
laser available at LLNL's Jupiter Laser Facility (JLF). The project involves the
installation of the seed laser, development of a plasma waveguide and studies of
its characteristics, implementation of a single stage SRBS experiment pumped by
a JLF laser, and finally a two stage (two gas jets) experiment. These
experiments will explore the saturation mechanism predicted by the particle in
cells (PIC) simulations by the PI's group and use an integrated effort that
combines theoretical analysis, simulations, and experimental investigation to
address the peak power saturation in plasma-based high-power lasers. The project
provides a unique opportunity for the PI and her students to combine home
institution's instrumentation with those available at large scale national
facilities to conduct experiments that are guided by theory and simulation, and
in turn provide useful feedback to validate and help improve theoretical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.