* 1833924
* Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Suzanne Ziegenhorn, Oakton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 676,512.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program will support the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Oakton Community College
in Illinois. This project aims to award a total of 127 yearly scholarships to at
least 47 academically talented, financially needy students pursuing degrees in
mathematics, physical sciences, biological sciences, engineering or related
technologies, or computer science and technology. The project will provide
cohort learning experiences, a STEM/English learning community and STEM
philosophy course, proactive advising, and faculty mentoring. Scholars will also
have opportunities to participate in undergraduate research projects and paid
internships.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The program is designed to remove some of the
barriers that students encounter while enrolled in challenging STEM coursework
through a holistic program of supportive services and STEM engagement. It will
use the latest best practices for STEM student engagement and retention to
develop novel programming focused on supporting low income students in STEM
fields, as well as unifying existing support services and activities. Further,
by using more intentional recruitment strategies this program also seeks to
broaden the pool of STEM Scholars. Understanding the impact of this
comprehensive approach at the community college level will contribute to the
current knowledge base about effective practices in STEM student success. The
knowledge generated by this project may be applicable to other community
colleges as they develop strategies to recruit, engage, retain, and graduate
and/or transfer STEM students. Collaboration with district high schools through
the project?s Advisory Committee will promote shared best practices throughout
the district. The STEM Scholars program has the potential to serve as a model
that could be implemented by other colleges to improve STEM engagement and
retention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.