* 1833200
* Collaborative Research: Reevaluating precipitation extremes and flood hazard in the wake of Hurricane Harvey
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Edward Beighley, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2022
* USD 199,935.00

In August 2017, Hurricane Harvey produced catastrophic flooding across southeast
Texas that caused over $100 billion in damages. Rainfall totals and river flows
associated with Hurricane Harvey shattered records across southeast Texas, but
these records span only the last ~100 years. How unusual was the flooding
generated by Hurricane Harvey, and what is the likelihood of such an event
occurring again? The brevity of instrumental hydrologic records currently limits
our ability to precisely answer this critical question. This project will
improve risk assessments for extreme precipitation and flooding in southeast
Texas by extending the length of the hydrologic record back in time using
geological evidence of flooding with a hydrologic model. These data will allow
us to better understand the probability of an event like Hurricane Harvey
occurring again, and evaluate how variations in climate and human activities
affect flood risk in southeast Texas. This research will improve assessments of
the risk posed by flooding, a hazard that has recent affected millions of people
living in the Houston metropolitan area. The project will engage undergraduate
and graduate students in research, and its findings will be disseminated to the
public and decision-makers through the Center for Texas Beaches and
Shores.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frequency analyses based on a century of
hydrological measurements estimate that the recurrence intervals of Hurricane
Harvey?s precipitation and discharge maxima approach 1,000 years (i.e., 0.1%
exceedance probability), but these estimates are highly uncertain with 95%
confidence intervals that span multiple orders of magnitude. The goal of this
project is to reevaluate flood hazard in the Houston metropolitan area by
extending the temporal range of analysis from ~100 years to ~1,000 years. To do
this, we will use established techniques in paleoflood hydrology to reconstruct
discharge maxima of the two rivers in southeast Texas over the last millennium,
and integrate these data with a hydrologic model to evaluate the roles of
natural and anthropogenic forces on regional flood hazard. These data will allow
us to (a) improve assessments of the exceedance probability of Hurricane Harvey
and other recent catastrophic floods in the Houston metropolitan region, (b)
test for the presence of non-stationarities in flood hazard, and (c) identify
the roles of climate variability and land use and land cover change in
generating discharge extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.