* 1833087
* RII Track-4: Pulse Radiolysis Studies of H2 Generation by [Cp*Rh] Complexes to Characterize Design Rules for Improved Catalysts
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* James Blakemore, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2021
* USD 166,780.00

Nontechnical Description

Renewable energy sources, which provide power without routine emission of
pollutants, are being developed rapidly in the United States and elsewhere.
However, effective and practical methods for the direct generation of useful
chemicals using renewable energy remain elusive. In part, this challenge arises
from a lack of detailed and predictive information on the individual steps
involved in energy-storing chemical reactions such as hydrogen generation or
carbon dioxide conversion. With the support of an EPSCoR Research Fellowship,
the PI will conduct research at Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), where he
and his collaborators will focus on revealing the detailed features of selected
energy-storing reactions as they proceed step-by-step. Unique resources
available at BNL, including techniques that can monitor reactions in real time
as they occur, will be used to conduct studies of active materials developed in
the PI?s laboratory at the University of Kansas. Within the framework of this
research, the PI and his students will closely collaborate with scientists in
the BNL Artificial Photosynthesis group, fostering a strong partnership between
institutions that will enable mutually beneficial exchange of knowledge and
expertise while also accelerating research progress. More broadly, this effort
will further scientific workforce development in Kansas by providing
opportunities for enhanced training and dissemination of research findings in
local and regional forums.

Technical Description

The research effort of this fellowship focuses on experimental study of
mechanisms of proton and electron management in reductive molecular catalysis.
Proton/electron management is important in artificial photosynthetic systems
that can be used to generate energy-dense chemicals and fuels; in such systems,
water serves as a sacrificial reagent to provide reducing equivalents to
catalysts that mediate formation of reduced products. A group of [Cp*Rh]-based
molecular catalysts (Cp* = pentamethylcyclopentadienyl; Rh = rhodium) developed
in the PI?s laboratory are the target of the studies in this project, as they
are highly active for catalysis, recyclable, and built from commonly available
components. However, unexpected metal- and ligand-centered protonation events
have recently been implicated in the activity of these compounds, motivating
detailed studies aimed at revealing the features of their structure and bonding
that favor efficient catalysis. On-site experimental work at BNL will focus on
pulse radiolysis and time-resolved UV-visible and infrared spectroscopic studies
in order to generate and observe the transient intermediates involved in
catalysis, with the goal of elucidating the roles of specific protonation sites,
metal hydride species, and ancillary redox-active ligands. Complexes that
feature a variety of ligand environments will be studied, including model
compounds that complement the active catalysts. The outcomes of this research
include fundamental knowledge for rational design of improved molecular
catalysts, particularly systems with ligand environments built upon
cyclopentadienyl-type ligands that may function as unconventional proton relays.
Notably, the design rules developed here could be broadly useful, as
cyclopentadienyl ligands are ubiquitous in organometallic chemistry and
catalysis, and are commonly used in industry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.