* 1833075
* Understanding the Dynamics of El Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Complexity
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jin-Yi Yu, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2022
* USD 792,053.00

El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events occur when sea surface temperature
(SST) warms (El Nino) or cools (La Nina) along the equator in the central and
eastern Pacific (CP and EP, respectively). These events have worldwide
consequences from disruptions in tropical monsoons to changes in the severity of
winter weather over the United States and Canada. The interplay of ocean
currents, surface winds, and precipitation leading to ENSO events has been
intensively studied, and the underlying dynamical mechanisms have been
identified. But important questions remain, particularly regarding event-to-
event differences in ENSO behavior that compromise prediction efforts. The term
"ENSO complexity" has been coined to refer to differences commonly observed
between individual events. Past work on the topic has emphasized differences in
the SST pattern at the peak of the ENSO event, in particular the location of the
maximum SST anomaly in either the CP or EP. Work here complements this analysis
by looking at systematic differences in event transition, seeking to explain why
some warm events are immediately followed by cold events and vice versa while
others, particularly cold events, linger for multiple
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary research by the Principal Investigator
(PI) identifies distinct onset mechanisms for ENSO oscillation between warm and
cold events and for persistent events of the same sign. In the charge-discharge
(CD) mechanism, warm water accumulates in the upper ocean over the equatorial
Pacific prior to the onset of a warm event and is subsequently discharged to
higher latitudes. This mechanism leads to oscillations in which warm events are
followed directly by cold events. In the seasonal footprinting (SF) mechanism,
wintertime weather anomalies in the middle latitudes cause ocean temperature
changes which in turn produce changes in the surface winds. The surface wind
changes propagate into the tropical Pacific and result in ENSO events, and the
PI's work links this mechanism to multi-year cold events. Further work suggests
that changes in ENSO behavior since 1980 are associated with enhancement of the
SF mechanism, and that climate models overrepresent the CD mechanism and thus
produce ENSO events which are too regular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will address five related goals: 1) understanding the combined effects on ENSO
complexity of the CD and SF onset mechanisms and subsequent ENSO evolution; 2)
understanding the cause of the asymmetry between the positive and negative
phases of the SF mechanism; 3) understanding the mean state sensitivity and slow
variations in the CD and SF mechanisms; 4) using ENSO complexity dynamics to
understand future ENSO projections and to develop new metrics for model
intercomparisons; and 5) using ENSO complexity dynamics to understand ENSO
activity in paleoclimate datasets. The work is performed through analysis of
observational datasets and simulations using climate models in a variety of
configurations. Work addressing goal 5 uses data from the Last Millennium
Reanalysis to examine differences in ENSO complexity between the Medieval
Climate Anomaly of the period 950 to 1250 and the Little Ice Age period (1300 to
1850).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has societal relevance due to the
worldwide impacts of ENSO events and the desirability of skillful forecasts of
them to allow for appropriate preparations. The work is directly relevant to
forecasting given the focus on warm-to-cold transition versus multi-year
persistence, a central challenge of ENSO prediction. The finding that the SF
mechanism has become more prominent in recent decades also has implications for
anticipating future changes in ENSO behavior. The project would support and
train a postdoctoral researcher as well as a graduate student and a graduate
student, thus providing for the future workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.