* 1833341
* I-Corps:  Real-time Monitoring of Civil Structures Using Video Cameras
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Thomas Heaton, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to develop a
new tool for weighing trucks as they cross bridges. Compared with existing truck
weighing systems, the technology promises to be inexpensive, easy to deploy,
fast and very difficult to evade. More consistent real-time identification of
overweight trucks could significantly decrease the tens of billions of dollars
per year of roadway damage caused by these overweight trucks. An additional
benefit of the system is that it promises to provide a new tool to identify
changes in the deformation response of bridges. These changes will help to
diagnose structural damage to bridges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project employs electro-optical technology to monitor the structural
deformations of civil structures in real-time. The intent of this technology is
to augment/replace existing systems that rely on load cells at weigh stations.
The technology measures the deformation of structures under dynamic loads with a
passive camera system that can monitor the structure from a distance. The system
uses off-the-shelf commercially available video cameras to monitor a specific
target on a structure, such as a fastener, reflector, or structural feature. The
real-time video is then processed using proprietary pixel manipulation
algorithms to calculate sub-millimeter displacements and rotations in 3 axes.
The information, when observed in real-time, as well as the data products
generated from the archived data can be used to determine the performance of
structures, the impacts of dynamic loading, and even the prediction of
structural failures. The system can also be used to identify overweight trucks
in order to enforce weight limits on roads and bridges. This system provides
high bandwidth measurements while exposed to typical lighting condition dynamics
or other ambient conditions. We have conducted real-world conditions tests on
bridges and a building that validate the feasibility of the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.