* 1833018
* RAPID Collaborative Research:  Resilient and resistant urban forests: the role of landscape configuration and socioeconomic legacy in understanding tree response to hurricane
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Christina Staudhammer, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 04/30/2020
* USD 22,739.00

Hurricane Irma caused severe wind and water damage across Florida. Damage to
urban forests was widespread. Many trees were uprooted or lost leaves and limbs.
As in previous storms, tree damage from Irma is unlikely to be felt equally
across communities. Since urban forests provide many important services,
understanding what causes differences in impacts between communities is critical
to recovery. Patterns of damage may depend on proximity to buildings and which
species were present. Management practices, as well as average household income
and age of housing, are also likely to be important. Therefore, the goal of this
project is to understand how local ecological, social and economic conditions
relate to the severity of damage to urban forests from Hurricane Irma. Irma
provides a unique and urgent opportunity to learn how urban forests are affected
by hurricanes, allowing communities to better predict where tree loss may be
high. This will lead to better preparation and effective recovery plans for
future storm events. Presentations and workshops will provide information to
urban planners and tree care professionals, helping improve urban forest design,
tree risk assessment and storm management efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will provide an opportunity to directly evaluate urban tree canopy
responses to hurricanes, and differences in tree damage related to biophysical
and social characteristics. This project will build on existing measurements,
utilizing field inventory data obtained in the months prior to the storm in
Tampa, Gainesville, and Orange County, Florida. Field plots will be re-visited
to obtain post-storm data assessing tree failure. These data will be used in
conjunction with remotely sensed data obtained before and after the storm, as
well as census data to establish socioeconomic context. This combination of
field measurements, census data, and remotely sensed data products will allow
inference about relationships between socioeconomic and forest structural
factors and tree failure. The findings and predictions will directly address
larger-scale questions about how urban forest ecosystems are altered in the face
of future disturbance scenarios. This project will also improve estimates of the
overall consequences of hurricanes to urban forests, allowing policy makers to
make better decisions to manage the ecosystem services of this important
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.