* 1833977
* Engaging, Mentoring, Retaining, and Graduating STEM Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Semra Kilic-Bahi, Colby-Sawyer College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 02/29/2024
* USD 647,970.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
support the success of 32 high-achieving students with demonstrated financial
need at Colby-Sawyer College. Throughout its five years, this project will fund
scholarships to two groups of seven students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees
in biology. The State of New Hampshire is experiencing rapid growth in STEM
jobs. Therefore, growth in the number of students who complete STEM degrees is
critical. This project will provide financial, academic, and social support to
help Scholars complete STEM degrees so that they can take advantage of these job
opportunities. Faculty from different STEM disciplines will mentor the Scholars
throughout the program, from students' acceptance into the program through
graduation. The faculty mentors will coordinate summer quantitative skill
building and orientation activities for the Scholars, to reinforce the
expectations and value of college education. Then, faculty will conduct weekly
study seminars and provide regular advising throughout the students' college
career. At early stages, the support activities will introduce the Scholars to a
wide range of career and post-graduate opportunities in STEM. As the students
advance, the support activities will shift to internships, research, resume
writing, and interview strategies, to support career preparation and graduate
school acceptance or job placement. The expected outcomes of the project include
an assessment of the utility of specific study strategies and learning
interventions for STEM students and placement of students into the STEM
workforce or graduate school upon completion of their college degree.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will support 14 academically high-achieving,
lower-income students as they pursue B.S. degrees in Biology at Colby-Sawyer
College. By 2020, it is expected that 14% of employment in New Hampshire will be
in STEM-related occupations. Yet, New Hampshire ranks last among states in the
number of bachelor's degrees awarded in the STEM disciplines. Additionally,
students from lower-income areas are known to be more challenging to retain,
particularly during the first year of college. This project will recruit
academically high-achieving students within that population and help students
persist through graduation and on to careers or graduate school in STEM. The
project will provide Scholars with scholarships, orientation and community-
building activities, quantitative skill building, and study skills training.
Faculty mentors will lead the study skills training, instructing students in
Successive Relearning, a strategy that combines Distributed Practice and
Practice Testing. Successive relearning has been shown to be an effective study
strategy, showing larger learning gains than traditional study strategies. The
project will measure its efficacy for improving success and retention of
academically-talented students from lower-income areas in a Biology major, thus
contributing to knowledge about supporting STEM student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.