* 1833749
* 2018 Graduate Climate Conference: Pack Center, University of Washington, November 2-4 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Cecilia Bitz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2019
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports the 12th Graduate Climate Conference (GCC), to be held at
the Pack Center of the University of Washington from November 2nd to November
4th 2018. The GCC is an annual interdisciplinary climate science conference
organized by and for graduate students. It provides a discussion forum for
students conducting research on climate in a variety of disciplines including
atmospheric dynamics, ocean dynamics, ocean biology and chemistry, atmospheric
chemistry, climate dynamics, paleoclimate, and human dimensions of climate
variability and change. The meeting is intended to help students familiarize
themselves with the breadth of climate science, gain exposure to the enormous
range of tools available to address climate-related questions, and understand
how their research fits into the broader landscape of current climate science.
The conference seeks to better prepare graduate students for scientific inquiry
in a field that increasingly demands interdisciplinary approaches. Funds
provided here support travel and subsistence for over 60 students chosen through
a competitive process which places emphasis on selecting a cross-section of
applicants that reflects the diversity of the next generation of scientists, and
recognizes the value in a wide range of geographic and ethnic backgrounds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.