* 1833940
* Replication of a Cohort-Based Computer Science Bachelor's Degree Model
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Mohsen Beheshti, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,998,980.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, the Replication of a Cohort-Based Computer Science
Bachelor's Degree Model project will support high-achieving, low-income students
with demonstrated financial need at California State University Monterey Bay,
California State University Dominguez Hills, Hartnell College, and El Camino
College. Throughout its five years, this project will fund 240 scholarships for
students who are pursuing associate's and bachelor's degrees in computer
science. This project's objective is to replicate a cohort-based pathway model
developed by California State University Monterey Bay and Hartnell College
within California State University Dominguez Hills and El Camino College, and to
study both implementations to advance understanding of the elements of the
cohort model that lead to student success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will study the impact of cohort supports, such as student learning communities
and just-in-time academic support, on retention and transfer rates, bachelor's
degree attainment, and employment success in computer science. In particular,
this study will focus on first-generation, low-income, and underrepresented
students. It will generate knowledge about best practices for the design,
structure, and implementation of these cohort programs. Specifically, the
project will study the impact of cohort values such as identity, habits, and
interrelationships on student success. The increase in graduation rates of women
and Latino/a computer science students expected from this model will positively
impact the overall diversity of computer science graduates, which will lead to
increased diversity in the technology industry. The knowledge generated through
this study will support larger-scale replication of this cohort-based model at
additional institutions to serve a larger number of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.