* 1833763
* AERO-STEM Scholars: Access to Early Research Opportunities in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Jocelyn Lanorio, Illinois College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 646,028.00

This five-year project will support the success of sixteen low-income, high-
achieving STEM undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need at
Illinois College, a private, liberal arts college. Achieving this goal will
contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists, mathematicians,
engineers, and technicians. The project will provide scholarships to students
who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology, Biochemistry, Chemistry and
Physics. First-year students will receive four-year scholarships. The project
aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by linking scholarships with
effective supporting activities. Planned activities include a two-week summer
program, a supplemental one-credit course entitled "Research Ethics and
Professionalism in STEM" for Scholars in their first year, focused mentorship,
an optional summer research opportunity, assistance in finding and applying for
outside research opportunities or internships, tours of local businesses to
broaden their view of potential career avenues in STEM, and tours of nearby
universities to explore graduate opportunities. Implementation of this project
will strengthen the ability of Illinois College to recruit academically-
talented, low-income STEM students, facilitate the academic success and
professional preparation of these students, and assess the effectiveness of
support strategies that may be utilized to improve delivery of higher education
STEM programs across the nation. Thus, this project has the potential to broaden
participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
project is to increase the success rates of low-income, academically-talented
students in STEM majors as well as placement of such students in STEM graduate
school programs and the STEM workforce. Cognitive and behavioral interventions
have been studied in adolescent and pre-adolescent children but have yet to be
investigated in college-aged students. The program will provide substantial
research opportunities early in students' undergraduate careers to build skills,
confidence, and commitment to scientific inquiry. Students will also be trained
to apply learning strategies such as mindfulness, study skills, goal setting,
and the psychology of learning and memory. The project will generate new
knowledge by studying the effectiveness of direct cognitive training to improve
collegiate success. This project has the potential to advance the STEM field's
limited understanding of the impact of direct training to improve cognitive
control in collegiate students. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to
generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.