* 1833479
* Harnessing the power of polymer phase interactions in the design of supramolecular interpenetrating networks
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2020
* LaShanda Korley, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 217,232.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological materials often feature
complex assemblies that utilize the interaction between phases possessing
disparate mechanical properties to achieve synergistic and highly tunable
effects. Incorporation of this nature-inspired structural interplay into
synthetic polymeric systems is proposed toward the development of mechanically-
robust and functional materials. Their structures and properties will be studied
and correlated in this project using a combination of advanced instrumentation.
The ability to control and tune the molecular and materials architecture in
complex systems addresses key scientific challenges related to mechanically
adaptive behavior and controlled transport in new materials development. Such
systems have potential use in a range of applications, including biomedical
delivery vehicles, sensors, actuators, and membranes, and may potentially also
offer advantages in terms of processability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate and
undergraduate students will gain exposure to cross-cutting research -- from
synthesis to processing -- and utilize these advances in the areas of mentorship
and community outreach. A mentoring platform for female students and post-docs,
particularly from underrepresented groups, to engage in dialogue regarding
shared experiences and career pathways will be supported. An expanded
partnership with a K-12 all-female independent school will provide hands-on
demonstrations, career development, and safety/ethics training during a two-week
science/engineering exposure program for high-school girls.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Supramolecular associations have been widely
explored in elastomers, blends, and copolymer systems, and have motivated
interest in the utilization of dynamic associations in the design of
interpenetrating polymer networks (IPNs). IPNs provide a robust platform to
explore the role of supramolecular motifs as a toughening mechanism due to the
intimate interaction of the polymer phases. This research program will elucidate
structural parameters and guiding principles to direct fabrication of
supramolecular IPNs with tunable interfacial interactions, tailored structural
heterogeneity, and synergistic mechanical behavior. Three classes of
supramolecular IPNs will be explored that utilize: (1) complementary and
orthogonal supramolecular associations with focus on how motifs of varying
interaction strength/organization influence microstructure development and
dynamics, (2) self-complementary and complementary hydrogen bonding associations
with an emphasis on the correlation between the resulting IPN morphology,
mechanics, and supramolecular response, and (3) particulate-reinforcement as an
approach to control phase coarsening, mechanical behavior, and functionality. A
full suite of structural, thermal, mechanical, and morphological
characterization techniques will be utilized, including variable temperature
nuclear magnetic resonance, fluorescence spectroscopy, tensile testing, dynamic
mechanical analysis, atomic force microscopy, rheology, scanning electron
microscopy, and X-ray and neutron scattering.