* 1833112
* A Fundamental Study on Gas Film Formation and its Effect in Electrochemical Discharge Machining Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Murali Sundaram, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 05/31/2023
* USD 349,472.00

Advanced engineering materials and alloys possess excellent physical properties.
However, machining these materials by traditional methods is difficult due to
their hardness, brittleness, and other characteristics, leading to increased
tool wear and surface damage. This award supports a fundamental study of
electrochemical discharge machining (ECDM) - a nontraditional process that
improves the surface integrity of advanced engineering materials that are
critical for the US economy and national security. Using modeling, simulation
and experimental methods, the formation and stability of gas film in the ECDM of
advanced materials will be studied. The topography, mechanical and tribological
properties, and composition of the machined surface will be analyzed
subsequently. The expected improvement in the machinability of a wide variety of
both conductive and nonconductive materials will help in unleashing the full
application potential of these materials in biomedical, electronic, automotive,
and energy industries. Potential applications in these industries include hip
joint prosthesis, electronics packaging, brake linings, and solid oxide fuel
cells. The multi-disciplinary approach and results of this study can be extended
to other electrical machining processes. The outcome of this project will be
integrated into graduate and undergraduate courses, and training and learning
within female and underrepresented minorities. The results of this research will
be disseminated through peer-reviewed publications, presentations at
professional society meetings, and YouTube videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
this research, fundamental knowledge on the mechanism of gas film formation and
stability during the electrochemical discharge machining process will be
generated by conducting analytical and experimental investigations to understand
the effect of thickness and stability of the gas film on the surface integrity
changes in machined parts. Critical insight into the rate of gas bubble
formation, the rate of coalescence, and the gas film thickness will be acquired
by molecular dynamics simulations to produce stable and thin gas film. Finite
element simulations coupling electrical, chemical and thermal aspects of ECDM
will be pursued to investigate the hydrodynamic behavior of boundary layers
during gas film formation. Multi-physics based mathematical models will be
developed to predict the gas film thickness, discharge energy and surface
roughness in ECDM. Sensor fusion of optical and electrical feedback signals will
be used in the experimental studies for in-process monitoring and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.