* 1833769
* Leveraging a STEM-focused Urban Industry Immersion Program to Expand Pathways for Undergraduates into STEM Fields
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2025
* Ter-yun Lin, North Park University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 03/31/2025
* USD 649,855.00

This project aims to contribute to the national need for well-educated
scientists, engineers, and technicians. Over five years, this project will fund
20 scholarships to two groups of 10 students who are pursuing baccalaureate
degrees in physics/engineering or biology. The project will support science and
engineering students as they participate in a new urban-industry experiential
immersion program. This program includes undergraduate research, internships,
class projects, job skills development, and opportunities for students to learn
about careers in industry. Student cohorts will be guided by faculty to foster
strong connections with industry, and to help students develop job skills and
knowledge about science and engineering-oriented careers. Dissemination of the
project will be facilitated by the Chicago Mayor's Office. Recruitment will
focus on students who are members of underserved populations and who are place-
bound. Consequently, this project has the potential to broaden participation in
STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project are to: (1)
recruit and enroll academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need; (2) create a STEM-focused urban industry experiential learning cohort
program; and (3) expand career pathways into the Chicago STEM-oriented (Science,
Technology, Engineering, Mathematics) job market. In addition to providing
scholarships and establishing a system of support for industry immersion
experiences, the project will include an outcome-based evaluation study with a
formative component to improve project implementation. In addition, the project
will conduct a research study that will conduct matched mixed methods
comparative studies of the outcomes for Scholars relative to other students. The
research study will investigate the socioeconomic factors associated with
student preparation, success, retention, and graduation. The findings from the
evaluation and research studies will form the basis of a model for city-based
learning in science and engineering for place-bound, underserved students in
metropolitan areas. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.