* 1833288
* EAGER: Bioelectronic Color Vision
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Mark Humayun, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Retinal prostheses have made a huge difference in the life of totally blind
patients affected by retinal degenerative diseases. Denser electrode arrays to
provide higher vision resolution to patients implanted with artificial retinas
are underway, however there is a significant loss of spatial visual information
with respect to normal vision. The addition of color vision would represent an
immense improvement in the limited visual acuity achievable with current
devices. Recent tests performed by one of the principal investigators with an
artificial retina revealed that electrical stimulation can result in color
perception. These findings indicate that it may be possible to encode color in a
retinal prosthetic device. This observation will be explored to devise improved
treatment options for patients affected by retinal degenerating
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiscale computational method will be used to
further our understanding of the color coding sensitivity in the electrically
stimulated degenerated retina. Experiments to characterize color perception in
patients with an artificial retina implant as a function of key stimulation
parameters will be performed. This work can lead to a generalized modeling
framework capable of informing therapeutic interventions with unprecedented
insights into degenerated retina function and their interface with biomimetic
devices. &lt;br/&gt;In addition to the potential benefits to the 50 million
people worldwide affected by retinal degeneration, the proposed work will train
engineering students in a highly interdisciplinary research
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.