* 1833406
* Support for Student Participation in the International Conference on Electron, Ion, and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication; Rio Grande, Puerto Rico; May 29 to June 1, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Jeffrey Hastings, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 05/31/2019
* USD 18,000.00

This award is for the partial support of the International Conference on
Electron, Ion and Photon Beam Technology and Nanofabrication (EIPBN) to be held
May 29 to June 1, 2018, in Rio Grande, Puerto Rico. The conference includes
presentations, free exchange of ideas, and extended discussions and interactions
among international participants, academics, industry leaders and government
stakeholders. This forum is instrumental in the generation and incubation of
breakthrough and transformative ideas in many scientific areas including
nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing. This award will partially support the
participation of junior participants, including graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and early career faculty members. Students and faculty from Puerto Rico
will be encouraged to attend the conference. NSF funds will support the
attendance at the conference of a total of 36
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EIPBN is a major international meeting and will
provide a single forum for discussion of the latest developments in directed
energy-enabled synthesis, fabrication, imaging, measurement and characterization
of small-scale structures, multi-layered devices and multi-scale systems.
Regular meetings of the key researchers, developers and users in this field are
necessary for the exchange of ideas, information, and state-of-the-art
technologies, to enable and accelerate advances and breakthroughs in
nanopatterning and nanomanufacturing. This international conference is a key
mechanism for linking basic science with engineering towards the development of
useful nano-enabled products, which are significant to the US and world
economies. This conference offers a forum for the open exchange of new and
previously unpublished scientific research and ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.