* 1833000
* RII Track-4: Terahertz Spintronics
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Matthias Jungfleisch, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2022
* USD 272,088.00

Nontechnical Description &lt;br/&gt;Over the past decades terahertz (THz)
technology has been an emerging research field with a wide range of
technological applications. THz radiation falls between infrared and microwave
radiation in the electromagnetic spectrum and can be used for a different types
of material characterization. Standard THz sources require additional lenses;
they tend to break down frequently and are relatively expensive. This project
explores the interaction of light and matter on ultrafast time scales and aims
to develop entirely new concepts for the generation of THz radiation. These new
THz sources are based on spin-electronics and are more cost effective, can
provide stronger THz light, and offer additional functionalities such as the
directional emission of THz light. The developed emitters could be used in many
other research fields for characterization purposes, and eventually lead to new
discoveries. A variety of modern technologies such as security systems, non-
deconstructive evaluation techniques, as well as biological and medical
applications rely on THz technologies. Therefore, the demonstration of novel,
powerful THz light sources and new THz sensing schemes may have a significant
impact on our society as a whole, nationwide, and around the globe.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;This project explores
ultrafast spin physics and introduces a paradigm shift for terahertz (THz)
technologies by utilizing the superiority of devices that exploit the electrons
spin rather than its charge. The studies will enable a rigorous investigation of
electron-, spin- and phonon-interaction on time scales of elementary scattering
events and lead to the development of completely new THz sources and sensing
schemes for THz detection. The developed THz emitters might also have a
significant impact on other disciplines such as material characterization,
biology, medicine and telecommunication. &lt;br/&gt;The first phase of this
project is the creation of novel types of spintronics-based THz emitters that
allow for an effective way to control THz properties such as amplitude,
polarization, bandwidth, and foremost, the direction of THz waves using modern
nanofabrication techniques. Furthermore, the THz properties of heterostructures
exhibiting topological spin textures such as magnetic skyrmions and quantum
materials will be explored. The second phase focuses on the ultrafast generation
of spin currents using THz light. These ultrafast spin current bunches can be
used to initiate an ultrafast demagnetization process in the magnetic multilayer
opening up new perspectives for all-optical magnetic recording and provide new
schemes for THz detection. The time-resolved THz spectroscopy setup at Argonne
National Laboratory is the ideal tool to explore this research opportunity.
Additional sample characterization techniques include magneto-optical Kerr
effect, Brillouin light scattering spectroscopy, magnetometry, magnetotransport
and microwave spectroscopy techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.