* 1833645
* Gordon Research Conference: Membranes: Materials and Processes 2018
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Mary Laura Lind, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

Critical societal needs in the areas of energy, water, bioprocessing, and the
environment are providing exciting new opportunities for membrane technologies.
These include the development of new membranes for fuel cells, water
purification, the production of biofuels, and the isolation of a target molecule
from a complex chemical mixture. Over the past 20 years, there has been a
growing understanding of how molecular scale phenomena at the membrane interface
translate to systems-level engineering design and optimization. This project
will support young research investigators to travel to the 2018 Gordon Research
Conference and associated Gordon Research Seminar: Membranes Materials and
Processes held at Colby Sawyer College in New London, NH from August 11-12 and
12-17, 2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this conference is focused on all
aspects of membrane science, with specific sessions on molecules, membranes and
membrane systems and their application to contemporary topics dealing with
energy production and storage, membrane technologies for energy efficiency,
nanomanufacturing, and membranes for water purification. A number of speakers
have been invited from a variety of disciplines including: Chemical Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering, Environmental Engineering, Chemistry, Physics, Biology,
Nanoscience, and Material Science. The discussions between the speakers and
audience will provide valuable feedback on current research efforts and will
enable the participants to further develop and refine new ideas for their own
research and/or to initiate new membrane projects. This 5-day technical
conference provides a unique forum for discussion of cutting edge research in
membrane science and technology. A student seminar precedes the conference,
providing mentoring and networking opportunities for young researchers. This
grant will provide registration support for US-based undergraduate students,
graduate students, and young postdoctoral research associates to attend the
conference. It is anticipated that the registration of 50 students will be
partially supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.