* 1833846
* EAGER: The Xpert Network: Synergizing National Expert-Assistance and Tool-Support Teams for Computational and Data-Intensive Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Rudolf Eigenmann, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2022
* USD 298,521.00

Today's science frontiers are being advanced, to an increasing degree, by
researchers who use large amounts of computational power to simulate models of
our world's processes and to analyze large volumes of observed and collected
data. Doing so requires expertise not only in the involved domain sciences, such
as physics, chemistry, and biology, but also in the computational tools that
implement the needed simulation and data analysis methods. Many research
projects have recognized the importance of pairing domain scientists with
computational experts. While the domain scientists pursue their individual
research objectives, there is much commonality is the supporting software and
hardware methods as well as in the needed cyberinfrastructure tools and
resources. This project aims to increase the productivity of the many
computational support teams - referred to as Xperts - through (i) the exchange
of best practices and discussion of open problems, and (ii) the provision of
advanced programming support environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the
first objective - creating synergy among Xpert teams - this award will engage
computational experts from some of the large, national cyberinfrastructure
projects, including XSEDE and the NSF Software Institutes, as well as from
university campus efforts that have recognized the value of computational
research support teams. Events for exchanging best practices and discussing open
issues will be organized at special workshops, through online meetings, and at
established annual symposia, such as the Supercomputing and PEARC conferences.
The same gatherings will be used to bring together users and developers of
programming environments, pursuing the second objective. Among these groups are
those who develop automatic, and semi-automatic program optimization
instruments, performance analysis environments, and data management tools. This
effort will not only expose Xpert teams to today's advanced programming support
environments, but also gather important feedback from key user groups - those
who push today's science frontiers - to help advance the programming
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.