* 1833154
* Workshop for Women in Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Tamara Broderick, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 10/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

Since 2006, the annual workshop for Women in Machine Learning (WiML) has brought
together women researchers of all levels, from industry and academia, to
exchange research ideas and build mentoring and networking relationships. The
one-day workshop has been especially beneficial for junior graduate students,
giving them a supportive environment in which to present their research (in many
cases, for the first time) and enabling them to meet peers and more senior
researchers. Networking opportunities have helped senior graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows find jobs following graduation. Indirectly, by retaining
women in the field, WiML assists in the development of research products by
women. Women continue to be underrepresented in the machine learning community.
The ability to meet and interact with other women (role models and colleagues)
in a technical environment allows women to build confidence in sharing their
work; it is the most often cited benefit of the workshop.

The workshop achieves these goals via events including the following. (1)
Invited talks by established researchers. Technical talks by researchers from
academia and industry share core machine learning research as well as serve as
role models. (2) Contributed talks and posters by students provide opportunities
for graduate students to showcase their own research and raise the presenters'
visibility among their peers. (3) Research and career advice roundtable
discussions. WiML matches senior researchers with junior researchers in small
discussion and mentoring groups. The support from senior women, many of whom
were previous attendees, speaks to how WiML is creating a lasting community
where women help retain women in the field. WiML is primarily a technical event.
Attendees have substantive technical discussions with other attendees, and many
attendees go on to stay in contact with colleagues they meet at WiML as research
collaborators. WiML has an established pipeline of senior women who continue to
return to the workshop each year to encourage and mentor younger researchers.
WiML has also helped with publicity and coordination when other organizations
wanted to host events for women, such as lunches at conferences or more local
events. The WiML Board has released a public directory of women in machine
learning (with over 1,300 entries) to assist event organizers in finding female
speakers and panelists. Thus, in addition to the workshop, WiML is becoming the
de facto source for connecting and finding women in machine learning.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.