* 1833590
* Meeting: The world is not flat:  Accounting for the dynamic nature of the environment as we move beyond static experimental manipulations - January 3-7, 2019, Tampa, FL
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Rachel Bowden, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 13,927.00

The world that animals live in is constantly changing, requiring responses to
predictable changes in environmental variables such as temperature, food
availability or tidal cycles. While physiological responses to environmental
variability are widely acknowledged, research is often conducted in a manner
that attempts to minimize that variability. It is becoming evident however that
to fully understand an organism's interaction with its environment, research
approaches are needed that explore how natural variation or experiments
conducted under more natural environmental regimes (e.g. daily and annual
fluctuations in temperature) affects physiological mechanisms and responses to
this variation. Recently, a number of investigators have turned their focus
towards attempting to incorporate environmental variation into studies of
physiology and behavior. Not surprisingly these studies are finding that the
results from studies that include environmental variation differ substantially
from those that do not. The goal of this symposium is to highlight important
insights that are gained when studies take into account these, often dramatic,
changes and to stimulate future research that is needed to better understand how
animals, including many economically important species, may cope with changing
environments. The symposium is designed to bring together researchers working
across taxa and ecosystems. This symposium will include a diverse range of
researchers that span career stages from graduate student to full professor, and
all speakers will disseminate these findings in a special issue of Integrative
and Comparative Biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nearly all animals experience
dramatic, often predictable, changes in their environment that requires
responsive changes in an individual's physiology and behavior. Yet many studies
aimed at understanding evolutionary and ecological responses to an environmental
or physiological variable of interest seek to control and minimize variation.
Some examples include the incubation of eggs in species with environmental sex
determination under continuous temperatures through the duration of incubation,
or hormone implants aimed at maintaining relatively constant circulating levels
for an extended period of time. Whether conducted in the laboratory or the
field, these studies have provided critical information about the mechanistic
relationships that influence physiology and behavior that, in turn, influence
variation in individual fitness, despite providing limited information on the
direct effects of environmental variation. Understanding why and how animals
cope with environmental changes is key to recognizing the sources and subsequent
responses that give rise to the variation that selection can act upon. This
symposium draws on longstanding questions in comparative physiology (e.g., how
do animals cope with environmental variability?), but approaches those questions
from a modern perspective. The group of speakers represent a diverse group of
scientists. In addition to the main symposium, a contributed session will be
advertised that will specifically target student trainees, and efforts will be
made to reach out to underrepresented groups through announcements in
organizations such as the Society for Advancing Chicanos/Hispanics and Native
Americans in Science (SACNAS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.