* 1833004
* RII Track-4: Synthesis, Characterization and Applications of FRET based Ionic Materials
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Noureen Siraj, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2023
* USD 188,863.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Forster Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET)
phenomenon, a well-known energy transfer process, is widely used in the arena of
energy (optoelectronics, solar cells), health (photodynamic therapy,
bioimaging), and environmental (sensors) applications. Therefore, several types
of FRET-based molecules have been designed for these applications. However, some
of them are toxic, incompatible with environment, and might require tedious
multistep, expensive, and time-consuming syntheses protocols. This project
focuses to develop novel, environmentally friendly, FRET-based, organic ionic
materials (IMs) using simple, rapid and inexpensive methods for optoelectronic
applications. Advanced electrochemical, optical and device fabrication
techniques will be used at Georgia Institute of Technology (GIT) to determine
the full potential of novel IMs. This fellowship allows PI to explore other IM
applications and broaden the scope of her research activities. An extended stay
at GIT would provide extensive exposure and hands-on experience of advanced
technologies available at GIT, and develop long-term collaborations that will
greatly strengthen the research activities at University of Arkansas (UA) Little
Rock. This training will provide an opportunity to establish an outstanding and
first-of-its-kind research group at UA Little Rock and the state of
Arkansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This study
integrates synthesis, characterization, optimization and device engineering of
highly tunable FRET-based organic ionic materials (IMs) and their thin films. A
novel and inexpensive approach is presented to develop a single organic molecule
exhibiting FRET characteristics. Ionic liquid chemistry is exploited to develop
a material with high product yield and purity along with promising FRET
efficiency. IMs offer great benefits and allow simple tunability of
photodynamics, hydrophobicity, thermal- and photo- stability characteristics as
compared to covalent molecules. IMs have distinct advantages over the existing
materials and are highly suitable to solve the ongoing efficiency and stability
challenges in the field of optoelectronics. Highly thermal stable FRET-based
organic IMs exhibit tremendous potential to enhance the efficiency of the
optoelectronic devices. It is highly important to understand the detailed
photodynamics of these novel materials to explore their full potential for
multiple applications. Advanced equipment available at GIT will be utilized to
understand fundamental electrochemical and photophysical properties of IMs and
their thin films. Finally, optoelectronic devices will be fabricated, optimized,
and investigated for their efficiency. GIT facilities are essential to
accomplish the overall objectives of the proposed research. This fellowship
provides a unique opportunity for materials scientists to work with experienced
optoelectronic scientists/engineers. This collaboration will introduce
economical and highly tunable materials for designing optoelectronic devices.
Establishing a long-term collaboration with GIT will strengthen k-12,
undergraduate student, graduate student, and faculty research activities at home
institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.