* 1833794
* Student Travel Grant: Sixth IEEE International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Fei Wang, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 06/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This project is to support doctoral student travel and participation in the IEEE
International Conference on Healthcare Informatics (ICHI 2018) in New York, New
York from June 4-7, 2018. The ICHI2018 conference provides a supportive
scientific forum for students focusing on computing, health- and bioinformatics.
ICHI2018 provides a forum for expert and peer critique of students' research
with the goal of improving their science. Student participants will also have
the opportunity to receive networking support and career advice from
internationally-recognized experts. Overall, the travel support brings together
students with experts who might not otherwise engage with one another and engage
in multidisciplinary research targeting science the area of health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supports doctoral students by providing a
Student Doctoral Consortium focused on encouraging students to learn from peers
and experts from multiple perspectives to understand how innovative computing
and informatics combine to have the greatest impact in the area of health. In
addition, student participation in rapid talks and roundtable discussions
provided at the conference enables students to explore their science and
evaluate different career paths for researchers in this area. The ICHI2018
conference exposes participants to different disciplinary approaches, supports
networking with conference attendees and is designed to support the development
of the next generation of scholars in health- and
bioinformatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.