* 1833610
* Using a Scientific Literacy Approach to Increase Retention and Graduation of Undergraduates in Biology, Biochemistry, and Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Ana Ribeiro, College of Mount Saint Vincent
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2024
* USD 959,955.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. Over a five-year period, this
S-STEM project at the College of Mount Saint Vincent will fund 88 annual
scholarships of up to $7,000 for 22 students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees
in biology, biochemistry, or chemistry. The project aims to build scientific
literacy, defined as the scientific reading, comprehension, writing, and
presentation skills students need to be successful STEM majors and
professionals. To achieve this aim, the program will offer a Freshman Seminar
with a focus on scientific literacy, and peer-led workshops that extend through
the third year of study. Additionally, it will promote academic and post-
baccalaureate success by engaging students in career development and enrichment
activities such as scientific conferences, career panels, and field excursions
to museums and academic centers. Participating students will also have the
opportunity to engage in faculty-mentored scientific research. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this S-STEM project are to improve academic
performance, retention, graduation, and post-baccalaureate opportunities for
participating low-income students. The project activities have been shaped by
successful models for supporting students from minority and other populations
that are underrepresented in STEM, both of whom comprise a significant portion
of the College's student population. The project will investigate the effects of
improved scientific literacy on these measures of student academic success. The
project will gather data about student performance to answer the research
question: In what ways does a combined program that features peer and faculty
mentoring affect development of scientific literacy? The effectiveness of the
overall project will be evaluated both formatively and summatively using a mixed
methods approach, to promote project improvement and measure project outcomes,
accomplishments, and lessons learned. This project has the potential to increase
the number of students with financial need who earn STEM degrees and enter the
STEM workforce, thus strengthening the STEM workforce and contributing to its
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.