* 1833804
* Collaborative Research: Exploring Sustainable Strategies to Support Success of STEM Students with Financial Need
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Bethany Bowling, Northern Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,068,593.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Northern Kentucky University
and Ferris State University. Throughout its five years of funding, this project
will provide scholarships averaging $2,500 to 288 unique low-income high-
achieving undergraduates, in four annual cohorts of 36 students at each
institution. This project will be a partnership between two similar-sized but
differently situated public universities: Northern Kentucky University, located
in a metropolitan region of more than two million people, and Ferris State
University, located in a rural region of Michigan with a population of fewer
than 11,000 people, almost one hour from the nearest urban area. The program
aims to: Increase the STEM enrollment of high achieving students with financial
need by 10%; Achieve a 90% retention rate in the transition from first to second
year; Increase the retention and graduation rates of S-STEM scholars
particularly those from underrepresented groups in STEM compared to similar
populations in both STEM disciplines and the university as a whole; Document the
sustainability and scalability of the interventions in Northern Kentucky
University?s previously completed NSF grants; and Determine the effectiveness of
shadowing STEM professionals on the first- to second-year retention rate of
S-STEM Scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on the lessons
learned from three successfully completed NSF grants that increased the
recruitment, retention, and graduation of low-income academically-talented
students who obtained degrees in STEM and entered the workforce or graduate
programs in STEM. Professional shadowing is a cost-effective, scalable
intervention. The project will investigate whether this previously untested
intervention can have a significant, positive impact on STEM retention. Project
scholars will participate in an orientation, a freshman seminar, a learning
community, entrepreneurship education, and co-curricular and enrichment
opportunities. Scholar recruitment will rely on each university's traditional
recruiting methods augmented by targeted recruiting in areas with large
populations of low-income and underrepresented students. Scholars will be
assigned to a mentor from the project team. Each scholar will belong to two
groups: one group will include the students in the shared learning community,
which will include some students who are not project scholars; the other group
will be exclusively for project scholars and will consist of 12 students who
meet, collectively and individually, with the same first-year mentor. To test
the efficacy of professional shadowing, each year a group of 12 first year
Scholars will shadow in the fall; another group of 12 first year Scholars will
shadow in the spring; and a third group of 12 will not shadow. The University of
Cincinnati Evaluation Services Center will serve as the independent external
evaluator to determine the extent to which the project achieves its objectives.
Throughout the life of the project, both Northern Kentucky University and Ferris
State University will disseminate "lessons learned" locally, statewide, and
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.