* 1833226
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Remittance Management During Disaster Recovery
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Susan Roberts, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/29/2020
* USD 17,461.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project analyzes the roles of
different community's members in the decision-making about remittance
allocations during disaster recovery. Human migration flows across borders is
matched by financial (remittances) and communication counter-flows that sustain
both the migrant at their destination and their families at their origin.
Remittances sent by migrants are commonly used to meet basic consumption needs
and for investment in education and housing, but they are also a key resource
that communities mobilize in the aftermath of natural disasters. While it is
generally understood that remittances constitute an important source of
household income and contributor to community development projects, particularly
during disaster recovery, what is less understood is the role of women in the
decision-making about the use of remittances during such recoveries. This
project will inform the understandings of how remittance management is organized
at the local level, specifically women's roles in decision-making, and has the
potential to inform policy to be more attuned to the significance of the role of
women in remittance management, especially in post-disaster recovery situations.
As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide
support to enable a promising doctoral student. This project advances knowledge
on how global migration and finance flows rely upon and rework family networks
and local communities. It will do so by answering two central research
questions. First, it assesses how a community manages remittances in the context
of other financial and resources inputs, especially when stressed due to a
natural disaster. Second, it investigates how negotiations over remittances are
transforming the lives of women. Specifically, this research project will
analyze (1) the precise ways that remittances are managed after a natural
disaster; (2) how women participate in remittance management at the household
and community level; and (3) how the process of negotiating the use of
remittances is transforming the responsibilities, labor, and social involvement
of women in communities. The doctoral student will combine a comprehensive
household survey with qualitative methods such as archival research, participant
observation, and semi-structured interviews in a case study of the post-
earthquake recovery in Oaxaca, Mexico. The research will contribute new
theoretical insights on the relationship between gender, labor, and citizenship
as well as generate new findings on how global migration and remittance flows
are mobilized by family networks and local communities in post-disaster
situations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.