* 1833522
* NISS Writing Workshop for New Researchers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* James Rosenberger, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 06/30/2019
* USD 9,990.00

Support for this conference provides partial participant support for the 2018
NISS Writing Workshop for Junior Researchers held at the Joint Statistical
Meetings (JSM) July 29 and 31, 2018 in Vancouver, BC, Canada. These funds
support a technical writing workshop for 24 junior researchers in statistics,
biostatistics, and data science. The writing workshop will provide individual
hands-on guidance and mentoring by recent journal editors on how to write
journal articles and research funding proposals. Junior researchers will apply
to the workshop by June 1 by submitting a writing sample and will be notified of
acceptance no later than June 20 after pairing applicants with eight senior
editors. Previous workshops have been very successful with many workshop
participants going on to become associate editors or co-editors of major
statistical journals. More specifically, at least 23 associate editorships and
one co-editorship are among the 109 recent graduates from 2007 to
2011.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From 2007 to 2016, NISS organized
technical writing workshops for junior researchers in statistics, biostatistics
and data science. The 2018 NISS writing workshop consists of two parts. The
workshop will open with tutorial sessions on the organization of material for a
technical article or a grant application, on techniques for technical writing,
and on the specific objectives and audiences of key journals in the statistical
sciences. Another session will cover journal specific information for deciding
where to publish, and a panel of current and recent editors will discuss the
differences among the key journals. Important ethical issues will also be
discussed, and issues of journal choice, and understanding and responding to
reviewers' comments will be covered in the final session. At the end of this
part, each participant meets with their mentor who analyzed a draft paper the
participant submitted prior to workshop and receives feedback and suggestions.
The second part focuses on the specific issues for participants whose native
language is not English, covering the writing process and details of grammar,
sentence structure and word choice. A panel of senior researchers whose native
language is not English will discuss their experiences with technical writing in
English. The website for the workshop is:
&lt;br/&gt;https://www.niss.org/events/2018-niss-writing-workshop-junior-
researchers-jsm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.