* 1833160
* Azimuthal anisotropy and attenuation structures of the Anatolian Plate
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Hejun Zhu, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 06/30/2021
* USD 145,176.00

The Anatolian Plate has been significantly modified by complex tectonic
interactions among its surrounding plates. Studying the subsurface structures of
the Anatolian Plate will provide a snapshot about how continental collision and
subduction modify the lithosphere and its underlying asthenosphere. In addition,
the interactions among these tectonic plates make Turkey one of the most
seismically active regions in the world. There are several large fault zones,
including the 1500 km North Anatolian Fault, which have generated large
magnitude earthquakes and serious damage to the local community. In this
project, the PI proposes to map seismic structures of the Anatolian Plate, which
enable the investigators to test several scientific hypotheses, such as the
behaviors of the North Anatolian Fault Zone and the magma chamber of volcanic
fields. With the new seismic model, the team will simulate ground motions
associated with a number of large magnitude earthquakes that may occur in
Turkey. These predictions will provide valuable information for seismic hazard
evaluation and mitigation, which will have significant social and economic
impacts. This project will advance the development of a new geophysics group at
UT Dallas by supporting an early career PI and one Ph.D. graduate student.
Results from this project will be disseminated via peer-reviewed publications,
presentations at national meetings, as well as an online tomographic model
visualization platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of this project,
the PI's team will develop a new tomographic model for the Anatolian Plate,
which includes 3-D variations in seismic velocities, azimuthal anisotropy and
shear attenuation. Full waveform inversion, an advanced imaging technology which
takes complicated wave physics into account, will be used to better extract
quantitative information for the Earth's materials. By jointly interpreting
velocities and azimuthal anisotropy, the team will test the following the
following questions: (1) Is the North Anatolian Fault Zone a lithospheric or
crustal scale transform fault? (2) Are there lower crust channel flows
underneath the Anatolian Plate? (3) How do the mantle flows respond to the
westward extrusion and counterclockwise rotation of the Anatolian Plate?
Furthermore, considering different sensitivities of attenuation and velocity to
the physical states of the crustal and mantle materials, joint interpretation of
these results will help to better delineate the morphology of magma chambers,
and detect potential partial melt underneath the Central and Eastern Anatolian
Volcanic Fields. Testing these scientific hypotheses will improve our knowledge
on how continental collision and subduction modify the Anatolian lithosphere and
asthenosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.