* 1833295
* Workshops: Homotopy Harnessing Higher Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Michael Hill, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 12/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

This award supports travel for junior research mathematicians from the United
States to participate in four workshops to be held at the Isaac Newton Institute
for Mathematical Science in Cambridge, England. These workshops, all part of the
semester program on Homotopy Harnessing Higher Structures are "Higher Structures
in Homotopy Theory" (July 2-6, 2018), "Equivariant and Motivic Homotopy Theory"
(August 13-17, 2018), "Derived Algebraic Geometry and Chromatic Homotopy Theory"
(September 24-28, 2018), and "Manifolds" (December 3-7, 2018). The last fifteen
years have seen a renaissance for algebraic topology. Old problems have been
solved using new methods, new methods led to new ideas, new ideas to new
problems, and new problems to new theorems. In each case, there was enormous
progress after the introduction and the study of higher structures. The larger
program at the Newton Institute will assess what has been done, highlight what
is working well, develop the field, give instructional and research workshops,
and provide a meeting place for researchers at all levels of the various
branches of the field. There will be mathematicians in residence, but the larger
community will be incorporated through the four
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will be used solely to
support the workshop participation of US graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and junior faculty without other significant support. The direct impact
of NSF funding will be the raining and career development of up to 30 junior
researchers, who will gain the opportunity to participate in a major program at
the Newton Institute, which is a major international nexus in mathematics. A
secondary impact is to further develop collaboration between emerging research
groups in algebraic topology and derived algebraic geometry in the US and
Europe. Each of the four workshops has a different emphasis and flavor. The
first, on higher structures, is focused on the foundations and applications of
foundations, and is expressly aimed at researchers new to the field. The second,
on equivariant and motivic homotopy theory, is set to be a major research
conference on a vital and extremely active area in the field. The third, on
derived algebraic geometry and chromatic homotopy theory, is a blend of an
emerging topic and a classical area; younger researchers have been important in
this new mixture of fields. Finally, the algebraic topology of manifolds has
become an intellectual crossroads for homotopy theory, derived geometry, and
mathematical physics; this workshop is intended as cross-disciplinary dialog
celebrating a wealth of developments. It is the expressed aim of all of these
workshops to incorporate new voices not simply as audience participants, but as
speakers as well. The website of the workshops can be found at
https://www.newton.ac.uk/event/hhh/workshops&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.