* 1833656
* Scholarships and Mentoring to Increase the Academic Success of Students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Freddie Dixon, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 989,475.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project at the
University of the District of Columbia will support the success of 32 high-
achieving students with demonstrated financial need. Throughout its five years,
this project will fund cohorts of six students who are pursuing bachelor's
degrees in biology, chemistry, or engineering. This project will provide STEM
students with supporting activities that have been shown to increase retention
and graduation of academically strong, lower-income students. These activities
include presentations by distinguished professionals in STEM fields, visits to
STEM graduate programs, internships, and research experiences. Analysis of the
impact of these activities will increase knowledge about how to recruit,
maintain, and graduate lower-income students in STEM fields. Its relatively
large population of lower-income students makes the University of the District
of Columbia a good choice for this project. In addition, because of its large
percentage of students who are under-represented in STEM fields, this project is
likely to broaden participation in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This S-STEM
project aims to increase the number of STEM professionals. It concentrates on
preparing lower-income, highly qualified STEM students to enter graduate school
or the workforce in their STEM disciplines. The project will provide students
with activities to develop academic and research skills in STEM. It plans to
promote persistence by providing scholars with holistic mentoring, concentrated
learning activities, and intensive research experiences. The first objective of
the project is to create and maintain a strong academic pipeline of students who
enroll, remain in, and graduate from the University with a STEM degree. To do
so, it will use an expanded recruitment strategy that incorporates faculty,
staff, and an advisory committee in the recruitment and selection process.
Secondly, the project will offer enrichment activities to improve students'
critical thinking, communication skills, and research capabilities. Thirdly, the
project will introduce a holistic mentoring system for the students. This
holistic mentoring will include dedicated efforts to provide professional
expertise and career skills, advice, and insight, which has been shown to
increase the successful completion of STEM degree programs. The mentoring system
also will provide a smooth transition to a competitive doctoral degree program
or discipline-related job. The project will apply published data that show the
benefit of concentrated learning activities such as seminar and workshop
attendance, weekly meetings, year-round research experiences, and internships.
In addition, this project will offer adaptive programs that change with the
individual student's need. It is expected that the project will increase the
success of participating students in completing their STEM degree and entering
into graduate school or the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.