* 1833851
* Cardinal STEM Scholars Program: Guided Pathways to Increase STEM Degree Completion
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Kristen Hoffbuhr, Skagit Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/29/2024
* USD 648,094.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Skagit Valley College. The
project will provide 34 low income, academically talented students with
scholarships, high-quality mentoring, research opportunities, and extensive
advising. The major goals are to increase the number of low income students
enrolling in and completing STEM degrees at Skagit Valley College, and to
increase the transfer of these graduates to four-year STEM programs. The project
will build on the college's guided pathways approach, which supports student
retention and graduation by providing clearly articulated and intentionally
sequenced course maps for STEM-specific transfer degrees. Following
identification of courses and progress milestones predictive of STEM retention
and completion, the maps will be updated to include specifically placed supports
and interventions to enhance student success. The project responds to the
national need to broaden participation of low income and underrepresented
students in STEM and expects to develop a generalizable model for increasing
student access and completion in STEM programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During five
years of funding, the project seeks to: (1) Increase the access and retention of
low-income, academically talented students into STEM programs and degrees; (2)
Identify mechanisms for increased retention and completion in STEM pathways
through identification of key gateway and critical courses, as well as
milestones (both academic and non-academic) in STEM pathways; (3) Increase the
percentage of STEM degree completion, with a focus on ameliorating inequities in
completion rates; (4) Increase the rate of successful transfer of STEM students
to four-year colleges; and (5) Develop an equity-focused model for implementing
STEM guided pathways that can be adapted and implemented at other community
colleges. During its first year, the project will identify courses and progress
milestones that correlate with student retention and completion in STEM
pathways. The results of this research will be used to place evidence-based
interventions within each STEM pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.