* 1833511
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 GRC on Scientific Methods in Cultural Heritage Research (SMCHR 2018)
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Charles Johnson, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

Technical art history is a new sub-discipline within art historical and
conservation research that applies science and technology to the understanding
and preservation of art objects. Only over the last decade has this community
begun to accord image processing and computational science the status of a
principal partner among the other scientific and technological disciplines,such
as chemistry, materials science, physics, imaging technology, and
dendrochronology, blended together in the growing specialization of technical
art history. From July 22 to 27, 2018, the 4th Gordon Research Conference on
Scientific Methods in Cultural Heritage Research with the theme "Leading Edge
Applications of Data Science, Degradation Science, and Conservation Strategies
for Cultural Heritage" will take place in Castelldefels, Spain. This award is to
support graduate students at US universities with backgrounds in engineering and
science that include applicable expertise in imaging science and technology,
digital signal/image processing, or computer science - to attend the 2018 Gordon
Research Conference on Scientific Methods in Cultural Heritage
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inclusion of digital signal/image processing
and related expertise from electrical engineering and computer science in the
foundation of technical art history helps align art history with the burgeoning
digital humanities. The expansion from words to images is an active frontier in
the digital humanities. Advances in the computational component of technical art
history, i.e. computational art history, are very likely to spawn "technology
transfer" to other branches of the digital humanities dealing with images and
objects. The potential for these newly opened cross-disciplinary applications of
digital image processing to raise new technical challenges is heightened by
aiding the inclusion of - particularly young - digital image processing
specialists in the foundation-building period of this new field of technical art
history. Another benefit arises with the public's exposure to science and
technology brought on by the expansion of technical art history research evident
in the recent upswing in the incorporation of technical information and their
computer-based visualizations into museum exhibitions. This is an unparalleled
opportunity for students in engineering, applied mathematics, computer science,
and other sciences to be present at the beginning of this young field's effort
to incorporate their image processing and computational science skills. Their
presence at this conference will also add to the perception of viability of
computational methods in the future of technical art history. The connections
the students make with domain experts with the potential for future
collaboration are priceless to both sides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.