* 1833234
* National Association of Mathematicians Network of Opportunities Targeting Students and Faculty at HBCUs
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Roselyn Williams, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Rankins
* 01/31/2020
* USD 99,960.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) supports conferences that seek to increase the research opportunities of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) students and faculty at
HBCUs. Morehouse College will host the National Association of Mathematicians'
(NAM) conference to encourage undergraduate students to pursue advanced degrees
in mathematics. The conference will be held at Morehouse College on September
28-30, 2018. About one hundred students from HBCUs, as well as mathematics
faculty and researchers, will attend this conference.

Undergraduate MATHFest and the NAM Faculty Conference on Research and Teaching
Excellence are the two featured events at the conference. Conference activities
at MATHFest are designed to improve the preparation and success of HBCU
undergraduate students as they complete their baccalaureate degrees and enter
graduate programs and careers in STEM disciplines. Activities at the Faculty
Conference are designed to strengthen mathematics education and research at
HBCUs. A key objective is to provide undergraduate students the opportunity to
interact with a group of mathematics researchers and teachers and to learn about
opportunities in various fields of mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.