* 1833905
* STEM Community Outreach Research Engagement Project
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Michael Masingale, Le Moyne College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

This five-year project will provide scholarships to twenty low-income, high-
achieving STEM undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need. The
scholarships will support students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
biology, chemistry, biochemistry, mathematics, physics, information systems,
computer science, or environmental science systems. The goal of the project is
to provide Scholars with evidence-based supports that will improve their
graduation with a STEM degree and pursuit of STEM careers or graduate degrees.
To accomplish this goal, the project will develop a service-learning curriculum
that provides Scholars with opportunities to use their scientific knowledge to
improve local communities. It will also provide Scholars with evidence-based
supports, including mentoring, career preparation, and research experiences.
Helping the Scholars attain their degrees will contribute to the national need
for well-educated scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three specific objectives: (1) to enhance
academic and co-curricular supports for Scholars so that at least 90% are
retained through year two and 85% graduate with a STEM degree; (2) place 90% of
Scholars into graduate programs or professional STEM positions within six months
of graduation; and (3) generate and disseminate knowledge about the relationship
between student service learning and persistence in a STEM major. Specifically,
the project team plans to investigate if a service learning curriculum embedded
into science courses and a three-week intensive service learning project improve
student self-efficacy, sense of perceived academic value, and peer
connectedness. They also plan to investigate if these factors contribute to
improved student graduation and progression into STEM careers. Findings from
this research should further illuminate the effects of service learning on
student retention and graduation, contributing to understanding the spectrum of
effective educational methods available in STEM undergraduate education. This
project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income,
academically high-achieving students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about academic
success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-
income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.