* 1833020
* RII Track-4: Integrative Multimodal Strategies for Advancing Ecosystem Monitoring and Science Communication
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mary Harner, University of Nebraska at Kearney
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 09/30/2022
* USD 230,932.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rivers provide water that is
essential for supporting human life and biodiversity. People are searching for
ways to manage rivers to meet societal and ecosystem needs as human populations
and demands for freshwater increase globally. Communication among diverse
stakeholders is necessary for achieving solutions for how to simultaneously
utilize and protect freshwater resources. This project aims to further
communication of river science and to identify and share perspectives about
river ecosystems with a variety of public audiences, ultimately improving
understanding of these complex systems and access to knowledge as people decide
the future of rivers. Fellowship activities will be conducted in collaboration
with the University of New Mexico, where the PI and a trainee-level researcher
will investigate historic and present influences on water-use decisions and
develop approaches for combining digital technologies, like time-lapse camera
systems and sound recorders, with creative ways of sharing information about
connections within and across river systems. By becoming better communicators,
project participants will be prepared to model these techniques for public
audiences and students, as well as to broadly improve public understanding of
river-floodplain systems and the various forms of life they
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rivers
are interconnected, complex systems that sustain aquatic and terrestrial life,
including humans. They are also at the forefront of ecological, economic, and
social controversies as human populations increase and freshwater resources
remain finite. Interdisciplinary approaches that bridge research, technology,
and public literacy of river science offer potential to provide information to
stakeholders so that they will be better equipped to address challenges about
meeting societal and ecosystem needs for water resources during a time of rapid
ecological change. The goal for this fellowship is to develop content,
methodologies, and strategies to communicate science to public audiences,
drawing upon multimodal digital technologies to obtain, analyze, and convey
complex ecological data in a variety of forms. The work will be conducted in
partnership with the University of New Mexico and will include learning
techniques for reaching public audiences; characterizing drivers of change
across river basins; and creating content to support science communication,
featuring dynamics of ecosystem change on regulated and freely flowing rivers,
as well as historic and present dimensions of water-use decisions. Fellowship
activities will guide development of novel integrative digital media strategies
for communication that can be shared and evaluated across diverse audiences to
understand how people respond to and learn from various forms of multimodal
content. Outcomes will help to establish a framework for understanding and
conveying complex river science; increase public scientific literacy about
ecosystem connections in river-floodplain systems; and provide people with a
deeper connection to rivers and the coupled human-environmental systems they
sustain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.