* 1833572
* WORKSHOP: Visual Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC) 2018 Graduate Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Scott Fleming, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2019
* USD 28,814.00

This award supports a Graduate Consortium (workshop) for 10-12 graduate students
from US universities along with about 4 distinguished research faculty as
mentors. The full-day event will take place on October 1, in conjunction with
and immediately preceding the 2018 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-
Centric Computing (VL/HCC), to be held October 2-4 in Lisbon, Portugal and
sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society. This year marks the 34th anniversary of
the Symposium. Established in 1984, the mission of VL/HCC is to support the
design, theory, application, and evaluation of computing technologies and
languages for programming, modeling, and communicating, which are easier to
learn, use, and understand by people. This includes research aimed at visual
technology and text, and technology that uses sound, taste, virtual reality, and
the Web. It also includes research on theories about the many media used toward
this goal. VL/HCC occupies a unique niche among HCI and programming language
conferences, in that it focuses specifically on how to help end users
successfully develop and use software. More information about the Symposium may
be found online at https://vlhcc18.github.io/. The PI and the members of the
organizing committee will make special efforts to attract a diverse and
interdisciplinary group of student participants to the Graduate Consortium, with
special attention paid to recruitment of students from underrepresented
institutions and women.

Recent advances in computing have led to continually deeper integration between
computers and human society. People now swim in a "sea" of socio-technical
systems that synthesize large numbers of contributing users with vast amounts of
source code. Examples include social media systems, open source repositories,
online marketplaces and massively multiplayer online games. Yet as the socio-
technical systems in this sea have grown in complexity, they have become
increasingly difficult for end users to understand and direct toward productive
ends. The primary goal of this year's VL/HCC Graduate Consortium, the 16th to be
funded by NSF in this series, is to stimulate graduate students' thinking about
how to use tools and techniques in the early stages of problem solving such as
problem definition and solution searching. In particular, what methods, models,
diagrams, and tools can people leverage to create mental models of complex
socio-technical systems that can be used to make design decisions and for
collaboration? Effective approaches will bring users and software together in
creative and productive ways that bear directly on the needs of modern society.
The student participants will make formal presentations of their work during the
workshop and will receive constructive feedback from the faculty participants as
well as from the other students. The feedback is geared to helping students
understand and articulate how their work is positioned relative to other human-
computer interaction research, whether their topics are adequately focused for
thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and
applied, and whether the results are appropriately analyzed and presented. This
event will therefore promote discovery and learning, while also building
community among young researchers working from the perspectives of diverse
fields including computer science, the social sciences, and education. To get
feedback from a broader slice of the VL/HCC community, every student participant
will present a poster or demo at the Showpieces event during the main
conference. An extended abstract of each student participant's work will be
published in the conference proceedings.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.