* 1833435
* Exploring the Impact of Cultural Wealth and Scholarships on Community College Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Phillip Vargas, City Colleges of Chicago Harold Washington College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program will support the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Harold Washington
College (HWC) in Chicago, Illinois. This project aims to award 94 scholarships
over five years to 47 unique STEM students as they progress through academic
requirements for an associate degree and transfer to a four-year institution for
a baccalaureate degree in a STEM major. Because urban community colleges are the
entry point to higher education for many low income and demographic groups that
are underrepresented in STEM careers, by increasing the success and transfer
rates of these students and identifying practices that most impact and promote
student persistence, this project can provide a model for other community
colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will take a cultural wealth
approach, which focuses on how cultural capital can be nurtured to promote
student success. This approach results in a shift in focus from a deficit model,
which assumes students are working from a position of disadvantage, to a
position that students possess unacknowledged and unrecognized cultural
knowledge that enhances their learning. The project will engage students in
student-driven creative exploration and project-based learning, scaffolded by
formal mentoring and skills-focused instruction. This project will involve
cohort building, networking, and faculty development activities. Cohort
activities include a common course sequence. Networking activities include
professional development, social, and community engagement events for all
students and will be co-organized by the S-STEM Scholars and existing the HWC
STEM Club. Faculty development will focus on the creation of a professional
learning community. An extensive research study is planned to help determine how
to redesign classroom activities, courses, and curricula to maximize the success
of students, and the cultural wealth focus will provide insights into how
community college systems can change to meet the expectations and needs of their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.