* 1833978
* Travel Support for Conference on Dynamics and Stability of Interfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Ranga Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 03/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support participation of students and postdoctoral scientists
and engineers at the IUTAM Symposium on Dynamics and Stability of Fluid
Interfaces, which will be held April 2-5, 2018 at the University of Florida,
Gainesville. The symposium will focus on the simulation and modeling of
interfaces between fluids and fluids/solids. Two phase flows are key to
processes including additive manufacturing, coating, flow in porous media,
aircraft de-icing, and many other natural and engineered flows. The symposium
will bring together computational and modeling experts to address major issues
in fluid interfaces and contact lines. Featured lectures by leading experts and
round-table discussions will provide a range of learning and networking
opportunities for early career scientists and students.

The conference is timely in terms of the technical impact and translation to
applications. While major advances have been made in the numerical simulation of
interfacial dynamics and accurate solutions from first principles can be
obtained, the cost of such simulations severely restricts their usefulness. In
addition, because topology changes and contact line dynamics take place below
the grid resolution, obtaining grid-independent results remains challenging. The
availability of reliable reduced-order models to represent sub-grid scale
physics would reduce computational costs. Thus, it is timely to bring
computational and modeling experts together. Encouraging the participation of
young investigators will help fill a national need to train a future work force
in interfacial fluid mechanics and will provide a unique opportunity for young
investigators to interact with leading researchers and industrial practitioners
in this area.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.