* 1833548
* The 2018 NIMBioS Undergraduate Research Conference at the Interface of Biology and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Louis Gross, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Mark Pauley
* 10/31/2019
* USD 20,150.00

The National Institute for Mathematical and Biological Synthesis (NIMBioS) will
host its tenth annual "Undergraduate Research Conference (URC) at the Interface
of Mathematics and Biology" from 27 - 28 October 2018, in Knoxville, Tennessee.
Since 2009, the conference has showcased undergraduate research in mathematical
biology, has provided students a chance to practice their scientific
presentation skills in front of a supportive audience of peers, and has given
students a venue to network with others having similar interests. In addition,
two invited lectures by leaders in research at the interface of mathematics and
biology provide students with insights into current research in this area. About
one hundred participants will attend the conference, many from traditionally
underrepresented groups in mathematics and biology. All student participants
have the opportunity to present their choice of a research talk or poster. The
event strengthens exchanges between the mathematical sciences and life science
disciplines, as many of the projects are presented by student teams of math and
life science majors. It is not uncommon to hear from life science students
attending the conference that their eyes have been further opened to the
usefulness of mathematics for making exciting progress on biological questions,
and for mathematics students to be inspired by encountering new applications for
their mathematical tools of which they were previously
unaware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NIMBioS URC's primary objective is to provide
opportunities for undergraduates from across the country to share their research
at the interface of biology and mathematics with peers and faculty mentors.
Between fifty and seventy contributed student talks and posters are featured.
Student abstracts will be gathered into a program book and published on the
conference website. Students present their own work that uses mathematical,
statistical and computational approaches to address challenging questions in
molecular biology, biochemistry, epidemiology, immunology, ecology, and other
areas. Their work comes from summer or academic year research experiences
supported by a variety of agencies including NSF, the National Institutes of
Health, the National Security Administration or through their home institutions,
thus allowing for cross-pollination of ideas from different programs. As a side
benefit, the research programs of the faculty mentors are enriched by the
sharing of information about recent research and forming new connections. The
conference's secondary goal is to provide students with information on careers
and graduate school and opportunities to network. The conference will host a
panel discussion on career opportunities, a graduate school showcase, and ample
networking opportunities through shared meals, frequent breaks, and an organized
networking activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.