* 1833170
* Ph.D. Forum at the International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP)
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Allen Malony, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,600.00

Now in its 47th year, the International Conference on Parallel Processing (ICPP)
is one of the longest continuously running conferences in parallel processing,
and it is a rewarding event for Ph.D. graduate students to connect with and
learn from the parallel computing community. The Ph.D. Forum at ICPP promotes
the progress of science as stated by NSF's mission by creating a rich
educational and learning experience where Ph.D. graduate students (i) present
and discuss their research in parallel computing with conference attendees, (ii)
expand their understanding of the parallel computing by attending technical
sessions, (iii) explore potential research projects with new colleagues, and
(iv) receive guidance from leaders in the field. By assisting in the training,
development, and mentorship of the next-generation of parallel computing
researchers, the ICPP Ph.D. Forum is contributing to the NSF's mission for
advancements in science, support for education and diversity, and broader
benefits to society. This award will support the travel of up to 24 eligible
students from US-based institutions to participate in the student program at
ICPP 2018 and to organize a PhD Forum. There are two main objectives of the
Ph.D. Forum at ICPP. First, it provides Ph.D. students with intellectual
opportunities to discuss their research work in a constructive and supportive
environment where leading parallel computing topics are presented and debated.
Second, it provides mentoring resources to help graduate students organize their
academic research work and plan for their future careers. The Ph.D. Forum makes
it possible for graduate students to (i) present their research during the
poster session, (ii) give a 2-3 minute introduction during a Ph.D. mentor
luncheon, (iii) attend a special parallel computing career session, (iv) meet
and interact with designated faculty and industry mentors during the conference,
and (v) distribute their research materials (poster, abstract) and CV to other
ICPP participants. A Ph.D. Forum award acknowledges best overall poster,
introduction, and participation. An associated objective is to lay the
groundwork for continuation of the Ph.D. Forum in future years of ICPP. For this
purpose, Ph.D. students provide feedback on their experience at ICPP and
thoughts for improvements in the Ph.D. Forum.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.