* 1833712
* Financial, Mentoring, Curricular, and Co-Curricular Supports to Increase Student Completion of Transfer Degrees in Biology, Chemistry, and Earth Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Methea Sapp, Spokane Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2023
* USD 649,561.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This project at Spokane
Community College will provide financial, academic, and professional support to
36 high achieving, low-income students, with emphasis on students from rural
high schools. The students will be enrolled in associate degree transfer
programs in biology, chemistry, or earth science. The need for more college
graduates in STEM fields is well documented, yet many students who enter college
interested in these subjects fail to graduate. In addition to providing
financial support, this project will engage these students in activities
designed to increase their success at Spokane Community College and
matriculation to a four year college to pursue a bachelor's degree in STEM.
Activities will include dedicated academic advising, tutoring, peer and
professional mentoring, undergraduate research, guided career exploration, and
community service. A collaboration with Washington State University College of
Education will provide insight into effective interventions for increasing STEM
student success rates, thus helping the project meet its goals. This
collaboration will also explore which approaches contribute to STEM student
success at community and four year colleges. It is expected that this project
will support students' academic goals and help to meet regional business and
industry workforce needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use multiple
strategies to improve the systemic recruitment of high achieving, low-income
students and guide their successful completion of a two-year transfer college
degree in the sciences. Scholarships provided through this project will provide
the economic means for students to focus on their academic goals. These
scholarships, in combination with advising/mentoring by STEM faculty and
curricular/co-curricular supports will increase student success as measured by
the scholars' persistence and completion of transfer degrees in biological
sciences, chemistry, and earth science. Results of the program evaluation
studies will provide insights to drive changes in institutional practice that
will improve Spokane Community College's future success in recruiting
academically talented low-income students and supporting completion of STEM
transfer degrees. The knowledge acquired through this program will be
disseminated through publications and presentations to further the national goal
of increasing STEM student success, particularly among low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.