* 1833642
* TWC: Small: User Behavior Modeling and Prediction in Anonymous Social Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Ben Zhao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 07/31/2019
* USD 309,477.00

Human beings are diverse, and their online behavior is often unpredictable. In
today's data-driven world, providers of online services are collecting detailed
and comprehensive server-side traces of user activity. These records or logs
include detailed, timestamped logs of actions taken by users, often called
clickstreams. Given their scale and level of detail, clickstreams present an
enormous opportunity for research into user behavioral analysis and modeling.
Understanding, modeling and predicting user behavior can dramatically improve
the security of today's online systems, while significantly advancing
understanding of user behavior. This project develops a general platform for
user behavioral modeling using clickstreams, with the goal of providing general
tools for modeling user behavior in any application context. If successful, this
approach will produce a generalized platform for identifying similar types of
user behavior. Prior work using a similar approach already produced significant
results in the context of automatically detecting fake accounts and identities
in online social networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will explore the use of
clickstream similarity graphs, graphs designed to capture and model the
similarity (or differences) between behavior logs of different users. By
applying existing graph analysis techniques, these similarity graphs can
identify general user behavioral patterns using semi-supervised learning
techniques, and can be used to identify abnormal or unknown user behavior
patterns. The researchers will use real detailed clickstreams from two online
social networks (Renren and Whisper). The goal of the project is to make
clickstream similarity graphs a general and practical user modeling tool. The
project will address 3 key challenges. First, it will explore and address
challenges of scale in users and trace length, so that the techniques can be
applied to large user populations of hundreds of millions. Second, the project
will quantify the level of dynamics in user behavior over time, developing
techniques to incrementally modify or update user behavior models. Finally, the
PIs will study issues in application specificity, i.e., how we can tune the tool
for different dimensions of user behavior.