* 1833856
* Wisconsin Lutheran College (WLC) S-STEM Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Daniel Ebeling, Wisconsin Lutheran College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 03/31/2024
* USD 628,843.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program will support the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Wisconsin Lutheran
College (WLC) in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Throughout its five years, this project
will fund 14 scholarships for two groups of seven students who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in biology, biochemistry, chemistry, or marine biology. Small
colleges often have excellent and thriving science programs that regularly
graduate well-qualified students to enter graduate school or careers in a
variety of STEM fields. Private colleges with intimate class sizes and high-
quality faculty and facilities require greater fees to maintain these features,
putting them out of reach of many low-income students. In addition, rigorous
introductory STEM courses prepare students well for more specialized upper level
courses and future careers but have relatively high attrition rates. The WLC
S-STEM Scholars (WSSS) Program will address these issues by providing
scholarship aid and early research opportunities to help students navigate
through introductory STEM courses. Partnerships with local high schools,
homeschool associations, and college-prep programs will provide excellent
candidates from diverse backgrounds. The WSSS Program hopes to adapt STEM
education research performed at large research universities to a small liberal
arts college. The program will introduce students to STEM laboratory research
early in their education and maintain this exposure throughout their
undergraduate careers. This will put concepts and practices from STEM courses
into perspective, will increase one-on-one interactions with faculty and
upperclassmen to establish better mentoring relationships, and will provide
valuable experience for internship and career goals. Increased mentorship will
ensure that program scholars are aware of and take advantage of resources such
as tutoring, workshops, and career preparation opportunities. Finally, a STEM
advisory council consisting of professionals from the burgeoning local STEM
industry and graduate schools will help to prepare students for careers and
opportunities after college. The WSSS Program will give superior STEM students
that may not be able to otherwise afford or succeed in college the opportunity
to get a first-class education to prepare them to enter a well-paying
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSSS Program will implement outreach and
recruitment to low-income students including underrepresented populations in
Milwaukee schools as well as homeschooled students. The program will implement a
summer STEM orientation to provide research experiences to incoming scholars, a
first-year Introduction to STEM Research course, continuing research
opportunities, enhanced mentoring, and career networking opportunities. These
activities build on and advance evidence in support of early research experience
as a positive factor in STEM student success. They also show how associated peer
mentoring, research peer groups, strong student-faculty interactions, and
research skill-building workshops work together to integrate diverse students
into a college research and academic culture and promote retention through
increased confidence in abilities and self-efficacy. WLC will investigate these
activities to examine their impact on enrollment and retention, graduation, and
postgraduate placement rates. The WSSS program will strengthen the science
departments' relationship with the Office of Admissions, high schools, and
homeschool networks through recruitment activities. The program will also
develop ties with industry through the creation of an industry-based STEM
Advisory Council. This will contribute to a stronger pipeline of diverse and
underrepresented students from secondary education through undergraduate
programming and into the regional STEM workforce. The project team will also
disseminate the results to other programs at WLC outside of the natural sciences
and will generate evidence to assist other institutions in replicating program
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.