* 1833630
* Preparing Highly Qualified Students with Financial Need for Careers in Computing and Cyber-Security through Evidence-Based Educational Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Enrico Pontelli, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,969,365.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This S-STEM project is a
collaboration between New Mexico State University and New Mexico Tech, in
collaboration with four two-year colleges: Dona Ana Community College, Eastern
New Mexico University Ruidoso, New Mexico State University Alamogordo, and New
Mexico State University Grants. These institutions are Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs) and members of an existing backbone organization, the
Computing Alliance of Hispanic Serving Institutions, which focuses on promoting
recruitment, training, and career advancement of Hispanic students in computing.
Over a five-year period, this S-STEM project will fund 66 scholarships, in three
groups of 22 students who are pursuing Associate and Bachelor's degrees in
computing-related disciplines. The project will apply practices that the
investigators developed over two previous multi-year awards and that have been
shown to support the development of students' technical and professional skills
in computation. Implementing these practices will guide students along pathways
from two-year programs to four-year degrees in computing, and to successful
careers and/or graduate studies in computing. The students' professional and
technical skills will be enhanced through a structured model that guides
development of skills in computer science, research, team work, and
communication. These skills will be refined through projects and activities in
cybersecurity, a critical computing area with nationwide implications. The
skills development activities, coupled with integrated mentoring initiatives,
will contribute to the advancement and success of the scholars.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The partnering institutions aim to prepare low-income, academically
high-achieving students to enter the computing workforce or graduate computing
degree programs. To this end, the project will provide the selected scholars
with co-curricular activities, grounded in evidence-based pedagogical
strategies, to strengthen technical and professional preparation. The strategies
build on multi-level mentoring, team work, and active involvement in the
scientific community, to build social capital among the scholars, and self-
efficacy and confidence in computing. The project will also contribute to
advancing the knowledge base about: (1) factors affecting the retention and
success of students in computing at HSIs and (2) factors that facilitate the
adoption and sustainability of evidence-based reforms that serve low income,
highly qualified students in computing. The program will contribute to the
training of talented students who can contribute to growing U.S. workforce needs
in computing and cybersecurity. The focus on low-income students, and the
predominantly Hispanic student population of the partnering institutions, will
contribute to building a computing workforce with greater diversity of
participants. The program will also contribute to reinforcing the pathways from
two-year colleges to four-year academic programs across New Mexico, opening new
opportunities for students, and advancing the economic development of the
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.