* 1833050
* Collaborative Research: PIQL: Physics Inventory of Quantitative Literacy
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Andrew Boudreaux, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 32,853.00

To improve physics teaching and learning, it is important to have validated and
standardized assessment tools to measure students' quantitative literacy in
physics. To meet this need, this project will develop a valid and reliable
multiple-choice assessment instrument to measure introductory physics students'
quantitative literacy, a subcategory of mathematical reasoning. Quantitative
literacy is a set of interconnected skills, attitudes, and habits of mind.
Together, they support the sophisticated use of elementary mathematics to
describe and understand the world. Sophisticated quantitative literacy is a
foundation for work in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields. Although development of quantitative reasoning is a goal of many
introductory science courses, particularly physics, research suggests that
students often have difficulty using mathematical reasoning to make sense of
physical situations. However, it is not known if instruction in introductory-
level physics helps students overcome this difficulty. The goal of this project
is to develop and implement an instrument to assess how students' quantitative
reasoning ability changes over time in an introductory physics course. Data from
such an instrument could drive improvements in instruction to increase students?
ability to conceptualize the mathematics that they do in physics. This
instrument could also assess the efficacy of such instructional changes. In
addition, the resulting instrument could be modified and exported to other math-
based disciplines. In this way, it has the potential to improve understanding of
how quantitative reasoning skills grow as students progress through their
college curricula. Since these quantitative skills are core to students' success
in physics and other STEM fields, this project could enhance student retention
in STEM disciplines and broaden our STEM workforce in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An effective STEM workforce needs to possess
quantitative literacy, which is the ability use numerical data in tabular or
graphical form to make appropriate conclusions about its meaning. Developing
these skills is an important objective of introductory physics. However, few
research studies have been published about the effect of instruction on
students' development of physics quantitative literacy (PQL). The proposed
research will fill this gap by developing the Physics Inventory of Quantitative
Literacy (PIQL), a multiple-choice assessment instrument. The project team will
develop the PIQL in the context of a multi-course introductory physics sequence.
They will then develop and pilot statistical methods to measure and evaluate
students' growth in three components of PQL: reasoning about ratios and
proportions, reasoning about negative quantities, and reasoning about co-
variation between quantities. Various psychometric analyses will be used to
ensure that the PIQL is both valid and reliable. (A valid instrument accurately
measures students' PQL. A reliable instrument measures PQL consistently across
different student populations.) Another major goal of the project is to use
statistical analyses to develop a scoring model that quantifies growth, not just
mastery, by incorporating the rich information contained in students' incorrect
answers. This project will address the critical need for a valid and reliable
instrument to measure student PQL in the introductory physics curriculum, and to
assess its growth. The project will facilitate the improvement of sophisticated
quantitative literacy as an educational outcome in physics classes. Furthermore,
the results will provide a model for assessing quantitative literacy in other
STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.