* 1833733
* Scholarships, Mentoring, and Building Connections between Mathematics and Science to Support Undergraduate Student Success in STEM Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* John Olmo, Universidad del Sagrado Corazon, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2024
* USD 642,507.00

This project contributes to the national need for a highly-capable, diverse STEM
workforce by supporting the success of low-income undergraduate students with
demonstrated financial need and academic promise. Over its five-year duration,
the project will provide 15 students with four-year scholarships to support
their attainment of bachelor's degrees in Biology, Biotechnology, Chemistry, or
Computer Science. A key component of the project's intellectual merit is the
application of high-impact academic and social support activities and emphasis
on helping students develop skills in connecting mathematics and science. It is
expected that the set of supports will address common barriers to success in
gateway courses and lead to increased retention and academic achievement of STEM
students. This project has the potential to serve as a model for preparing
bilingual STEM professionals for the nation's STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to address the national
shortage of qualified STEM workers and provide a critical match between STEM
careers and students in an economically depressed region. Consequently, the
project will develop relationships with industry partners to expand internship
and job opportunities for the Scholars. The project objectives include achieving
an increase in students' academic achievement as well as an increase in the
retention and graduation rates of STEM majors. Faculty and peer tutoring, a
first-year course, and STEM workshops will be designed to help the Scholars make
connections between mathematical and scientific skills and to understand the
close relationships between mathematics and science. The project will also
provide supports to prepare the Scholars for placement in STEM careers or for
entry into graduate school. The project will investigate the impact of the math
support activities on the Scholars' persistence and retention in the STEM major,
especially for low-income, Hispanic STEM students who are a significant
proportion of the College's student population. The project results may be used
by other institutions as a model of effective strategies to address the
mathematical barrier for STEM students. This project is funded by the NSF
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to
generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.