* 1833869
* Recruiting, Retaining, and Engaging Academically Talented Students from Economically Disadvantaged Groups into a Pathway to Successful Engineering Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Aidsa Santiago-Roman, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,097,951.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at University of Puerto Rico
Mayaguez. Throughout its five years, this project will fund 176 scholarships for
students who are pursuing bachelor's and master's degrees in engineering.
Scholarships will address college access and economic hardships of target
students. The project includes a research plan to investigate the effectiveness
of an institutional intervention model seeking to increase the retention and
academic success of talented engineering students coming from economically
disadvantaged families. By leveraging scholarship support and established
college-wide programs, the project aims to create an environment that fosters
degree attainment by low-income students, in a model that can be used by to
other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project interventions fit a hybrid
theoretical model that combines elements from widely accepted theories on social
cognitive career choices and student attrition mitigation. The longitudinal
implementation of interventions will address specific cognitive factors,
including sense of belonging, self-efficacy beliefs, career interest, and
individual actions leading to the ultimate goal of graduating and inserting
scholars into research- or job market-oriented engineering careers. A mixed-
methods research approach will allow for collecting information to assess the
impact of each intervention, providing answers to a set of research questions
guiding the investigation. The knowledge gained through this research will
provide recommendations for sustainable institutional policies and intervention
methods for improving recruitment practices, strengthening retention strategies,
and increasing graduation rates of economically disadvantaged students. The
project will foster collaborations among major stakeholders that include
academic programs, research centers, faculty, the library, students, and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.