* 1833484
* Workshop: Bridging the Gap. A Mini-Conference on Race and the Environment: Philadephia, PA - August 10, 2018
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Michael Mascarenhas, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 06/30/2019
* USD 19,227.00

Minority scholar participation in the study of environmental sociology is low,
leading to potential biases in topics addressed and analytical approaches to
them. The Workshop will provide a forum for scholars and practitioners to
discuss strategies that would advance a more theoretically robust and
methodologically rigorous environmental sociology that seeks to overcome
institutional and disciplinary obstacles to advancing the study of race and the
environment in sociology and in the sub-discipline of environmental sociology.
This Workshop will bring together U.S.-based scholars to share work that draws
on theoretical frameworks that are outside of the traditional purview of
environmental sociology to address the lack of diversity in scholarship in the
sub-discipline. This Workshop aligns well with the core value of inclusiveness
and the strategic goal of innovative interdisciplinary collaboration outlined in
the NSF Strategic Plan for 2014-2018. Both initiatives strive to increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in scientific inquiry.

Over the past four decades, membership in the Environmental Sociology (ES)
section of the American Sociological Association (ASA) has steadily grown to
reach 510 members in 2017, which is slightly higher than the section average of
505 for all 52 ASA sections. However, the percentage of African American,
Hispanic/Latino(a), and Asian/Asian American scholars in the ES section is very
low in comparison to other ASA sections and the association overall. Just under
5% of section members identified as Asian/Asian American in 2005 and 2016, and
around 2.5% as Hispanic/Latino(a) in 2005 and 2016. Regular ES members who
identify as African American increased from zero members in 2005 to seven in
2016, and now represent 2.5% of section membership. The proposal argues that the
lack of diversity in ES and in the subfield of environmental sociology is a
result of lack of engagement with other disciplinary fields. The one-day
workshop will increase the range of theoretical and methodological discussion in
the subfield, thus encouraging greater diversity in both scientific approaches
as well as in the demographics of participation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.