* 1833847
* Building Foundations for Undergraduate Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2025
* Arlene Hoogewerf, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2025
* USD 999,814.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. During the five-year period of
funding, this S-STEM project at Calvin College will fund scholarships for up to
36 students, in three groups of 12 students, who are pursuing bachelor's degrees
in biology, chemistry/biochemistry, computer science, engineering, mathematics,
or physics. In addition, these students will receive enhanced academic and
vocational mentoring, be part of an intentional S-STEM cohort community, and
enroll in special sections of chemistry, calculus, and computer science (as is
appropriate for their desired academic program) in which research-based
interventions will be implemented to enhance student learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities will adapt and combine
interventions that have been used in other contexts, to improve retention at
Calvin College, a mid-sized liberal arts college. A first-year seminar will
include a social-belonging exercise, pioneered at Stanford University and
implemented for retention of at-risk students at the University of Texas-Austin.
Classroom interventions that originate from current best practices and use
active-learning methods will be incorporated into introductory chemistry,
calculus, and computer science courses that have higher than average failure
rates. The project will assess: 1) whether interventions developed elsewhere can
be generalized to this cohort of low-income/high-potential first-year students;
2) whether the gains made in these courses by the S-STEM cohort will lead to
long-term persistence in STEM through to graduation; and 3) whether these
interventions work equally well for distinct sub-populations (e.g., females)
within our cohort. The data will enable comparisons to be made between the
S-STEM cohort and others who only receive the classroom interventions. This
project has the potential to strengthen STEM education, contribute to the STEM
workforce, and provide new insights into practices to promote success of
undergraduates in STEM degree programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.