* 1833054
* EAGER: SCC: Scoping an NSF Prize Challenge For Smart and Connected Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Benjamin Levine, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2019
* USD 319,996.00

This project seeks to design and structure a Smart &amp; Connected Communities
(S&amp;CC) Prize Challenge that provides innovative solutions to technically and
socially complex needs that are of broad and pressing interest to communities.
The proposer will harness the expertise of researchers, communities,
philanthropy, and industry to scope and plan the Prize Challenge, including: 1)
identification of prize challenge topics ; 2) the structuring and recruitment of
a consortium of funding partners from the philanthropic and corporate community;
and 3) the development of a governance structure, launch plan, and review
process for the prize challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research component of
this project will test the creation of a new framework that will drive truly
integrative, community-focused research done in partnership with funders from
philanthropy and industry. This new structure introduces questions about how
community-focused research is crafted and how that research integrates into the
broader ecosystem of state and local government, public planning, philanthropic
programming, industry research and development (R&amp;D) activities, and
collaboration across communities. This process will test the impact of more
guided research prompts on the quality of responses from researchers and
communities. It will also seek to create funding partnerships that will broaden
the research-to-deployment pipeline, thereby enhancing the technical and
societal impact of S&amp;CC research. The project will draw from MetroLab
Network's experience working with universities, communities, philanthropies and
other civic-focused stakeholders. The team will work with a range of partners to
undertake this project, including subject-matter experts across S&amp;CC topics;
it includes partners who have collaboratively developed new approaches to how
data and technology are integrated in the policy planning and implementation
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.