* 1833287
* CAREER: Machine Learning through the Lens of Economics (And Vice Versa)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,01/31/2020
* Jacob Abernethy, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 01/31/2020
* USD 310,469.00

Machine Learning (ML) is the study of leveraging data and computational
resources to obtain prediction and decision-making algorithms that function well
in the presence of uncertainty. The techniques employed to design and study ML
algorithms typically involve concepts and tools from probability, statistics,
and optimization; the language of economics, on the other hand, is conspicuously
absent. It is rare to encounter terms such as marginal price, utility,
equilibrium, risk aversion, and such, in the ML research literature. This gap is
significant and belies the reality that the broad interest in Machine Learning,
and its sudden growth spurt as a research field, can be ascribed to its
potential for generating economic value across many segments of society. This
NSF CAREER projectadvances an already-emerging relationship between Machine
Learning and the fields of microeconomic theory and finance. This will begin
with the development of mathematical tools that enable a semantic correspondence
between learning-theoretic objects and economic abstractions. For example, the
project shows that many algorithms can be viewed as implementing a market
economy, where learning parameters are associated with prices, parameter updates
are viewed as transactions, and under certain conditions learned hypotheses can
be extracted as market-clearing price equilibria. In addition to developing this
link, the project research raises a number of intriguing questions and explores
several surprising and novel applications with benefits to computer science more
broadly.

Among several such applications stemming from the new theoretical connections
are: 1. Developing new models for distributed computing for learning and
estimation tasks: The economic lens gives new insights into a robust and
effective model for decentralization of data-focused tasks. 2. Designing new
techniques for crowdsourcing and labor decentralization via collaborative
mechanisms involving financial payment schemes: This builds off of the success
of platforms like Amazon's Mechanical Turk as well as the Netflix Prize and the
prediction challenge company Kaggle. 3. Developing a market-oriented model for
data brokerage and financially-efficient learning: As information is
increasingly traded in market environments, we aim to answer questions such as
"what is the marginal value of a unit of data?"

The project will also develop the Michigan Prediction Team, a data-science
focused program for formulating and solving prediction and learning challenges
that develop from across the University of Michigan as well as externally. The
group primarily targets undergraduates with graduate student mentors, and Team
has a strong interdisciplinary focus.