* 1833058
* Investigation of the dynamic pressure surge effect in a fluid-filled fracture through numerical modeling and laboratory experiment
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Yingcai Zheng, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,570.00

It is well documented that naturally occurring earthquakes, even those located
thousands of kilometers away, can dynamically trigger other earthquakes by the
passage of a weak vibrating seismic wave. Furthermore, seismic waves can also
induce liquefaction and volcanic eruptions. However, the physics of these
triggered phenomena are unknown. This work will focus on understanding the
physical conditions that can trigger earthquakes, either by passing seismic
waves or by human activity, such as fluid injection at wells. Specifically, this
study will investigate a pressure surge phenomenon, which could be the common
underlying mechanism for all these triggered phenomena although in different
geological settings. The investigator will use both numerical modeling and
physical experiments to discriminate between competing physical mechanisms that
lead to earthquake triggering. Elucidating the triggering mechanism has broad
and fundamental societal impact in the mitigation of natural hazards. This work
will support an early career faculty member and a graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The passing of weak seismic waves not only can suddenly
trigger earthquakes but can also change the fluid permeability of a hydrologic
system, cause liquefaction and bring on volcanic eruptions. However, what
mechanisms control all these different triggered occurrences are largely unknown
because the stress perturbation due to the seismic wave is extremely small and
it is on the order of a few thousand Pascal, equivalent to the weight of a few
coins. Finding the underlying triggering mechanism has been a central problem in
Geophysics. This 2-year study seeks to make a fundamental breakthrough in
understanding these triggered phenomena. The investigator recently identified a
dynamic pressure surge phenomenon where the fluid pressure in a fluid-filled
fracture can increase 2-3 orders of magnitude relative to the incident wave
pressure. The increase in fluid pressure can reduce the effective confining
pressure to trigger earthquakes or to produce a pressure gradient to drive fluid
flow. This newly discovered effect could be much more pronounced for a low-
frequency incidence seismic wave than that for a high-frequency one, which
agrees with observations. In addition to its frequency-dependence, the pressure
surge phenomenon also depends on the fracture geometry and aperture. This
project will investigate a scientifically testable hypothesis, which can fill
the knowledge gap in understanding triggering of many phenomena, including
earthquake dynamic triggering. To test this hypothesis, the investigator will
use both high-performance computing on numerical models and laboratory
experiments. The proposed idea and approaches are promising and may have far-
reaching consequences in not only the earthquake but also the volcano hazards
mitigation. In addition, the insights learned from this project can be used to
create new subsurface sensing and imaging methods, useful in carbon
sequestration, nuclear waste disposal, and unconventional/geothermal energy
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.