* 1833155
* Conference to Advance Scientific Understanding and Broader Impacts of Indigenous Languages of the Americas: South, Central, and North
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Shannon Bischoff, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2020
* USD 34,000.00

Most indigenous languages of the Americas are severely threatened, adding
urgency to the increasing the scientific and broader impacts for the
documentation of these languages. The international Society for the Study of the
Indigenous Languages of the Americas (SSILA) is among the organizations
increasingly focused on effective approaches to the language sciences that
advance knowledge using various methodological approaches, including, community-
based. Such research paradigms emphasize meaningful, egalitarian relationships
with communities whose languages are under threat. This project supports a
workshop organized for the annual meeting of SSILA, and it proposes to infuse
new methodologies and strategies for documenting and revitalizing American
indigenous languages by bringing together academic and community language
experts from Central and South America with a North American audience. The goal
is to bring together these diverse perspectives and enrich the quality of
language data for linguistic research, ultimately leading to new insights about
relationships among languages, traditional knowledge embedded within language,
and the possibilities of the human mind. Broader impacts include the potential
for engagement with and advancing knowledge to the greater audience of linguists
who attend this annual meeting, the availability of results through the SSILA
website, and the potential benefits of approaches from other regions of the
Americas that can positively impact the preservation and revitalization of
Native American languages in the U.S.

This workshop will provide an initial platform for communication among
community members, researchers, and institutions across the Americas who engage
in community-based language work. By supporting the attendance of and Central
and South American researchers and indigenous community members, the workshop
will promote an understanding of how community-based research is conceptualized
across the Americas, what principles and constructs are used, and what can be
learned from one another in order to conduct language research in a more ethical
and effective manner and promote language revitalization, maintenance, and
documentation. Because there are few consistent platforms for communication
across the Americas, noteworthy work on community-based approaches to language
documentation, and revitalization taking place elsewhere in the Americas does
not always reach U.S.-based community members and researchers and Native
American communities. Research agendas into acquisition of endangered languages,
or the broadening of participation by training indigenous language speakers are
both areas where the U.S. lags behind. Novel approaches through this knowledge
exchange has the potential to enhance scientific understanding and investigation
into the linguistic diversity of the Americas, broaden participation by Native
Americans and Latinos in the U.S. in the language sciences, while the
involvement of students has the potential to enhance the STEM workforce in an
increasingly globalized context. The methodology employed will include a
collective impact model, defined as a commitment by a diverse set of
stakeholders to solve a specific social problem under a centralized
infrastructure, to collectively tackle the challenges of unnatural language
loss. The model will help establish strategies for future communication,
collaborations, and dissemination of community-based approaches to language
preservation, maintenance, revitalization, and documentation across the
Americas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.