* 1833767
* Engineering Academic Talent Scholarship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2025
* Nieves Angulo, CUNY Hostos Community College
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,149,400.00

This five-year project will contribute to the national need for well-educated
STEM professionals by supporting the success of thirty Scholars who are pursuing
associate's and bachelor's degrees in engineering. The project is led by Hostos
Community College, an urban Hispanic-Serving Institution in Bronx, NY, and
member of the City University of New York system. The project will support the
retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need in partnership with The City College of New York's
Grove School of Engineering. Over five years, this project will fund up to 110
annual scholarships. Each scholarship will provide a full year of financial
support for up to four years of study, including up to two years at Hostos
Community College and up to two years at the Grove School of Engineering. The
project will increase the impact of the scholarship support by providing
Scholars with mentoring by faculty and near-peers and ensuring that the Scholars
take full advantage of available resources and professional development
opportunities that are associated with student success. These resources include:
1) writing across disciplines in the STEM curriculum; 2) mentored immersive
undergraduate research experiences; 3) guidance and support for transfer to a
four-year institution; 4) exposure to STEM-related working and professional
facilities; 5) participation at professional STEM conferences; and 6) career
orientation workshops and other professional development opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the previous NSF-funded "Bridges to
Engineering Success for Transfers" Program that helped to establish a Joint Dual
Engineering Degree Program between Hostos Community College and the Grove School
of Engineering. The project includes a robust evaluation plan to determine the
impact of combined faculty and near-peer mentoring on Scholars' academic
success. The evaluation plan will use a mixed-method approach to assess the
project's impact on Scholars' academic performance, retention (institutional and
within STEM disciplines), and post-graduate outcomes relative to their non-
participant peers, as well as project implementation, progress in relation to
developmental objectives, institutional impact, and alignment with the NSF
Scholarships in STEM program. The research results from this study will be used
formatively to refine the intervention model as student experiences and outcomes
are better understood. The results are expected to be generalizable to other
populations both inside and outside of Hostos Community College, creating the
potential to expand the project model to other STEM programs and institutions.
This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income, academically high-achieving students with demonstrated financial need
who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about academic
success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-
income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.