* 1833095
* RII Track-4: Liquid Xenon Time Projection Chamber R&amp;D on the Large Xenon Test Stand at LLNL
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Ryan MacLellan, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2020
* USD 184,689.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The only known neutral
fundamental particles, that also have mass, are neutrinos. This makes them the
only candidates to be their own antiparticle. If the neutrino is its own
antiparticle, we could resolve some outstanding curiosities, not the least of
which being: "Why is the Universe made up of matter and not roughly equal
amounts of matter and antimatter?" This fellowship will initiate a long-term
collaboration between the University of South Dakota (USD) and the Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) that will perform research and development
of liquid xenon detector technologies for the next generation of rare decay
searches. This fellowship will provide the PI and USD graduate students with the
opportunity to experiment with state of the art detector technologies that could
one day be deployed in South Dakota in a next-generation multi-tonne-scale
liquid xenon dark matter or neutrinoless double-beta decay search. Observation
of the latter is the only feasible way to determine that the neutrino is, in
fact, its own antiparticle. Both USD and LLNL are members of the much broader
nEXO Collaboration that is working towards a proposal to build such an
experiment deep underground, such as in the Sanford Underground Research
Facility in South Dakota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large, monolithic liquid xenon time-projection
chambers have been demonstrated to be among the most powerful tools for low-
background rare-event searches. In particular, the direct dark matter search
community has embraced them as the leaders of the next generation program that
is beginning to take shape. EXO-200 has also demonstrated the potential for such
a detector to meet the next generation target for a tonne-scale neutrinoless
double-beta decay search. The goal of this fellowship will be to initiate a
long-term collaboration between the University of South Dakota (USD) and the
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL). This collaboration will leverage
the large xenon test facility at LLNL to perform R&amp;D towards a (five) tonne
scale liquid-xenon time-projection chamber to eventually search for the
neutrinoless double-beta decay of Xe-136 with the nEXO experiment. The primary
objective of the LLNL test facility, once we finish construction and
commissioning, will be to qualify the electric field for the full diameter of
nEXO. However, it can house many of the novel detector systems being prototyped
for nEXO including novel charge readout tiles and custom silicon
photomultipliers. The test facility will also be used to prototype external
xenon handling systems. Immersing the PI in this R&amp;D nexus for nEXO will
ensure that the PI will have the expertise to contribute to the ongoing success
of the nEXO experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.