* 1833147
* Building Physical Science Content Knowledge of Pre-Service Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Alice Steimle, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,982.00

This project is an IUSE: EHR Exploration and Design Tier for Engaged Student
Learning project that seeks to provide robust learning experiences in physical
science for non-science majors, specifically pre-service elementary teacher
majors. The specific aims are to: 1) increase pre-service elementary teachers'
physical science content knowledge; 2) increase their science-related pedagogy
knowledge; and 3) change the teaching practices and approaches used by
instructors of physical science undergraduate courses for non-science majors. If
this approach is successful, then teachers who received this education will be
better positioned to engage their elementary students in rich learning
activities. Furthermore, this curriculum has the potential to be used beyond
pre-service elementary teachers, extending to all undergraduate non-science
majors and contributing to a more scientifically literate
populace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a Design-Based Research approach, this
project will examine the successful model of the Making Sense of Science (MSS)
professional learning courses for K-8 teachers to identify key elements that led
to success. Using MSS and a situated learning framework, the project will
design, develop, and deliver a non-major physical science content course. This
course will be designed with appropriate pedagogical techniques and integrated
with mathematics and literacy. The aim is that this course will deepen the
science content knowledge and science pedagogy knowledge of pre-service
elementary teachers, so they will be better prepared to enter their future
classrooms. The project intends to employ a convergent-parallel mixed methods
approach to compare a treatment group (students in the new course) to a control
group (students in the traditional course). This design includes quantitative
instruments that explore changes in the science and science pedagogy
understandings of the pre-service teachers. The qualitative component of the
study integrates data from interviews, artifacts, and participant observations,
along with the use of focus groups. The results of this project have the
potential to advance understanding of how to improve science teaching and
learning in higher education, providing a knowledge base upon which others can
build.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.