* 1833291
* CSR: Medium: Collaborative Research: Portable Performance for Parallel Managed Languages Across the Many-Core Spectrum
* CSE,CNS
* 08/13/2017,05/31/2019
* J. Eliot Moss, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2019
* USD 9,100.00

Computers with many tens to hundreds of ?cores? are on their way, but
programming languages and tools that exploit them well have lagged. At the same
time, there are emerging programming languages intended for writing programs to
run on these computers. These languages, such as X10 and Fortress, add support
for new concepts that make it easier to write many-core programs, but there does
not yet exist good compiler and run-time support for these languages. Systems
that run Java, namely Java virtual machines such as those that run on virtually
every laptop, desktop, and server today, supply much of what the new languages
need, but fall short in some important ways. In particular they do not provide
for saying in which part of memory to place particular objects, on which core to
run which computations, easy ways to get all cores busy working on different
parts of a big piece of data, or for synchronizing and getting right all the
data manipulations happening at the same time. This project is extending an
existing research Java virtual machine (Jikes RVM) with support for many ways of
doing the things that the new languages need in order to run well on many-core
computers. The primary goal is to devise extensions to standard Java virtual
machines for this new world, and to make it possible for many others to
experiment with different ways of implementing these extensions, thus leveraging
the creativity of the whole community of language and virtual machine
researchers. Secondary goals include offering reasonably good initial
implementations of virtual machine extensions as a starting point for future
research and development, and proposing specific extensions to the Java virtual
machine specification standard.