* 1833053
* RII Track-4: Peering into Nature's Glass Boxes - using nano-Raman Spectroscopy to answer Novel Questions in Diatom-focused Environmental Research
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jeffrey Krause, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 121,325.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;Diatoms are abundant microscopic oceanic
'plants' which have a protective shell made of glass. Despite their small size,
diatoms' collective importance in marine ecosystems is immense. They produce as
much oxygen globally as all the rain forests combined. Their glass shell (i.e.
diatomaceous earth) also has many industrial applications. Unlike land plants
which grow relatively slow, diatom biomass accumulates fast and is rapidly
recycled in seawater. The recycling of diatom biomass releases 5-10 billion
metric tons of carbon back into the ocean annually -a quantity of carbon which
exceeds global fossil-fuel emissions. This project will use state-of-the-art
technology to examine the properties of the glass shell and determine how they
affect diatom-biomass recycling. This technology uses single-cell analysis,
instead of traditional methods which require thousands of cells, thereby
enabling new understanding and insight of single-cell material composition and
structure. This project will help entrench this technology into diatom-based
research and provide training for a Ph.D. student. The project collaboration
with Stony Brook University based scientist will help researchers at the
Alabama-based Dauphin Island Sea Lab personnel to emerge as leaders in their
subfields. Also considering the vast industrial application for diatomaceous
earth, these approaches may be useful for industry. This expertise will enable
future work to serve the unique environmental research needs in the northern
Gulf of Mexico (Alabama, Mississippi, Louisiana).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;Diatoms are aquatic phytoplankton, characterized by their
silica shell, which account for 20-40% of marine primary production. Post-mortem
silica dissolution liberates diatom organic matter within days or weeks after
production, this equates to 5-10 Pg of carbon being recycled back into the ocean
annually -a quantity of carbon which exceeds global fossil-fuel emissions.
Because the long-term fate of diatom organic matter is governed in part by
whether their shell dissolves, this project aims to understand how organic
matter within diatom silica affects its dissolution. This project will move away
from reliance on current methods (which require thousands of cells) and examine
processes at the single-cell level. Raman spectroscopy can provide detailed
single-cell information on material composition and structure. Sample analyses
will be done at the NARMIL facility at Stony Brook University. This facility
houses the state-of-the-art instrumentation necessary to test hypotheses related
to understanding how silica-encased organic matter is affected by diatom growth
conditions and whether sediment-preserved diatoms share common organic-matter
traits. This project will have broader impact beyond its duration. The PI's
group will build a methodological tool set that has yet to be fully utilized in
his subfield and considering the vast industrial application of diatom silica
(diatomaceous earth) these approaches may be useful for industry. A Ph.D.
student will be trained in these methods and analyses. This collaboration will
also foster data set development and publications which will enable the Alabama-
based PI to be competitive for future proposals by applying these approaches to
address novel questions in the northern Gulf of Mexico and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.