* 1833667
* Frederick Community College STEM Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Matthew Lochman, Frederick Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 07/31/2024
* USD 637,097.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Frederick Community College.
Throughout its 5 years, this project will fund 30 scholarships in 3 groups of 10
students who are pursuing associate's degrees in STEM disciplines. The program
will offer these scholars the resources and support needed to identify
appropriate STEM-related academic and career pathways and make a full-time
commitment to achieving their goals related to their chosen pathways. The
project will answer the need to train more students to become STEM
professionals. With financial support, faculty mentoring, exposure to research,
industry experiences, and opportunities for STEM-related community service,
students will develop an identity not only as STEM students, but as
professionals entering a discipline and members of a robust STEM
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek to provide new
understandings of how to improve student enrollment and success (retention,
completion, and/or transfer) using STEM scholarship funds and student
interventions. The research in the project will build upon and extend prior
studies around increasing STEM enrollment using scholarships and
interdisciplinary seminars, retention models for STEM majors, and best practices
for student intervention identified by Complete College America. Along with
these activities, a speaker series, field trips, service learning opportunities,
and other co-curricular events will be created by the STEM Scholars program to
aid in the creation of a cohort identity. Through interviews and surveys, the
program plans to determine which parts of the program attracted students, how
and why these components affected them academically and socially, and how these
experiences made lasting changes to their future success. It will also examine
the impact of the scholarships covering the entire cost of attendance on
students' employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.