* 1833549
* SCH: Student Travel Support for IEEE Conference on Connected Health (CHASE 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Hua Fang, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 04/30/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This project is to support student travel and participation in the IEEE
Conference on Connected Health (CHASE 2018) in Arlington, VA. CHASE provides a
supportive scientific forum for students focusing on computing and engineering
research associated with the multidisciplinary field of connected health. CHASE
provides a forum for expert and peer critique of students' research with the
goal of improving their science. Student participants will also have the
opportunity to receive networking support and career advice from
internationally-recognized experts. Overall, the travel support brings together
people who might not otherwise engage with one another and engage in
multidisciplinary research in fields involving connected health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal supports doctoral students by providing a
Student Research Forum focused on encouraging students to examine technologies
from multiple perspectives to understand how innovative technology, usable
systems, and sound medical information combine to make the most impact. In
addition, the Career Panel enables students to see different career paths for
researchers in this area. The CHASE conference exposes participants to different
scientific disciplinary approaches, supports networking with conference
attendees and is designed to support the development of the next generation of
scholars in connected health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.