* 1833753
* Mentored Excellence Toward Research and Industry Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Paul Buonora, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 998,413.00

This five-year project aims will contribute to the national need for highly
qualified STEM professionals by increasing the number of STEM students who earn
a bachelor's degree in STEM and enter a STEM career or pursue a STEM graduate
degree. To achieve this goal, California State University, Long Beach (CSULB)
will provide scholarships to 44 undergraduates who are pursuing bachelor's
degrees in mathematics, chemistry, geology, or physics. The project estimates
that each Scholar will receive approximately two years of scholarship support.
This support will relieve unmet financial obligations sufficiently to enable the
Scholars to focus on academic responsibilities and related opportunities. The
project aims to develop an institutional pathway that combines career
development with experiential learning to foster student leadership. Project
activities include faculty and peer mentorship and mindset training designed to
elevate students' confidence and sense of belonging. To improve students'
scientific and workplace skills, the project will provide Scholars with career
and internship preparation, advising, experiential learning, and leadership
development training. The project will develop service-learning opportunities
within local communities that enable Scholars to use their STEM knowledge to
help local businesses and community programs. The project aims to educate
student leaders who know how to use their STEM expertise to positively impact
their local communities and society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's
research plan is designed to investigate: how a three-tiered, progressive
admission process affects recruitment of low-income and academically talented
students, including first generation and under-represented minority students;
how students' non-cognitive characteristics affect their success in project
activities and in STEM; how the project activities affect students' recognition
of the potential for STEM to serve and advance local and regional communities;
and how the project activities affect students' sense of themselves as potential
leaders in STEM. Results of formative and summative project evaluation will
define which project activities are most effective at supporting skills
development, building confidence, and removing barriers for the participants.
Two, one-year Graduate Research Fellows will be recruited to study the project's
impact on increasing students' confidence, skills, efficacy, and leadership
qualities. Results from this project can inform STEM educators about effective
design of supports that meet the needs of students at critical transitions in
their STEM education. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income, academically high-achieving students with demonstrated
financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the
education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.