* 1833419
* Microearthquakes on the Endeavour Segment, Juan de Fuca Ridge: A Near Real Time Earthquake Catalog for the ONC Cabled Observatory and a Reanalysis of Historical Data
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* William Wilcock, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2021
* USD 131,427.00

Midocean ridge earthquakes, while not as large and damaging as subduction zone
earthquakes, are nevertheless important for understanding the geological
processes that form ocean crust. These earthquakes arise due to motion on faults
associated with tectonic plate extension or from magmatic activity associated
with seafloor volcanic processes. Earthquakes are also generated by crustal
cracking that results from hydrothermal cooling of ocean crust. Ocean Networks
Canada have operated a cabled observatory at the Endeavour midocean spreading
center segment of the Juan de Fuca Ridge off the Pacific Northwest coast since
2011. Initially, the cabled observatory supported a variety of instruments in
two hydrothermal vent fields, but just a single seismic station. In 2016, the
seismic network expanded to four stations and several more are being added in
summer 2018, together with more instruments to monitor the hydrothermal vent
fields. This study will create an earthquake catalog for the Endeavour cabled
observatory that will update in near real time. Seismicity from two prior
experiments with autonomous ocean bottom seismometers will be relocated with
three-dimensional seismic velocity models from recent a tomography. The
scientific goals are to characterize how the seismicity has evolved as
extensional stresses have accumulated since the segment last ruptured
volcanically two decades ago, improve the interpretation of two complex
earthquake swarms in 2005, constrain the linkages between hydrothermal
seismicity and heat uptake above the magma chamber, and provide a public
earthquake catalog that can be used by researchers to investigate temporal
linkages between seismicity and variations in the hydrothermal fields. In terms
of broader impacts, this project will train a postdoctoral researcher and foster
an international collaboration with Canadian scientists studying the Endeavour
hydrothermal fields.

Long term observatories are an important tool for capturing the seafloor
spreading events that form the upper oceanic crust and for understanding the
evolution of hydrothermal systems and the chemosynthetic biological communities
they support. About 1 meter of extensional strain has accumulated since the last
non-eruptive diking event on the central Endeavour segment in 1999, and the
rates of seismicity and level of tidal triggering are likely to evolve as the
current spreading cycle approaches its culmination. The two swarms that occurred
in 2005 on the northern Endeavour segment and West Valley propagator were
difficult to interpret because of large systematic location errors. Relocating
the earthquakes with an accurate three-dimensional model and the double-
difference technique will allow earthquakes to be associated with morphological
features and facilitate a better understanding of the magmatic and tectonic
contributions to these swarms. Existing locations for the earthquakes above the
axial magma chamber have absolute errors of several hundred meters and
relocating these events with an accurate three-dimensional velocity model will
contribute to the understanding of hydrothermal heat uptake by constraining the
position of earthquakes relative to the axial magma chamber. It may also resolve
changes in the configuration of the hydrothermal system as a result of deepening
of the hydrothermal system as heat is mined from the axial magma chamber and/or
the injection of fresh magma.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.