* 1833818
* Supporting Graduation and Transfer of Community College Students in STEM Through Opportunities in Research
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Daeri Tenery, Valencia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 12/31/2023
* USD 650,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
support high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at
Valencia College, a two-year college and Hispanic-Serving Institution. Lack of
knowledge and skills combined with limited access to educational resources are
significant barriers to the success of many low-income, high-achieving students
in STEM academic and career pathways. This S-STEM project aims to strengthen and
diversify collegiate STEM degree completion and, ultimately, the STEM workforce
by creating a STEM support program at Valencia College. This project will
provide low-income, academically talented students with comprehensive wrap-
around support early in their college experience, with emphasis on STEM
research, mentoring, coursework, and advising to support STEM degree completion.
The project aims to generate a STEM research community that nurtures student
development and encourages continuation in STEM education and careers. Over the
five years of funding, the project will provide 60 one-year scholarships to 30
students pursuing associate degrees in biology, chemistry, computer science,
engineering, or physics transfer pathways. Students who successfully transfer to
a four-year STEM baccalaureate program will receive a one-time scholarship to
support their studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since Valencia College has unique,
non-traditional student demographics, including a considerable population of
low-income students, the project will address existing disparities of low-income
student completion in STEM degrees. The project will accomplish this goal by
determining optimal conditions for the post-secondary research experiences, the
support network, and scholarship assistance to maximize positive impact on
student persistence in STEM to successful transfer. The goals of the project are
to: 1) increase the enrollment and diversity of low-income, academically
talented students in STEM degree pathways; 2) adapt evidence-based practices and
leverage existing resources to create a sustainable student support model; 3)
increase student success rates through integrated support services promoting
full-time enrollment and degree attainment; and 4) assist student transfer to
four-year degree programs and support them to gain access to upper division
undergraduate research. The project will advance knowledge through a research
study focusing on the impact of early experiences in undergraduate research at a
two-year institution and on early interventions including mentoring practices
that incorporate growth mindset interventions. The project will disseminate
these results to inform the design of curricular methods and educational
practices that other institutions of higher education can adapt to support low-
income, academically talented STEM degree-seeking
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.