* 1833019
* RII Track-4: Using STM to Examine the Origin of Biological Homochirality in Amino Acids from Ultra-High Vacuum to Liquid Environments
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Erin Iski, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 123,741.00

Nontechnical Description &lt;br/&gt; This project focuses on elucidating
fundamental science on the surfaces of amino acids by comparing
characterizations under carefully controlled conditions with those closer to
real-world conditions. In line with NSF's mission, this project will lead to a
deeper understanding of how small, prebiotic molecules interact with surfaces
and participate in the emergence of biologically applicable precursors. On a
fundamental level, this project will study how amino acid molecules interact and
how those interactions correlate to biologically relevant structures like
proteins. Importantly, the association of single-molecule studies performed on a
high-end microscope (low temperature, high vacuum) with studies performed on a
less-ideal microscope (room temperature, typical atmospheric pressure) is both
novel and essential to studying biologically relevant systems. While single
molecule studies are often performed in pristine conditions, it is rare that
those studies are combined with the same systems in the real-world. Research
outcomes will make significant contributions to our understanding of prebiotic
molecules and the evolution of those molecules on metallic surfaces. The
findings of this research will be used at educational events to demonstrate how
fundamental science can be used to make broader predictions about amino acids
and the beginning of biologically-active molecules on this planet.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt; The preference for a
specific handedness of biological molecules has long intrigued scientists. The
question of how chiral symmetry was broken and subsequently biased towards left-
handed molecules is central to the understanding of the origin of life on this
planet. As a step towards understanding such processes, the assembly of
individual molecules on surfaces can be studied with modern surface science
techniques. Low-temperature, ultra-high vacuum, scanning tunneling microscopy
(LT-UHV STM) will be used to capture exact molecular arrangements, which will
then be coupled with liquid and electrochemical STM (EC-STM) to replicate
biological conditions for model systems such as amino acids on metals. In
addition to imaging molecular self-assembly with nanoscale resolution, STM
images will be used to understand chiral propagation and recognition, which is
directly applicable to origin of life studies. Beyond the transfer of chirality,
these biological systems are relevant for the study of the preference for
secondary structures by different amino acid residues. In order to study these
systems, several research objectives are proposed: (1) Establish a baseline for
molecular assembly and how molecular adsorption alters the underlying metal
substrate in UHV. (2) Use ambient, liquid, and EC-STM to determine if the
observed UHV behavior can be extended to more realistic conditions. (3)
Investigate how the chirality of L-amino acids is transmitted across a 2D
surface in UHV. This proposal addresses the critical need to ascertain a
connection between model chiral surface studies and studies performed with
similar resolution under relevant biochemical
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.