* 1833225
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research Food-Water-Energy Nexus: Intelligent Urban Metabolic Systems for Green Cities of Tomorrow: an FWE Nexus-based Approach
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Shaowen Wang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 06/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Many cities across the globe are facing difficult challenges managing their
food, water and energy systems. The challenges stem from the fact that the
issues of food, water and energy are often tightly connected with each other,
not only locally but also globally. This is known as the Food-Water-Energy (FWE)
nexus. An effective solution to a local water problem may cause new local
problems with food or energy, or cause new water problems at the global level.
On a local scale, it is difficult to anticipate whether solutions to one issue
in the nexus are sustainable across food, water and energy systems, both at the
local and the global scale. Innovative solutions that encompass the nexus are
particularly important to enable cities to better manage their food, water and
energy systems and understand the benefits and tradeoffs for different
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports U.S. researchers
participating in a project competitively selected by a 29-country initiative
through the joint Belmont Forum- Joint Programming Initiative (JPI) Urban
Europe. The Sustainable Urbanization Global Initiative (SUGI)/Food-Water-Energy
Nexus is a multilateral initiative designed to support research projects that
bring together the fragmented research and expertise across the globe to find
innovative solutions to the Food-Water-Energy Nexus challenge. The call seeks to
develop more resilient, applied urban solutions to benefit a much wider range of
stakeholders. The rapid urbanization of the world's population underscores the
importance of this focus. International partners were invited to develop
solutions for this challenge. The funds requested will be used to support U.S.
participants to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries and that bring together natural scientists,
social scientists and research users (e.g., civil society, NGOs, and industry).
Participants from other countries are funded through their national funding
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to identify the key
factors of urban metabolism and their complex interactions from FWE Nexus
perspective and to improve the cost-benefit for FWE consumption by optimizing
food-water-energy reallocations. This project will identify critical FWE factors
and define critical pathways of food-water-energy delivery to urban centers
using advanced tools such as Artificial Intelligence, data mining, system
dynamics modelling, agro-logistics and scenario analysis. The project seeks to
understand the intertwined nature of food-water-energy in terms of their
lifecycles, including production, processing, delivery, consumption, and
disposal. The primary outcome will be the development of the intelligent urban
metabolic systems for cities with challenges for green urban centers of
tomorrow. The comprehensive solutions will provide stakeholders and decision
makers with information that can be used to develop strategies to help sustain
the inevitable trends of urbanization by effectively managing the food-water-
energy nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.