* 1833783
* Alleviating Transfer Shock in Community College STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2024
* Ashley Hagler, Gaston College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 12/31/2024
* USD 972,598.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
support high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at
Gaston College in North Carolina. This project aims to award 90 one-year
scholarships over five years to 30 different STEM students; support will be
available for up to two years at the community college, and up to two semesters
after transfer to a four-year STEM degree program. The aims of the project are
to improve retention, course success, degree attainment, and transfer success of
students in the Gaston College Associate of Science and Associate of Engineering
degree programs. Community colleges are the entry point to higher education for
many low income and demographic groups that are underrepresented in STEM
careers. Thus, by identifying practices that most effectively promote student
success both at the community college and after transfer, this project can
provide a model for community colleges and their university partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using Tinto's model of academic and social integration as
its theoretical basis, this program will implement activities that build
students' academic cultural capital, maintain student interest in STEM, and
increase student success in STEM majors, particularly for underrepresented
populations. These activities include academic supports in the form of learning
community participation, professional tutoring, faculty mentoring, success
coaching, and targeted advising, as well as co-curricular activities that
support STEM identity formation. After transfer, cohort graduates will benefit
academically and socially by maintaining contact with their original support
networks via virtual mentoring and web-based discussion boards through which
they can share experiences, find campus resources, and get advice and support,
thereby reducing the effects of transfer shock. Many of the activities, such as
participation in learning communities, have been shown to be effective in
increasing retention and graduation among STEM majors. However, little research
has been done to examine the impact that maintaining a connection to the
original learning community has on transfer shock. This project aims to address
this gap in current knowledge and continue to advance understanding of
activities associated with community college student retention, transfer between
institutions, and degree attainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.