* 1833105
* RII Track-4: Why are Young Volcanic Rocks Undateable: Chemistry, Environment, or Instrumentation?
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Jeff Benowitz, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2020
* USD 220,043.00

Nontechnical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geochronology is the field of
science that determines the age of earth materials using trace radioisotopes
contained in rocks and other minerals when they were formed. Different methods
used for radiometric dating apply to different materials and vary in the
timescales over which they are accurate. This fellowship enables an early career
researcher at the University of Alaska Fairbanks and a graduate student trainee
to collaborate with researchers at the Oregon State University. While there they
will use state-of-the art equipment to determine the age of young volcanic rocks
from Alaska's Aleutian and Wrangell arcs. Precise geological dating of young
volcanic rocks is important in understanding the eruptive history of volcanoes
in Alaska, volcanic and seismic hazards assessment, and tectonic
reconstructions. The project will investigate how the chemistry and environments
of the samples and the sensitivity and precision of available measurement
instrumentation contribute to the uncertainties in determining the age of young
volcanic rocks. The research will enable the development of new methods to
accurately date young volcanic rocks and lead to improved research capabilities
for the PI at his home institution. The training and collaborations accrued
through this project will enrich the careers of the participating faculty and
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will allow researchers at the University of Alaska-Fairbanks to
collaborate with the Oregon State University Argon Geochronology Laboratory
(OSU-AGL) to produce high-precision 40Ar/39Ar geochronology data to determine
the age of volcanic rocks and products from Alaska?s Aleutian and Wrangell arcs.
Accurate dating of these young volcanic rocks is hampered by uncertainties
arising from radiochemistry within the samples, limitations on the available
instrumentation, and mass fractionation processes in the magma chamber. This
project overcomes some of these difficulties through systematic experimentation
of the volcanic rocks using the noble gas multi-collector mass spectrometer and
software available at the OSU-AGL. The researchers will select samples from a
broad range of tectonic-magmatic settings, for example, monogenic cones,
intraplate, arc-transform magmatism, and arc magmatism, to investigate potential
mass fractionation influences. The PI and his graduate student will extend their
expertise with the use of a noble gas mass spectrometer by peak-hopping on a
single detector and will be trained in the operation of modern instrumentation
with the potential to enhance the research instrumentation and capabilities at
their home institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.