* 1833532
* A New Adjoint-state Full Waveform Tsunami Source Imaging Method
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Lingsen Meng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2022
* USD 378,757.00

Tsunamis are oceanic gravity waves generated by the displacement of a large
volume of water in the ocean, typically resulting from complex geophysical
processes including shallow earthquakes that break the oceanic crust and
seafloor landslides. Tsunamis can cause large number of casualties and economic
loss in coastal regions, which are home to over a third of the world population.
Tsunami warning is thus a crucial system to reduce and mitigate tsunami hazards.
In order to perform a more rapid and accurate tsunami early warning as well as
better understanding the complexity of tsunami source, the investigators propose
to apply the adjoint-state method to solve for the initial seafloor deformation
of the tsunami source. The method improves the imaging resolution of the
earthquake source process and produces little artifacts with a relatively small
computational cost. This project takes full advantage of increasing tsunami
instrumentations including ocean-bottom pressure sensors and coastal tide gauges
and supports the Ph. D work of a female student. The research results are being
shared via conferences and journals, as well as outreach to public schools and
in undergraduate classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional source inversion
using tsunamis waves is based on either the finite-fault slip modeling or the
time-reversal imaging. Such inversion methods suffer from the uncertainty of
fault parameters or crustal rigidity. Moreover, the heavy computational burden
of calculating Green's functions result in limited spatial resolution and
hinders the real-time applicability of the traditional methods to tsunami early
warning. In this work, we transplant the state-of-art adjoint-state full-
waveform inversion method from exploration seismology to tsunami source imaging.
The adjoint-state method solves the initial-water-elevation pattern with less
computational cost, which potentially can improve the speed of tsunami early
warning and reduces the blind zone. Our new method does not rely on pre-defined
fault parameters and is suitable for tsunami-generating earthquakes with unknown
fault geometry. This method also efficiently handles dense mesh grid and is
capable of resolving small-scale secondary tsunami sources, such as the seafloor
landslide or secondary ruptures on splay faults. Our results will advance
tsunami science and earthquake source dynamics and set the stage to improve
real-time applications such as tsunami early warning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.