* 1833035
* Collaborative Proposal: NSF Summer School on Computational Modeling of Disordered Materials for Historically Black Colleges and Universities
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Parthapratim Biswas, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2021
* USD 115,459.00

SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports an intensive training workshop
for students and faculty members from Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU) and Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) on computational
modeling of complex materials, with an emphasis on the fundamental concepts of
physics, chemistry and materials science. The participants will learn and employ
a variety of modern structural modeling techniques and widely used computer
simulation methodologies to understand and analyze the properties of highly
complex and technologically important disordered materials. The workshop will
adopt a lecture-laboratory approach, whereby each lecture is followed by hands-
on computational "laboratory" exercises, aimed at illustrating how information
from the lecture can be directly employed for practical simulations of complex
materials. The topics to be addressed in the laboratory exercises are:
structural modeling techniques on the length scale of atoms, analyses of
structural properties, geometry optimization, electronic and vibrational
properties, as well as thermodynamic properties of different types of disordered
materials. The participants will also be introduced to the fundamentals of
emerging data-centric and machine-learning techniques in materials modeling. The
workshop will: (i) expose students to a wide range of state-of-the-art computer
simulation techniques, and the applications of these techniques to real-world
problems; (ii) bridge the gap between the standard teaching curriculum at the
undergraduate and graduate levels and the actual expertise and knowledge that
are needed for practicing computational materials science even at its basic
level; (iii) develop collaborative initiatives between HBCUs and state-funded
and private universities to initiate research in computational modeling of
complex materials. The PIs will provide post-workshop support for a period of
six months so that participants may develop small publishable research projects
on their return to their home institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.