* 1833148
* RV Endeavor Ship Operations: 2018-2022
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Thomas Glennon, University of Rhode Island
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rose Dufour
* 07/31/2024
* USD 16,900,752.00

R/V Endeavor is owned by the National Science Foundation, and is operated by The
University of Rhode Island (URI) Graduate School of Oceanography (GSO). This
proposal represents a request for renewal of a five-year Cooperative Agreement
with the National Science Foundation from 2018 through 2022. With its home port
at URI's Narragansett Bay Campus, R/V Endeavor represents the flagship of the
school's shore-based facilities. GSO's researchers investigate local to global-
scale phenomena, providing greater breadth and depth of scientific
understanding. GSO's disciplinary strengths span physical oceanography, marine
geology and geophysics, marine and atmospheric chemistry, and biological
oceanography. GSO is also home to unique outreach expertise in the fields of
science communication, coastal policy and management, and marine
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal presents the objectives and the
methods employed for continued service of a renewed cooperative agreement for
R/V Endeavor program, which has consistently provided support over the past 41
years to our nation's oceanographic science community. Historical budget data is
presented to show the results of efficient, cost effective financial management
systems. The proposal also describes URI GSO's involvement with the East Coast
Oceanographic Consortium (ECOC), its membership, and delineates the benefits of
a consortium approach to ocean-based research and education. This funding
request supports 127 NSF mission days aboard the R/V Endeavor and is based on a
comprehensive operating budget forecast and analysis of projected income and
expenses for CY 2018. The extent to which the University of Rhode Island will
operate and accomplish its goals for the five-year Cooperative Agreement is
described in the Project Description of this proposal. The intellectual merit
and broader impact of the program is reflective of its
missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For CY 2018, the missions are noted
below:&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#1048696; Seven Science Missions for NSF&lt;br/&gt;- Heidi
Sosik (WHOI) - LTER: Linking pelagic community structure&lt;br/&gt;- Purnima
Makris (Nthest U) - Development of a large-aperture coherent
hydrophone&lt;br/&gt;- Joseph Montoya (GaTech) - Collaborative Research: Impact
of the Amazon River &lt;br/&gt;William Balch (Bigelow) - Coccolithophore
Mixotrophy;&lt;br/&gt;- Andrew Juhl (LDEO) - Development of low N:P in the
euphotic zone -&lt;br/&gt;- Steven D'Hondt (URI-GSO) - An autonomous ocean
profiling and water sampling&lt;br/&gt;- John Toole (WHOI) - Development and
Field testing Lift-Assisted Moored Profiler&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#1048696; One Science
Mission for NAVY-ONR&lt;br/&gt;- Jennifer Mikis-Olds (UNH) - Atlantic Deepwater
Ecosystem Observatory Network&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#1048696; One Science Mission for
NAVY-NRL&lt;br/&gt;- Zhiqiang Liu (NRL-DC) - Secure and robust underwater
acoustic networking&lt;br/&gt;&amp;#1048696; Three Science Missions for URI-
GSO&lt;br/&gt;- Steven D'Hondt (URI-GSO) - First Sea Trial of Autonomous Ocean
Profiling &amp;&lt;br/&gt;Water Melissa Omand (URI-GSO) - An Endeavor to Explore
and Educate&lt;br/&gt;- David Smith (URI-GSO) - Rhode Island Teachers at
Sea.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.