* 1833215
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Bleaching phenotypes of acute vs. chronic coral bleaching susceptibility and resilience: towards a standardized coral resilience diagnostic
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mark Warner, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2023
* USD 109,361.00

The past few years have seen an unprecedented amount of coral bleaching across
the globe. Global bleaching events in 2015-17, severely impacting iconic coral
reefs in places such as the Great Barrier Reef, Micronesia, Hawaiian Islands,
and Caribbean, were the worst recorded in recent human history. When ocean
temperatures rise, the symbiosis between reef-building corals and their
photosynthetic algae deteriorates, many times resulting in widespread coral die-
offs as corals can starve without their symbiotic partners to supply food. These
widespread events can have drastic impacts on ocean health and biodiversity, as
well as the communities that depend on reefs for fishing, tourism, and
protection from storms. Importantly, some corals resist or recover from
bleaching better than others. Such variability in coral response to ocean
warming could be critical to reef survival in the future, yet the scientific
community lacks any standardized diagnostics to rapidly assess bleaching
tolerance limits. Here, we plan to: 1) develop a standardized, short-term
exposure to assess bleaching limits (analogous to cardiac stress tests for
humans), 2) design an experimental system capable of delivering a range of
thermal treatments as an open-source, low-cost, highly-portable device that can
be readily adapted for bleaching tests in a wide variety of coral habitats, and
3) disseminate the results, instructions, and technologies to the reef research
and conservation community through a combination of hands-on workshops, online
outreach materials, press releases, and open-access research publications.
Widespread dissemination of project products will be achieved via hands-on
demonstrations and workshops in key geographic areas (Middle East, Caribbean,
and Indo-Pacific), with a focus on the assembly of the system and operation of
the experimental assay using local corals. This project will train both graduate
students and a postdoctoral researcher, and brings together a team of national
and global researchers in a collaborative investigation to address the
international problem of coral bleaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With each passing
year, coral bleaching has shifted from an issue of serious sporadic concern to a
critical widespread threat to reefs across the globe that is increasing in
frequency and severity. However, during widespread bleaching events, some
scattered corals and reef sections are able to survive better than others.
Whether this is due to acclimatization or adaptation in thermal stress
tolerance, this variability in response is critical to coral resilience to
climate impacts. Currently, the scientific community lacks a standardized
approach to rapidly assess coral thermal limits and identify resilient
individuals or populations. Present day approaches range from observational
surveys of natural bleaching and mortality, to multiple weeks of controlled
chronic thermal exposure, to rapid, single or multi-day acute heat shocks. To
what degree bleaching response varies across short-term versus longer-term
experiments and how these responses compare to natural bleaching patterns is
largely unknown. Using a group of coral species representative of a historical
range of bleaching susceptibility (e.g., Acropora hemprichii, Pocillopora
meandrina, and Porites lobata), research will address this important knowledge
gap by experimental evaluation of the bleaching response to acute (0 - 2 day)
versus chronic (&gt;4 week) thermal stress. The overarching questions for this
study are: how are the acute and chronic coral bleaching responses related, and
can investigators predict ecologically relevant bleaching outcomes from the
response to a short-term, acute heat-stress? To answer these questions, the
research team will: 1) objectively compare acute versus chronic heat-stress
exposures and synthesize a variety of response metrics based on core
physiological measurements to develop a standardized, short-term thermal assay
and diagnostic approach to rapidly assess bleaching, 2) operationalize an
experimental system built around an open-source, cost-effective, easily
transportable temperature control technology, and 3) distribute the results,
experimental procedures, and temperature controlling technologies to the reef
research and conservation communities. This project will produce an affordable
experimental system and short-term diagnostic capable of determining coral
thermal limits in just a few days in almost any location with reliable access to
seawater and electricity or a portable generator. The research fills a critical
knowledge gap through the development of a standardized set of diagnostic tools
to assess coral thermal vulnerability before widespread bleaching events
actually occur, so that proactive conservation and management strategies can be
implemented ahead of widespread impacts to reef
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.