* 1833559
* Scholarships and Support Services to Increase Student Success in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2024
* Sandra Poinsett, College of Southern Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2024
* USD 953,243.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program will support the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at the College of Southern
Maryland. This project aims to award a total of 96 scholarships to at least 52
academically talented STEM students with financial need. The project plans to
implement and study practices shown by research to be effective. In this way,
the project will contribute to understanding about recruitment, retention,
student success, academic/career pathways, transfer, and degree attainment in
STEM fields. The project aims to: 1) implement undergraduate research
experiences in the community college and studying whether these experiences
increase student satisfaction with the program and retention; 2) measure
students' perspectives about persistence, and its relationship to campus climate
and students? sense of belonging; and 3) contribute to the growing body of
knowledge about community college students' experiences and success in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to scholarships, the project will
provide students with a continuum of support services aimed at increasing
retention and assisting graduates in transitioning to further education or
employment at one of the regions? private sector companies, military
installations, and government agencies. Targeted programs include Applied
Sciences and Technology, Biological Technology, Computer Information Systems,
Computer Science, Engineering, Engineering Technology, Information Services
Technology, Information Systems, Cybersecurity, and Mathematics and Physical
Sciences. Project objectives include: 1) increasing enrollment by capitalizing
on extensive K-16 STEM activity in the region; 2) improving student registration
through advising and program pathways to encourage retention; 3) increasing
student retention through community-building, biweekly cohort contact,
mentoring, tutoring, undergraduate research, a summer bridge program, and
enrichment experiences; 4) expanding and streamlining articulation to facilitate
transfer to four-year institutions; and 5) engaging employers in recruiting,
mentoring, and providing work-based enrichment
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.