* 1833310
* Systems Chemistry from Concepts to Conceptions Gordon Research Conference
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2018
* David Lynn, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 10/31/2018
* USD 45,000.00

The award from the Chemistry of Life Processes; Chemical Catalysis;
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry; and Chemical Structure,
Dynamics, and Mechanisms programs in the Division of Chemistry and the Systems
and Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences and the Biomaterials Program in the Division of Materials Research
supports the inaugural "Systems Chemistry" Gordon Research Conference on 29
July-3 August, 2018 organized by Professor David G. Lynn of Emory University and
Professor Yi Tang of the University of California at Los Angeles. The
conference, which is international in scope, brings together the most
knowledgeable investigators in the field of systems chemistry for in depth
discussions of state-of-the-art research and an examination of potential
priorities for the future. The conference is extremely timely, having the
capacity to bring definition and direction to a rapidly expanding subject in
chemistry. Systems chemistry is a highly multidisciplinary undertaking that
impinges on virtually all aspects of chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This first
Systems Chemistry from Concepts to Conceptions GRC has two primary foci. The
first builds on and extends themes that emerged from the NSF-supported workshop
on Alternative Chemistries of Life. Specifically, the emergence of function in
self-organized multi-component systems, self-replicating systems, design and
analysis of functional chemical systems operating far from equilibrium, and
chemical evolution of complex systems. The theory/experiment continuum permeate
all sessions and connect the chemistry of life on earth implicitly and
explicitly with the emerging opportunities for analyzing the chemistry of
supramolecular molecular assemblies. Further, the conference connects the
divergent foci that have emerged somewhat independently across the US, UK, and
EU by constructing and analyzing the diverse, non-equilibrium molecular networks
by researchers in universities, government laboratories, and private research
institutes to inform the research community on the limits of dynamic chemical
systems. Second, the formal presentations, response questions, discussions at
poster sessions, and the casual interactions constitute an opportunity for ideas
on new topics and future directions to emerge. Young scholars selected from
submitted abstracts and scholars form minority serving institutions are engaged
in a with established scientists to achieve greater inclusive excellence. Timely
new results from student talks extend the discussions and open possibilities for
mentoring. New ideas span and unify the current diversity of involved
disciplines. Representative topics at the conference include: dynamic behaviors
of chemical networks, non-equilibrium chemical networks, supramolecular
chemistry, and alternative chemistries of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.