* 1833896
* Opportunities in Manufacturing of Advanced Materials for Second Career Seeking Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Oleksandr Kravchenko, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. Over the five-year award, this
project at the Batten College of Engineering and Technology at Old Dominion
University (ODU) will fund 60 scholarships to students, in groups of 6-8
students who are pursuing undergraduate and graduate degrees in engineering. The
project will include recruitment of second career seeking students interested in
a concentration in manufacturing of advanced materials. In addition to
scholarships, the program will include a hands-on, project-based curriculum with
opportunities to conduct interdisciplinary research projects in advanced
manufacturing areas. Co -curricular activities will include regular seminars,
mentoring opportunities, and participation in professional societies and
conferences for S-STEM scholars. This S-STEM project aims to create a pipeline
for well-trained second career students entering engineering professions with
focus on manufacturing of advanced materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will focus on understanding the factors that affect academic success of
engineering students at ODU. The combination of interventions will improve self-
efficacy beliefs and outcome expectations among second career seeking students.
Faculty from the Batten College of Engineering and Technology will collaborate
with researchers in the Department of Psychology at ODU to study barriers,
supports and resources that affect agility, academic success, recruitment,
retention, and degree attainment of engineering students. The project will
extend the methodology previously developed at ODU for understanding the
differential experiences of groups of students as they transition along their
careers paths. From the educational research point of view, the project will
study the transition process for second career seeking students as an
educational psychology research problem, identifying the critical barriers and
the key driving factors (i.e. support and resources) that facilitate a
successful transition to a new career. When acted upon, this knowledge may lead
to improvements in the success rate for second career seeking students in
engineering programs at ODU and nationwide. Therefore, the inclusion of second
career seeking students at ODU will contribute to the national effort to engage
wider groups of academically talented, hardworking students with financial need
in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.