* 1833047
* RII Track-4: Advanced Morphology Characterization of Nanostructured Cyclic and Linear Polymers and their Blends
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Julie Albert, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Lindquist
* 09/30/2022
* USD 170,494.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Over the past thirty years, tremendous
advancements have occurred in the microelectronics and healthcare industries,
resulting in phones that are more powerful than the earliest computers and
medical treatments that are more effective, less invasive, and capable of
treating formerly untreatable ailments. This rapid technological growth was
enabled by the creation of new materials and efforts to fully understand their
chemical and physical properties. In order to sustain this level of growth, the
search for new materials must continue. This project supports collaboration
between university researchers and scientists from government laboratories in
this search. In one area, fundamental research into the properties of block
copolymers, a type of nanostructured rubbery plastic material, promises a new
route to lithographic patterning on the nano-scale to facilitate the move from
micro-electronics to nano-electronics that are faster and capable of greater
data storage. In a second area, studies on biocompatible, biodegradable, semi-
crystalline polymers will reduce the need for undesirable small molecule
additives to control crystallization, thereby enhancing biocompatibility and
safety for use in medical applications. The project promotes scientific
advancement by supporting experiments that can be conducted only in state-of-
the-art national laboratories. By nurturing close interactions between academia
and government, the project trains students to connect their educational
experiences to the goals of national health, prosperity, welfare, and the
production of civically-mindful scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;The cyclic molecular
architecture endows polymer materials with unique and useful physical properties
compared to linear counterparts such as smaller nanostructure domain sizes in
block copolymers and greater thin film stability. These polymers show great
promise as additives for endowing linear polymer systems with desirable
properties. However, the molecular level integration of linear and cyclic
materials in topological blends is not well-understood. Advanced
characterization experiments made possible through this fellowship produce the
fundamental knowledge necessary to understand how topological blends (linear
plus cyclic polymers) can be used to (1) enhance block copolymer nanostructure
properties for nanolithgraphy and (2) regulate crystallization kinetics and
morphology in semi-crystalline polymer films. These goals are achieved by
revealing molecular mechanisms in these systems using resonant soft X-ray
reflectivity (RSoXR) for the characterization of molecular distributions in
block copolymer systems and broadband coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering
(CARS) for mapping the localization components in semi-crystalline polymer blend
films. Host site visits, in which the PI and students work closely with experts
at the National Institute of Standards and Technology, are important for
understanding organization of materials at the molecular level and for
sustaining long-term academic-government
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.