* 1833474
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 Hackathons on Resources for Modeling in Biology (HARMONY); Workshop-June 18-22, 2018; Oxford UK
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 05/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The purpose of this award is to support travel expenses for students to attend
HARMONY 2018 to be hosted by University of Oxford in Oxford, UK from June 18th
to 22nd. This workshop is instrumental in making progress in the development of
standards in synthetic biology. Currently, most standardization efforts are
either unfunded or only have very limited support. The success of these
standards hinges on the donation of time from many individuals to participate in
discussions, write specifications, serve as standards editors, and attend
workshops. Many of these individuals working on the development of standards are
students based in the US who would find it difficult to find the funds to attend
this meeting. Therefore, this award helps support travel, lodging, and
registration expenses for US based students working on systems and synthetic
biology standards. Not only would this be a valuable experience for these
participants, but it would also greatly enhance the COMBINE goal of bringing
together researchers in synthetic biology with those working in systems biology
leading to integrated standards and shared software and
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standards for data exchange are critical to
the development of any field since they enable researchers and practitioners to
exchange information reliably, apply a variety of tools to their problems, and
reproduce scientific results. The COmputational MOdeling in Biology NEtwork
(COMBINE) was created in 2010 to organize standardization efforts for systems
biology. The HARMONY workshop is organized by COMBINE and will be held at the
University of Oxford in the UK, from June 18th to 22nd 2018. The major goals of
this workshop will be: (a) Develop synergistic relationships between systems and
synthetic biology researchers. (b) Produce a tighter integration of standard
development for systems and synthetic biology. (c) Engage in outreach to
modelers and experimentalists. (d) Develop a coordinated effort to advocate the
use of standards in publications and archival
databases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.