* 1833974
* Naugatuck Valley's STEM Inclusive Opportunity Network
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Peter Angelastro, Naugatuck Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 02/29/2024
* USD 649,323.00

This project will contribute to the national need for a highly qualified STEM
workforce by supporting the pursuit of a two-year STEM degree by 75 low-income
students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise. The project will
provide up to two years of scholarship support to students enrolled in
associate-level degree programs in STEM fields, including Computer-Aided Design
Engineering Technology, Computer information Systems Technology, Electronic
Engineering Technology, Engineering Technology, Engineering Science,
Environmental Science, Mechanical Engineering Technology, Technology Studies,
Automated Manufacturing Engineering Technology, or a Biology, Chemistry,
Computer Science Mathematics, or Physics Transfer Ticket degree. The project
intends to overcome cultural and institutional barriers to student success in
STEM by providing Scholars with: strong social, academic, and professional
support networks; diverse STEM role models; enhanced STEM identity; training
about overcoming adversity; deeper knowledge of STEM career paths; transitional
education and orientation to college-level expectations; encouragement to use
existing support systems; and opportunities for professional development through
research, internships, and job shadowing. The project also seeks to ensure
student success beyond graduation through university transfer and job placement
supports. Given the diverse student population at the institution, this project
could enhance the diversity of students who pursue STEM degrees. In addition,
the large number of scholarships may have a significant impact on both the
institution and the development of STEM graduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through
implementation of a set of evidence-based practices, the project has the central
goal of improving undergraduate student persistence and academic success in STEM
fields. To evaluate the project's success in achieving this goal, project will
conduct a quantitative and qualitative assessment to investigate how the project
and its individual components affect STEM students' self-efficacy, motivation to
pursue a STEM career, STEM identity, and persistence in obtaining a STEM degree.
The project seeks to determine effective practices to promote student success,
particularly for low-income underrepresented minority STEM students. These
results could be valuable to other institutions that seek to develop faculty
expertise in effective pedagogies and effective programming to support diverse
students seeking STEM degrees. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income, academically high-achieving students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to
generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.