* 1833219
* WORKSHOP: ThinkTank (Doctoral Consortium) at International Community for Auditory Display (ICAD) 2018
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Myounghoon Jeon, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports a "Think Tank" (workshop) of about 13 promising graduate
student scholars along with distinguished research faculty mentors, in
conjunction with the 24th Annual International Conference on Auditory Display
(ICAD 2018), which will be held June 11-15 on the campus of Michigan
Technological University in Houghton, MI, ICAD is the premier international
forum for presenting research on the use of sound to display data, monitor
systems, and provide enhanced user interfaces for computers and virtual reality
systems. It is unique in its singular focus on auditory displays and the array
of perception, technology, and application areas that this encompasses, which
include for example data sonification, auditory wayfinding, auditory graphs,
speech interfaces, virtual environments, and associated perceptual, cognitive,
technical, and technological research and development. Many of the
interdisciplinary research and development efforts are of direct relevance to
persons with perceptual disabilities, especially visual impairments; for
example, developing wayfinding systems for the blind requires research into
effective distance cues and object identifiers used in auditory displays.
Research into the efficacy of auditory graphs may be used to help visually
impaired students and scientists participate more fully in science. Even
household devices can have more effective auditory displays that provide richer
information than the basic "beeps" they presently tend to generate. A common
approach in this field is universal design, wherein a display strategy is
developed once, to be used by all kinds of users, including those with and
without specific access issues. This year's conference theme is "Sonification as
Art / Design / Science / Research"; more details about ICAD 2018 are available
online at http://icad2018.icad.org/. The ICAD Think Tank is a doctoral
consortium that promotes scholarship and networking among new researchers in
this important emerging interdisciplinary area. It will help shape ongoing and
future research projects that have clear and important implications for
development of assistive technologies and universal access. The doctoral
consortium will afford participants exposure to a larger community, allowing
them to bond among themselves and with senior researchers at a critical stage in
their professional development. Because the students and faculty constitute a
diverse group across a variety of dimensions, including nationality and culture,
scientific discipline, and institution, the students' horizons are broadened to
the future benefit of the field. This year, the organizers expect that up to 10
U.S.-based Think Tank Scholars will have their travel and attendance heavily
subsidized. Additionally, up to 3 U.S.-based Think Tank Scholars local to the
Michigan Tech area (including Wisconsin and Minnesota) will have their
attendance at ICAD 2018 (but not travel and accommodation) subsidized, for a
total of 13 Student Scholars. Some NSF funds will also be used to support travel
by research faculty panelists (both U.S. and foreign-based), since they provide
great value to the US students, but NSF funds will not be used to support travel
and participation of non-U.S. students. The organizers will be proactive in
promoting diversity among the attendees; stage in their academic program,
research topic, gender and disability status are examples of dimensions on which
participant diversity will be pursued, while geographic and institutional
diversity will also be strongly considered. To further promote diversity among
the Student Scholars, no more than two participants will be selected from any
one university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICAD Think Tank, a full-day event which
will take place on June 10 immediately preceding the conference, is open to
graduate students at all stages of their educational program, including both
Masters and PhD students. Exceptional undergraduates who have demonstrated
interest in pursuing this field in their graduate careers may also be
considered. The Think Tank will bring together students from diverse backgrounds
(e.g., engineering, computing, music, and psychology), so that they can
experience the broad spectrum of approaches to auditory displays, assistive
technologies and universal design. The Think Tank will develop a supportive
community of scholars and a spirit of collaborative research, by providing
participants with a friendly and open, yet rigorous, scientific forum in which
to present their research ideas, to listen to ongoing work from peer students,
and to receive constructive feedback from a panel of distinguished experts.
Panel feedback is designed to help students understand and articulate how their
work is positioned relative to related research, whether their topics are
adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are appropriately
analyzed and presented. The Think Tank will also offer invited speakers and
discussion groups (e.g., to provide students with relevant information about
important issues for doctoral candidates, whether they are considering academic
or industrial career paths). Student participants will present their work via
posters during the ICAD 2018 technical program, and via extended abstracts
published on the ICAD 2018 website. The Think Tank Chair will provide a summary
and review at the conference banquet, which will includes an overview of the
event's success, and in which all Think Tank participants (students and
panelists) are introduced to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.