* 1833880
* Faculty-Mentored Experiences for Improving Undergraduate Biology Student Outcomes
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Geoffrey Zahn, Utah Valley University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/29/2024
* USD 972,287.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program will support the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Utah Valley University.
Over a five-year period, this project will fund full-tuition scholarships to 37
students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in biology, biotechnology, or
botany. This project aims to improve the retention and graduation rates of these
students by addressing several attrition factors, including lengthy time to
completion, excessive part-time work, and feelings of isolation. The project
will address these factors by creating an undergraduate research program that
supports faculty-mentored research for scholarship students. This project aims
to prepare low-income, academically talented students for the workforce and
graduate school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to advance knowledge
about the impact of evidence-based practices on student self-efficacy, interest,
and persistence. The primary goals of the project are to: 1) promote student
success and degree completion in STEM at an open-enrollment teaching institution
with traditionally low STEM enrollments; 2) provide faculty-mentored research
and other experiences that enrich students' education and increase their
preparation for the workforce and graduate school; and 3) advance knowledge
about the roles of self-efficacy, teacher immediacy, and faculty mentoring in
supporting student success. This project will help cultivate a sense of
community among the biology students and faculty. A key component of the project
is an orientation course where first-semester scholarship recipients will learn
about research conducted by faculty/student teams. An important aspect of the
project is the training and evaluation of mentoring provided to faculty research
mentors. The scholarship recipients will participate in two-week rotations among
research laboratories that interest them. Subsequently, the students will work
with their choice of faculty-mentored research team. In lieu of research,
students will be able to participate in other types of faculty-mentored
projects, teaching assistantships, and internships. Enrichment activities for
all scholarship recipients include twice-monthly meetings, a multi-level
mentoring network, and professional development opportunities that include
conference attendance and presentation. This project will contribute to a
professional cooperative spirit among the scholarship students that can support
their preparation for graduate school and careers in the biological
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.