* 1833496
* Collaborative Research: Community Facility Support: Facilitating Access and Innovation through a Collaborative Organization for Rock Deformation (CORD)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Terry Tullis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2021
* USD 271,164.00

This award will establish a community facility for rock deformation by funding
for two full-time laboratory technician positions, both of which will jointly
support the rock deformation laboratories at both Brown University and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology as part of forming a "Collaborative
Organization for Rock Deformation" (CORD). Experimental rock deformation studies
provide fundamental insights into the natural phenomena which shape our Earth
and other planets, including earthquake generation and viscous flow of rocks and
ices. Increasing knowledge of rock properties also plays a key role in meeting
societal needs such as exploiting natural resources and enabling CO2
sequestration to mitigate climate change. Owing to technical complexity, only a
handful of laboratories exist in the US with the capability to perform such
work. Beyond dedicated experimentalists running the equipment, there is a broad
user community with interest in performing experiments but without the resources
and experience to start their own laboratories. The key challenge in increasing
access to existing equipment is the training of users, and maintenance and safe
operation of complex machinery. The presence of dedicated technical personnel is
an effective way to facilitate access to this sophisticated equipment for a much
broader section of the Earth science community and provide a robust, effective,
and welcoming laboratory research environment. The two laboratory technicians
will jointly support rock deformation laboratories at Brown University and
Massachusetts Institute of Technology that form the Collaborative Organization
for Rock Deformation (CORD). Visiting scientists will be able to become
acquainted with faculty, staff, and students at MIT and Brown. In addition to
the extensive suite of rock deformation equipment, visiting scientists will have
access to other resources at our universities, including libraries, seminars,
and technical facilities. Besides improving outreach to other universities and
organizations, the CORD project will promote coordination between the two
partner laboratories. Regular meetings, lectures and workshops that can be
attended by all those interested available by web-link will be held. Because
each of the two technicians will spend equal time at each university, both
groups will benefit from insights and best practices from the other location.
Lastly, the presence of dedicated technical personnel will facilitate the
development of new experimental capabilities, pushing the boundaries of
experimental geophysics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this proposal
is to encourage and facilitate participation in experimental rock deformation
studies by a broader spectrum of scientists within the Earth science community.
The technician support will increase the availability and efficiency of use of
the equipment in the two laboratories to colleagues from other organizations,
who are interested in rock deformation, but currently lack access to laboratory
facilities and expertise. The secondary goal is to develop new experimental
capabilities. By sharing the support staff equally, two individuals with
complementary skill sets can be hired which will increase the depth of support.
Each laboratory technician will become an expert operator of equipment in both
laboratories and, in close collaboration with the investigators, will train new
users. The primary responsibility of the technicians will be to maintain the
equipment in dependable working order and enable its safe and efficient
operation with a broad user base. Maintenance is a priority for maximizing
access to visitors working on fixed schedules. Routine tasks include training of
new users in collaboration with PIs, and replacement of seals and gaskets,
calibration of load cells, displacement transducers etc. The technicians will
organize and ensure consistent archiving of experimental data. Other duties
include maintaining inventories of consumables and lists of suppliers. Assisting
in the design and implementation of new innovative capabilities of the equipment
is also an important component of the responsibilities. Scientific and technical
advances go hand-in-hand. Both visitors and resident personnel will wish for new
experimental capabilities. Sharing technical support will also provide inter-
laboratory calibrations, standardization of techniques, and development of a
consistent format for data management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.