* 1833276
* NSF Workshop on Internet-of-Things (IoT) Hardware Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Marilyn Wolf, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

This project supports a workshop to identify research directions and build a
research community for Internet-of-Things (IoT) hardware systems. IoT hardware
systems combine wireless, low-power sensor and actuator nodes in networks along
with fog and cloud computing. They provide rich data sets that can be used for
real-time monitoring, control, and decision-making. IoT systems are widely used
for industrial, transportation, health care, and other applications. As IoT
systems increase in scope and complexity, new research challenges arise that
require new results and novel interdisciplinary collaborations. The workshop
will involve researchers with expertise in a wide range of topics relevant to
IoT. The attendees will collaborate to develop a report identifying key
challenges and opportunities in IoT hardware systems as well as important
resources needed to carry out this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
convens researchers from related disciplines: sensor networks, VLSI,
communication, signal processing, etc. The workshop will help to build a
community of IoT researchers. The workshop will include graduate student
attendees to broaden educational impact. The workshop organizers will strive to
build an inclusive set of workshop attendees. The workshop will include a
session on diversity issues in IoT research. Talks from the workshop will be
broadcast for wider dissemination. The workshop report will be broadly
distributed. Workshop attendees will be selected on the basis of white papers
submitted to an open call. Workshop presentations will be broadcast on the
Internet using video-conferencing tools. Topics of potential interest to the
workshop include: VLSI IoT device architectures; ultra-low power design for IoT
devices; IoT communication and networking; emerging technologies for IoT devices
and systems; distributed algorithms under power and bandwidth constraints; IoT
applications in manufacturing, transportation, health care, smart communities,
etc.; safe and secure IoT systems; data science challenges in IoT systems;
machine learning and AI using IoT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.