* 1833040
* RII-Track 4: Elucidating the Structure and Interactions of Complex Carbohydrates in Fungal and Plant Cell Walls via Dynamic Nuclear Polarization Solid-State NMR
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Tuo Wang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 179,578.00

Non-Technical description &lt;br/&gt;The complex carbohydrate is a fundamental
building unit of cell walls in a variety of organisms such as plants, fungi,
bacteria and algae, which serve as a central source for bioenergy and
biomaterials as well as a potential target of medical therapies. These
polysaccharides are often polymorphic and disordered in their native state,
however, due to technical limitations their functional structure remains under-
investigated. This EPSCoR project will strengthen the collaborative efforts
between Louisiana State University and National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
(NHMFL), with the aim of developing a novel method to address several
fundamental scientific questions that are related to polysaccharides.
Specifically, the proposed research will advance understanding of the tendency
and mechanism for carbohydrates to interact with other biomolecules as well as
the building principles and conserved modules of cell walls. These molecular
insights will guide the design and engineering of carbohydrate-rich composites
to fulfill the diverse needs of the nation for better biofuel, material, and
biomedicine. This collaborative project also allows scientists and students to
gain frequent exposure to state-of-art magnet facilities, training at NHMFL and
introduce a new technique that will build up the research capacity of Louisiana.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
expand knowledge of carbohydrate research from soluble or crystalline molecules
in purified components to the highly polymorphic, insoluble and disordered
glycans in native cells. This goal will be achieved by integrating Dynamic
Nuclear Polarization (DNP) technique and solid-state NMR methods to characterize
the structure and the assembly of complex carbohydrates with minimal
perturbation. By combing the sensitivity enhancement from DNP and the resolution
improvement from spectral editing, the PI will be able to conduct site-specific
investigations of polysaccharides in a complex whole-cell system. Structural
characterizations will start from 13C,15N-labeled tissues and then progressively
extend to unlabeled materials. This approach, once established, will alleviate
the difficulty and expense that is typically associated with isotope-labeling,
thus overcoming a long-standing barrier to large-scale structural elucidation.
To enable rapid access to the results, a database will be established to
document the NMR observables and structural restraints of polysaccharides as
well as the diverse architecture of cell walls and other biomaterials. The
proposed method and database has the potential to facilitate the modification of
carbohydrate-rich composites to serve national demand for better bioenergy and
materials. This collaborative project also provides a faculty and a postdoctoral
fellow with the access to high-field NMR and DNP magnets at National High
Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) and grants invaluable learning experiences
through extensive interactions with well-established experts, thus stimulating
the career development of next-generation scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.