* 1833025
* RII Track-4: Using Novel Applications of Luminescence Techniques to Evaluate Channel Mobility and Bedrock Valley Development
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Abigail Langston, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Johnson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 197,599.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By eroding and depositing
sediment, river systems record past changes in climate, hydrology, vegetation,
and tectonic processes on the Earth's surface. While vertical erosion into
bedrock landscapes has been extensively studied, there is little consensus on
how rivers erode laterally in bedrock landscapes. It is crucial to establish the
duration of lateral widening intervals that create bedrock valleys in order to
understand how changes in river dynamics shape the Earth's surface. Through a
collaboration with the Desert Research Institute (DRI), the PI will learn
luminescence dating techniques that will allow her to establish the timing of
lateral erosion intervals and apply these techniques to infer transport history
of sediments. Determining the timing of past and current river incision is
important for predicting the effect of ongoing landscape change on humans who
live and work near rivers in Kansas, the PI's home state. The PI's home
institution, Kansas State University, will benefit from the professional
development of the PI, her extended collaborative network with DRI, and the
incorporation of dating techniques in research and teaching to demonstrate how
local rivers change on decadal and centennial time scales that humans must be
prepared to adapt to.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The processes that control vertical incision in
bedrock rivers are widely studied and well characterized; however, the
fundamental processes that control lateral erosion have not been quantified in
the laboratory or in the field. Field data that describes past channel mobility
and defines absolute time constraints on the length of lateral erosion intervals
are vital for better understanding the conditions that result in wide bedrock
valleys. Analysis of luminescence properties is a key tool for dating fluvial
deposits to determine periods of lateral erosion and vertical incision. It also
has the potential to illuminate transport processes, such as channel mobility,
during periods of sediment deposition. Research conducted during this project
has the potential to transform our understanding about the processes and timing
of the evolution of bedrock valley systems. Two main project objectives support
the overarching goals: (1) learning single-grain luminescence techniques to date
the depositional age of sediments with complex transport histories; (2)
interpreting luminescence properties as a proxy for fluvial processes, such as
channel mobility. Using luminescence techniques to interpret geomorphic
processes is an emerging application that has the potential to give insight
beyond dating. When this project is complete, the geomorphology community will
be closer to interpreting luminescence properties as proxies of transport
processes to assess past channel mobility from sediment deposited in association
with periods of bedrock valley formation and ultimately a new way of
interpreting a wealth of measured, but previously unexamined
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.