* 1833209
* Improved Meteoroid Characterization through Laboratory Experiments, Modeling, and Ground-based Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Zoltan Sternovsky, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 645,134.00

A four-year research designs to investigate and improve the understanding of the
relationship between the properties of a meteoroid and the resulting mesosphere
and lower thermosphere (MLT) meteor optical emission and radar signatures.
Laboratory experiments would be set up to simulate the ablation of meteors by
the Earth's atmosphere by firing projectiles with known mass, speed, and
composition into a laboratory chamber containing a known density of gas. The
observed relationship found between the luminous brightness of the simulated
meteor with the mass of the projectile used would help enable the use of ground-
based radar and optical meteor measurements to determine the masses of
individual meteoroids with considerably improved accuracy. This result would
then quantify the estimate of the total meteor influx of objects into the
Earth's atmosphere. This research would be done through experiments at the
University of Colorado's Institute for Modeling Plasma, Atmospheres and Cosmic
dusT (IMPACT) facility in which the goal would be the recreation of the ablation
process in well-defined laboratory conditions. These experimental results would
then be applied to meteor observational data derived from both radar and optical
techniques, in order to estimate masses of individual meteor events and to
validate experimental and modeling results. This award would further support the
education and training of a graduate student pursuing a Ph.D at CU Boulder. In
addition, undergraduate students would be involved in the program through the
Discovery Learning Apprenticeship Program (DLAP) at CU Boulder. The DLAP program
provides CU undergraduates a hands-on research experience, with pay, culminating
in a final research report and a presentation to faculty and graduate students
in the program. Finally, results from the research would be integrated into a
new undergraduate course entitled 'Space: Environment and Effects', to begin in
Fall 2018. This course is being developed under the auspices of a campus wide
"Space Minor" open to students in all majors; as such, this curriculum would
reach students beyond science and engineering. Meteors make up a key component
of the space environment, and so this research would be used as a key topic to
underline the fascinating complexity of the near-earth space environment. The
researcher plans to include lectures on simulated meteor work in this
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meteoroids enter the Earth's atmosphere with
velocities between 10 and 70 km/s and masses from femtograms (fg) up to grams or
larger; however, the total mass flux of meteoroids remains uncertain, with a
range of estimates spanning two orders of magnitude. The ablation of meteoroids
are suggested to be responsible for the creation of metal layers of the upper
atmosphere, including atomic iron (Fe), magnesium (Mg), calcium (Ca), potassium
(K), and sodium (Na) layers that all peak within the range of 85-95 km altitude.
These metal layers lead into a variety of aeronomical phenomena, including the
nucleation of noctilucent cloud particles, ocean fertilization with bio-
available Fe, and creating a relationship between stratospheric aerosol content
and O3 chemistry. Moreover, meteors of milligram size and larger pose a risk to
spacecraft orbiting the Earth, with the potential to cause physical or
electrical damage. Accurate assessment of the total mass flux is critical to
improving the understanding of each of these areas. The total mass flux error is
primarily caused by the inability to determine masses of individually observed
particles. The major sources of uncertainty that lead to poor estimates of
meteoroid masses are uncertainty in the parameters which map the mass to
observables, such as optical emissions and radar cross section. These parameters
are the luminous efficiency and the ionization probability. The project would
possibly provide the best measurements to date for a range of velocities and for
different materials representative of meteoroids. The foremost science objective
in this award addresses a simple yet critical problem in understanding MLT
aeronomy: what is the total mass flux entering our atmosphere from space? The
ability to create artificial meteors in the lab provides a great opportunity to
engage with the community in a way that non-specialists can
understand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.