* 1833654
* Ocean Observatories Initiative Facility Board (OOIFB) Administrative Support Office
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Annette DeSilva, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* George Voulgaris
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,259,992.00

The University of Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography will host the
Ocean Observatories Initiative Facilities Board (OOIFB) Administrative Support
Office (ASO). The OOIFB ASO will assist the OOIFB in engaging researchers and
educators through webinars, workshops, and sessions at major oceanographic
conferences so that science discoveries and OOI educational approaches can be
shared broadly, optimizing the capabilities of the OOI facility. The Education
and Outreach program includes seagoing experience for early career scientists,
building an early career scientist network, creation of an OOIFB education
committee and involvement of the URI Inner Space
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) is
providing new opportunities to the ocean community with access to a continuous
stream of data from its cabled and un-cabled arrays located at critical coastal
and global sites. The OOI program is a Major Research Equipment and Facilities
Construction (MREFC) project funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
that includes a network of interactive, globally distributed sensors with near
real-time data access. The OOI data will enhance our capabilities to address
critical issues such as ecosystem variability, ocean acidification, and carbon
cycling. In 2017, NSF formed the OOI Facilities Board (OOIFB) to provide
independent community-based input and guidance regarding the management and
operation of the Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI). With support from this
award, the University of Rhode Island Graduate School of Oceanography will host
the OOIFB Administrative Support Office (ASO). The OOIFB ASO will assist the
OOIFB in engaging researchers and educators through webinars, workshops, and
sessions at major oceanographic conferences so that science discoveries and OOI
educational approaches can be shared broadly, optimizing the capabilities of the
OOI facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.