* 1833918
* Engaging Undergraduates in Science Communication to Support Persistence, Graduation, and Development of Scientific and Professional Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Brian Wysor, Roger Williams University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,999.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This S-STEM project at Roger
Williams University aims to increase the retention, persistence, graduation, and
career placements of lower income students. Over a five-year period, this
project will provide 68 annual scholarships to 20 students who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in applied math, biology, biochemistry, chemistry, computer
science, engineering, environmental science, forensic science, marine biology,
or mathematics. The project aims to educate students to become critical thinkers
who can collect, interpret, translate, and share scientific information critical
to informed decision making. The project will train the scholarship students in
science communication, using popular platforms to emphasize STEM issues of
personal and societal relevance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
investigate science communication as a potential high-impact practice for
increasing persistence, engagement, and placement of students in STEM careers.
Although science communication has become a crucial element of graduate and
professional development, relatively few programs emphasize this kind of
training at primarily undergraduate institutions. A summer bridge program will
introduce students to the science communication initiative via projects that
target communities outside of traditional academic environments. The general
education courses in public speaking and writing studies will incorporate
science communication enhancements. To promote student engagement and success in
STEM, the project will implement an early intervention program to identify
potential academic and personal challenges. In addition, research experiences,
industry internships, faculty mentoring, tutoring, and other student support
services will promote persistence and student success in the STEM fields. The
students will interact with academic and professional networks at meetings and
conferences to strengthen their sense of self-identification with the STEM
community. The project assessment and evaluation studies will explore whether
participation in the program increases: 1) academic performance, retention, and
career or graduate school placement; 2) self-identify and self-efficacy as STEM
practitioners; and 3) the ability to communicate STEM knowledge. This project
has the potential educate STEM graduates who can contribute to the STEM
workforce and to the growing STEM-based economy, as well as increase knowledge
about high impact practices that support the success of lower income STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.