* 1833604
* Implementation and Investigation of a Holistic Student Support Learning Environment for Undergraduate Chemistry Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Herman Holt, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 01/31/2024
* USD 997,988.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
support the success of 24 high-achieving students with demonstrated financial
need at the University of North Carolina Asheville. Throughout its five years,
this project will fund scholarships to four groups of six students who are
pursuing baccalaureate degrees in chemistry. The project will integrate
comprehensive student support into the chemistry curriculum and departmental
culture. It is expected that this support will help students: overcome academic,
social, and emotional challenges; earn undergraduate chemistry degrees; and
promote matriculation to graduate education. Beginning in their first year, the
students will join a chemistry student community and have access to support
including faculty and peer mentoring, cohort building activities, academic
course support, career professional development, and undergraduate research. By
partnering with the University's Student Affairs Office, the project will
integrate focused support into the chemistry major to help students meet the
challenges of being a college student. This project will investigate the impact
of this approach on student engagement, as well as how that engagement
correlates with student achievement and degree
completion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use a three-phase holistic
support structure that includes all chemistry majors, beginning with their entry
and extending through completion of their degree. Although the support system
will target the needs of first-generation college students, it will be adaptable
to individual student needs. The project aims to construct a learning
environment that motivates and develops the academic, social, and emotional
skills students need to be successful in the chemistry major. By improving
students' academic achievement, persistence, engagement, and well-being, the
project expects that more students will graduate and matriculate into graduate
school or enter a chemistry career. A long-term recruiting plan, built upon
prior recruiting efforts, will attract promising low-income, first-generation
students to pursue chemistry majors. Assessment of the learning environment,
student engagement, and project outcomes will be used to determine how the
holistic support system affects student achievement and well-being. This
research will generate new knowledge regarding the impact of a holistic
supportive learning environment on chemistry student engagement and well-being.
As a result, this project has the potential to inform future directions for
chemistry and STEM education. The support structure and recruiting plan could be
adopted by other departments or institutions that aim to support the academic,
social, and emotional skills of their students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.