* 1833221
* Supporting Student Research at the NanoFlorida 2018 Conference
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2020
* James Brenner, Florida Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 11/30/2020
* USD 10,000.00

Supporting Student Research at the NanoFlorida 2018
Conference&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florida Institute of Technology (Florida Tech)
will host the 11th annual NanoFlorida Research Conference on October 5-7, 2018.
NanoFlorida is a unique event with a long, successful tradition of student
researchers sharing their discoveries in nanotechnology. The NanoFlorida
conference series is the only state-wide nanotechnology conference in which
graduate and undergraduate students can present their research to their peers
and other faculty at neighboring schools, and to industry scientists and
engineers. Students with an interest in nanotechnology from all colleges and
universities in Florida attend in order to learn more about this important
topic, meet students at other schools, and network with representatives from
graduate schools and industry employers. The NanoFlorida 2018 Research
Conference organizers will attract more students to attend the conference in the
following ways: (1) lower registration costs, (2) add symposia that highlight
important new areas of nanotechnology research, and (3) provide more ways for
students to disseminate their research. Perhaps the most important benefit to
NanoFlorida student attendees is that they can meet researchers from other
schools and from industry, forming professional relationships that provide long-
term benefits to their STEM careers. The participation goal for NanoFlorida 2018
is to increase attendance at NanoFlorida 2018 to 200 students. Funding for this
conference proposal will allow organizers to reimburse to students the cost of
their registration fees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Florida?s research universities
are always well-represented at NanoFlorida conferences. In order to increase the
diversity of attendees, the conference organizers will advertise the conference
to faculty at institutions that do not grant PhDs in STEM disciplines. Among
these schools are Florida A&amp;M and Bethune Cookman University, both HBCUs,
and schools in the Florida state college system that have an enrollment of 60%
women. The nanotechnology education symposium will draw an audience that
includes faculty teaching nanotechnology, thereby imparting knowledge about
effective teaching practices to those who can immediately use that knowledge in
their own classrooms to benefit students. Program tracks include nanomedicine,
nanomaterials and devices, and applications of nanotechnology in energy and the
environment, as well as new symposia for research in nanotechnology education,
nanotechnology applications in agriculture, and nanotechnology applications in
space exploration. NanoFlorida conferences allow for graduate and undergraduate
students to present their research in a low-stress, supportive environment and,
for the first time, NanoFlorida 2018 organizers will publish students? extended
abstracts of their presentations in conference proceedings. In addition, the
organizers are arranging special issues of peer-reviewed science and engineering
journals to publish nanotechnology research papers authored by students and
their faculty mentors. Post-conference surveys and the publication of
presenters? research will serve as a measure of the success of the NanoFlorida
2018 Research Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.