* 1833482
* Smart and Connected Communities- Perspectives for Border Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Miroslav Krstic, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The U.S.-Mexico border region is home to more than 80 million people. Binational
cooperation, especially on issues of shared importance, such as transportation,
commerce, and the environment, is vital to ensuring economic prosperity and
environmental sustainability in both countries. Emerging technologies and other
innovations can offer smart solutions that have the potential to address many of
the challenges in border communities including infrastructure resilience, and
food, energy, and water security. Never has the need been greater for academic
institutions, border communities, private industry, non-governmental, and
government agencies to work together to identify common technology, water,
energy, environmental, and security challenges, and to explore and test smart
utility infrastructure solutions along both sides of the border. This project
brings together four public universities in California, Arizona, New Mexico, and
Texas in collaboration with four universities in Mexico to conduct a series of
three workshops to foster collaboration amongst academic institutions,
government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and industry partners on both
sides of the U.S.-Mexico border to pursue fundamental research, the results of
which can benefit communities and economies in both
countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshops will catalyze the ideas,
partnerships, and resources needed to foster collaborative, binational research,
and open access to data that will inform solutions to regional U.S. and Mexico
challenges that take advantage of smart technology. Specifically, the proposed
workshops will support the initiation and advancement of convergent,
interdisciplinary research relevant to the development of innovative solutions
to the most pressing border-region challenges: water-energy security, economic
opportunity, education, security, immigration, and crime. Additionally, the
workshops and the research activities that flow from them will promote Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) workforce development on both
sides of the border. Ultimately, the research will contribute to improving
quality of life for those who live in the border region by potentially lowering
energy costs, reducing food scarcity, improving border safety and commerce, and
offering better healthcare access to underserved communities. Application of the
data and research results of anticipated Alliance projects is anticipated to
extend far beyond border communities to other regions with similar
infrastructural, environmental, and social concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.