* 1833400
* Student Support for the 17th International Semantic Web Conference 2018 (ISWC 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Bo Fu, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2019
* USD 18,000.00

This award provides support 13 U.S.-based students to participate in the 17th
International Semantic Web Conference (ISWC 2018), held in Monterey, California
from October 8 to 12, 2018. ISWC is the premier international forum for state-
of-the-art research on all aspects of the Semantic Web and Linked Data
Community. The supported students will attend the conference, discuss and
disseminate their work. They will also have an opportunity to interact with
future national and international scientific collaborators and senior
researchers and practitioners. Students will benefit from the Doctoral
Consortium - a full day event where students can get critical, but encouraging,
feedback on their work from senior members of the community. The program also
includes a career mentoring meeting, where experienced members of the community
from both academia and industry answer questions in an informal setting. The
selected students will form a diverse group in order to broaden participation in
computer science.

The International Semantic Web Conference, now in its 17th year, is an
interdisciplinary conference that includes work on: Data Management, Natural
Language Processing, Knowledge Representation and Reasoning, Ontologies and
Ontology Languages, Semantic Web Engineering, Linked Data, User Interfaces and
Applications. The conference regularly includes several hundred attendees. In
addition to the main technical tracks, the conference includes a variety of
events that provide opportunities for deeper interaction amongst researchers at
different institutions, at different stages of their research careers, and
researchers who are interested in many different aspects of Semantic Web
Research. The ISWC 2018 web site (http://iswc2018.semanticweb.org) provides
additional information on the conference.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.