* 1833165
* NNA: AON: EAGER: Closing the Water Vapor Exchange Budget Between the Ice Sheets and Free Atmosphere
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Bruce Vaughn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 06/30/2024
* USD 441,830.00

As the Arctic warms faster than the rest of the planet, understanding the
Greenland ice sheet response to changing climate ? and the associated effect on
sea level rise - is important for policy and mitigation strategies. A variety of
satellite and surface tools currently exist to help understand snow accumulation
and the loss of ice from outlet glaciers or melting, but the magnitude of water
vapor exchange between the interior ice sheet and the atmosphere remains
essentially unknown. This vapor flux could potentially be a very large factor in
calculating the mass gain or loss of the ice sheet. Vapor flux occurs either by
addition to the ice surface through vapor deposition and condensation or losses
due to sublimation. This project seeks to utilize Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,
commonly referred to as drones, for collecting atmospheric water vapor samples
to constrain vapor flux on the Greenland Ice Sheet. A remote-controlled sampling
pod containing multiple air-capture chambers and environmental sensors will be
retrofitted to a commercially available multi-copter drone and flown above the
ice surface to collect samples. Upon landing, the atmospheric samples will be
analyzed for water isotopes, which are variations of water molecules with
different molecular weights that can, for example, provide evidence of vapor
flux into or away from the ice sheet. The goal of this project is to use drone-
captured data to address major gaps in the understanding of frozen water storage
on the Greenland ice sheet, which could reduce uncertainty in estimates of
global sea level rise. The data can also be used to improve satellite algorithms
used for high-latitude measurements of water isotopes; to improve general
circulation models; and improve meteorological understanding of the atmosphere
in general. Further, these data may also substantiate the current understanding
of long-term temperature records recovered from water isotopes of polar ice
cores. Initial testing and atmospheric measurements using the drone-sampling
unit will occur in Summer 2018 at an ice core camp in Northeast Greenland. A
second deployment in 2019 will allow for improvements to the drone-sampling
unit, and a possible deployment of a fixed wing drone aircraft, for measurement
of high-resolution data across the 4-month summer field season.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in the first drone retrofitted
with a water vapor sampling pod, which can be directly analyzed in the field
following flight. In doing so, the project stands to provide the first detailed
and high-resolution airborne measurements of water vapor isotopes in the
critical atmospheric boundary layer just above the Greenland Ice Sheet. This
region is typically too expensive and dangerous for manned-flight missions, and
balloon release experiments have proven logistically burdensome with limited
scientific returns. This study brings together researchers from the fields of
Aerospace Engineering and Geochemistry. Students and researchers will receive
drone pilot training through a Federal Aviation Administration accredited class.
Undergraduate and graduate students will receive laboratory training to assist
in processing and interpreting the data. A near real-time blog for public
viewing and outreach will be available during field operations, which will
include field updates, selected data, photography, and film. Public lectures and
scientific talks will further disseminate the knowledge learned during this
project. As the technology for this project progresses, it could be transferred
to other projects, such as detection of fugitive emissions from oil and gas
wells or to measure methane release in regions of thawing
permafrost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.