* 1833317
* Open Compass: Leveraging the Compass AI Engineering Testbed to Accelerate Open Research
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Nicholas Nystrom, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 04/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) has immense potential to contribute to advances
spanning progress in science, the national health, prosperity and welfare,
education, benefit society, or secure the nation's defense. Research
initiatives, conferences, investments, and products based on AI abound and are
expanding rapidly, while the methods, performance, and understanding of AI are
in their infancy. Researchers face vexing issues such as how to improve
performance, transferability, reliability, comprehensibility, and how better to
train AI models with only limited data. Future progress depends on advances in
hardware accelerators, software frameworks, system architectures, and creating
cross-cutting expertise between scientific and AI domains. One way to accelerate
progress on these topics is to create an engineering testbed, which provides a
controlled environment that allows investigators to explore solutions to these -
and other - challenges. Open Compass is an exploratory research project to
conduct academic pilot projects on an advanced engineering testbed for
artificial intelligence, culminating in the development and publication of best
practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open Compass will: 1) engage pilot projects and
research groups, documenting approaches, experiences, and lessons learned; 2)
conduct training events, in-person and using the Pittsburgh Supercomputing
Center's wide area classroom; 3) organize and conduct a workshop focusing on
advanced AI technologies; 4) integrate experiences gained through open research
collaboration with those of industry experiences to identify a comprehensive set
of best practices; and 5) publish results and best practices in peer-reviewed
journals, conferences, and technical reports. The broad community will benefit
from publication of research results, experiences, and a knowledge base of best
practices. The research community will gain access to new technologies on which
to develop algorithms and applications, along with insight across new fields of
those technologies' applicability and important trends for AI. Open Compass will
promote workforce development through student involvement in pilot projects and
training and provide feedback to industry for to enable more efficient future AI
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.