* 1833084
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Households Immediate Response During a Night Time Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2020
* Shih-Kai Huang, Jacksonville State University
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 05/31/2020
* USD 9,892.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project examines household earthquake risk
perceptions and immediate responses during a nighttime earthquake, in
particular, the 2018 Eastern Taiwan (Haulien) earthquake that occurred on
February 6, 2018. This project is innovative because most of the data on
immediate response to earthquakes has been collected from daytime earthquakes,
and this study can identify patterns of protective action that differ from those
in daytime earthquakes. Better understanding of responses can help emergency
management agencies provide appropriate emergency services to their communities
and help households to better prepare for future events. In addition, this
project will use an earthquake immediate response questionnaire that has been
used in other earthquakes, including a US territory. This standardized
questionnaire will be used to assess cultural differences in variables such as
risk perception, self-reported shaking intensity, and emotional responses. The
results of this study can be used to examine how cultural differences impact US
residents' disaster response in culturally diverse regions of the US. Another
earthquake impacting the US is inevitable and understanding people's response is
critical to protecting our national health, prosperity, and welfare when the
event occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tests the Protective Action
Decision Model (PADM), which supposes that people's risk perceptions and
responses are shaped by environmental/social cues and physical/household/social
context when warnings are absent. In addition, this project tests the degree to
which households' environmental/social cues, risk perceptions, and earthquake
immediate response differ in urban and rural areas that vary in their shaking
intensity and duration. This data expands a multinational earthquake response
dataset that will allow investigators to conduct a statistical meta-analysis
that will identify commonalities and differences in household response across
different earthquakes throughout the Pacific Rim. The results of this study can
provide an important empirical test of the degree to which research support for
the PADM from hurricanes and flash floods also extends to nighttime
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.