* 1833989
* A Support Ecosystem to Expand Capabilities and Opportunities for STEM Undergraduates Following Hurricane Maria
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Carmen Bellido, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 909,996.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This S-STEM project at the
University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez will support 26 scholars in the College of
Engineering and the College of Arts and Sciences for three academic years
(2018-2021), totaling 78 annual scholarships of $5,000 over the project
duration. The proposal seeks to address some of the challenges facing
undergraduate STEM students in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria. The project
will enhance and provide students with (1) financial support, (2) academic
support, and (3) socio-emotional support to increase retention and graduation.
In addition, the project team will generate important knowledge about student
resilience and persistence after a natural disaster, the importance of an
ecosystem of support that includes academic and socio-emotional support systems,
and the validity of the adage that financial aid alone cannot increase student
success. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are: (1) to provide
academically talented low-income undergraduate STEM students with financial,
academic, and socio-emotional support; (2) to adapt and implement an ecosystem
of proven financial, academic, and socio-emotional support strategies and to
study their effects on retention, graduation, and success; and (3) to contribute
to the implementation and sustainability of effective evidence-based curricular
activities for low-income STEM students. A quantitative factor analytic study
will examine the contributions of the three types of support (financial,
academic, socio-emotional) separately and their synergistic effects on student
success, retention, and graduation. A critical outcome of the effort will be
insight into the effects of natural disaster on undergraduate students' pursuit
of STEM degrees and the importance of a systemic approach to facilitating
student success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.