* 1833294
* I-Corps:  Transformational Nutrient Curation and Management for Hydroponic Systems
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2019
* John Blaho, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project focuses on the
development of a data driven approach combined with automation equipment to
optimize plant nutrition in real time. The project goal is the development of an
efficient and practical machine learning system for nutrient curation and
management that may revolutionize commercial farming. Current technologies on
the market lack adequate performance specifications and are not cost effective
for commercial applications. As a result of changing climate conditions and
economic factors, many farms struggle to maintain profitability due to new
operational challenges and risks. Worldwide, arable outdoor farmland is
dramatically being reduced due to changing climate conditions. The proposed
I-Corps project will initially explore the warehouse farm sector that grows
produce indoors close to the point where this produce is consumed. Direct
beneficiaries of this project include the US agriculture industry, as well as
those responsible for national food security. Development of technologies to
assist new forms of farming are now required to ensure access to fresh and more
nutritionally dense produce in the decades ahead.

This I-Corps project is based on the premise that the rational addition of
nutrients to hydroponic systems based on real time feedback optimizes plant
growth. The core technology includes an automated nutrient dosing and pH
balancing system which collects data and acts on environmental data. This system
consists of a sensor module monitoring hydroponic nutrient reservoir conditions
and pump modules, combined with a cloud based data storage and processing
component that adjusts chemical conditions as needed. The driving algorithms
utilize analytical techniques that model nutrient factor usage and predicts
their effects on cellular gene expression and overall plant health. Together,
the hardware and software components derive a variety of plant growth metrics
that will form the basis for a larger framework of environmental controls to
dictate optimal plant growth.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.