* 1833854
* Developing Pathways to Diversify the Profession of Engineered Materials
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Lilo Pozzo, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,982.00

This five-year project aims to contribute to the national need for well-educated
scientists, mathematicians, engineers and technicians. It will do so by
providing scholarships and educational opportunities to approximately 80
students who transfer from a community college in Washington to the University
of Washington. These Scholars will pursue bachelor's degrees in "materials-
intensive" engineering fields, including Chemical Engineering, Materials Science
and Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering. This project involves a partnership
between the University of Washington and four community colleges in the greater
Seattle region: Edmonds Community College, Everett Community College, Green
River Community College, and Seattle Central Community College. Transfer
students from these colleges will be selected to receive two-year scholarships
to complete their bachelor's degrees at the University of Washington. These
graduates will be eligible for an additional one-year scholarship to pursue a
master's degree. The project aims to support community college students with
enrichment activities that are predicted to an increase their successful
completion of degrees in materials-intensive engineering fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the project are to: i) double the
number of transfer students who apply for admission to the materials-intensive
departments; ii) increase the number of students from underrepresented groups in
the materials-intensive departments; and iii) upon graduation, successfully
place the Scholars in full-time STEM employment, graduate school, or an
international experience. The program will implement a blend of new and proven
practices to achieve its goals. Programming highlights include an advising
outreach program brought from the University of Washington to the community
colleges, a student mentor ladder that spans from regional high school students
to graduates who were supported by the project, and a choice of experiential
activities involving engagement of the Scholars in faculty research projects,
industrial internships, and/or an international exchange experience at Tohoku
University in Japan. The program will also integrate academic and professional
development activities to build community and promote the Scholars' academic and
personal growth. Using a mixed-methods approach that includes surveys, focus
groups and institutional data, the program's research study aims to identify the
factors that influence community college students to pursue and complete
bachelor's and, potentially, master's degrees in materials-intensive fields.
Additionally, the study aims to determine the impact of the project elements on
student self-efficacy, achievement levels, and professional identity. The
efforts of this program have the potential to substantially impact the
materials-intensive departments at the University of Washington and to yield a
model that is broadly applicable, both across the State of Washington and
nationally. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics Program, which seeks to increase the number of low-
income academically talented students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about academic
success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-
income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.