* 1833492
* FORCE 11 Travel
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Maryann Martone, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 30,646.00

The objective of this proposal is to assist students, early-career researchers
and instructors with travel fellowships to attend the FORCE11's Scholarly
Communications Institute (FSCI) 2018 meeting being held July 30 - August 3, 2018
at the University of California, San Diego. The intent of FSCI 2018 is to expose
all participants to exceptional training opportunities and the latest research
and trends in the ongoing transformation of scholarly communications and
research practice and dissemination. In addition to special training sessions,
participants will particularly benefit from increased access to principal role
models within the field from prominent national and international research
laboratories and centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The host organization, FORCE11,
the Future of Research Communication and eScholarship, is a community of 2500+
scholars, librarians, archivists, publishers and research funders that help
facilitate the change toward improved knowledge creation and sharing.
Individually and collectively, the members bring about a change in modern
scholarly communications through the effective use of information technology.
The FSCI 2018 meeting is designed as a week-long summer training meeting,
incorporating intensive courses, seminars, workshops, group activities, lectures
and hands-on training. Participants will attend courses taught by world-wide
leading experts in scholarly communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.