* 1833960
* STEM Scholarship Excellence Project:  Exploring the Effects of Psychosocial Factors on STEM Persistence at an Historically Black College
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Melanie Van Stry, Lane College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 649,801.00

This five-year project will support the success of twenty-eight low-income,
high-achieving STEM undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need at
Lane College, an Historically Black College. Achieving this goal will contribute
to the national need for well-educated scientists, mathematicians, engineers,
and technicians. The project will provide scholarships to students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology, Chemistry, Computer Science,
Mathematics, and/or Physics. First-year students will receive four-year
scholarships and transfer students will receive two-year scholarships. The
project aims to increase student persistence in STEM fields by linking
scholarships with effective supporting activities. Planned activities include
mentoring, undergraduate research experiences, service learning, outreach
projects, graduate school preparation, and participation in discipline-specific
conferences. With the help of mentors, the Scholars will create Individual
Development Plans that define their career goals and steps toward achieving
those goals. The project will also support curriculum improvements aimed at
increasing first-year student retention in STEM. Because Lane College has a high
population of underrepresented students, this project has the potential to
broaden participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of
the project is to increase degree completion of low-income, academically high-
achieving undergraduates in STEM fields. Non-cognitive, psychosocial factors,
such as fixed and growth mindset, grit, self-efficacy, and attitudes toward
science, have been demonstrated to affect student persistence in STEM. This
project will investigate the effects of psychosocial factors on STEM students at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, many of whom face challenges
related to college readiness, academic engagement, and scientific identity. This
project will examine the possibility that the Scholar selection process is
biased toward students who are predisposed to success because of psychosocial
factors, such as growth mindset. It will also investigate the alternative
possibility that the Scholars develop certain psychosocial factors associated
with academic success as a result of participating in project activities. This
project has the potential to advance understanding of how psychosocial factors
affect student success in STEM fields, including the success of students from
underrepresented groups. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income, academically high-achieving students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to
generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.