* 1833207
* 2018 Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics, Columbus, Ohio
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Candace Chan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 27,557.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPITON: The goal of the 2018 Professional Development
Workshop in Ceramics is to enhance the career development of the next generation
of future leaders in ceramic materials research and education. The workshop
focuses on early-career faculty who have recently been awarded NSF CAREER grants
from the Ceramics Program in the Division of Materials Research, but the
workshop activities are structured to be of value to all participants as there
is a desire to increase the scale and scope of this workshop over prior
versions. The workshop is also open to other early-career faculty as well as
interested post-doctoral associates, faculty-minded senior graduate students,
and more senior faculty interested in mentoring the next generation. It an
intensive (Oct. 13-14, 2018) workshop that brings together two 2017 CAREER
awardees with targeted panels of U.S.-based and international experts from their
chosen technical specialties in a forum that promotes professional discussions,
mentoring, and networking activities. The direct panel feedback aims to impact
the research and training of the early career faculty; the broader exchange of
best practices for training and teaching as well as the forging of new
collaborative research opportunities and mentoring relationships will benefit
all participants. These outcomes provide a strong base to help faculty succeed
in becoming outstanding researchers and educators in their chosen fields, while
strengthening the ceramics community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
The 2018 Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics will be held on Oct.
13-14, 2018 to coordinate with the Materials Science and Technology meeting Oct.
14-18, 2018 in Columbus, Ohio (MS&amp;T18). This workshop focuses on two
technical topics to be presented by the two participating CAREER awardees: 1)
understanding the spatiotemporal evolution of structure, chemistry, and
morphology of ceramic electrolyte interfaces within solid-state batteries, and
2) enhancing ferroelastic toughening in electroceramic composites through
microstructural coupling. The respective early career faculty and the technical
experts in their sub-specialties of ceramic materials research are leading the
scientific discussions for the purpose of critically evaluating research plans,
career development, and education efforts. Pre-registration is appreciated,
please e-mail the PI with "2018 Professional Development Workshop in Ceramics"
as the subject line, or register on-line at the MS&amp;T18
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.