* 1833623
* EAGER: Collaborative: Secure and Trustworthy Cyberphysical Microfluidic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Jeyavijayan Rajendran, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 07/31/2020
* USD 69,999.00

This project's overarching goal is to ensure the security and trustworthiness of
cyber-physical microfluidic systems (CPMS). Microfluidic systems are devices
that handle small volumes of fluids and are usually coupled with "cyber"
elements such as sensors and intelligent control algorithms to improve
performance and reliability. CPMS are coming of age in an era of rampant
cybersecurity issues, and novel security and trust solutions are the need of the
hour. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Secure and trustworthy CPMS will be realized
through three central research tasks: 1) analyzing security threats,
motivations, attack surfaces, and their consequences for the research landscape,
industry, and society; 2) developing novel architectures, protocols, hardware,
and algorithms to prevent, detect, and mitigate these threats; and 3)
experiments on the benchtop to validate the developed approaches and to expose
subtle issues that arise at the biochemical level. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Miniaturized, low-cost CPMS that are also secure and trustworthy will
be revolutionary. In academia, this project will foster multi-disciplinary
research and education for students of hardware design, computer-aided design,
molecular biology, and security. In industry, growth and investment will be
fostered by protecting intellectual property and providing an impetus for
adoption by end users. For society, CPMS designed with security in mind should
help in establishing trust.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The data collected in this
research will be disseminated through publications and public portals, such as
GitHub and https://sites.google.com/a/tamu.edu/security-of-microfluidic-
biochips/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.