* 1833098
* RII Track-4: Advancing Machine Learning in Biological Oceanography Through Interdisciplinary Collaborations
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Roy Collins, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2020
* USD 187,301.00

Non-Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;Modern scientists in interdisciplinary
fields like oceanography and genomics regularly generate complex datasets with
billions or trillions of data points. Machine learning is revolutionizing the
way these data are observed. As a merger between statistics and computer
science, the techniques of machine learning have been used for decades, but
recent improvements in high-performance computing, and research investment from
the commercial sector have supercharged the utility of these methods.
Environmental scientists have been relatively slow to take up these new methods,
in part because the rapid pace of discovery makes it difficult to stay at the
cutting edge, but as scientific datasets grow ever larger and more complex, it
is becoming increasingly important to make use of machine learning as a way to
explore and understand the world. In collaboration with colleagues at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institute, the PI aims to stimulate progress in oceanography and
genomics by bringing cutting edge tools and techniques from the world of machine
learning to Alaska. Acquiring these skills in parallel with an early career
scientist, and applying them to ongoing research projects in the Arctic, will
enable a substantially improved understanding of ongoing changes in the marine
ecosystems of Alaska. Passing on this knowledge to students by designing and
teaching a new course on Machine Learning in the Environmental Sciences will
ensure that future generations of Alaskans have access to the skills they will
need to succeed in science and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;The broad goals of this visit are to advance machine
learning in biological oceanography through interdisciplinary collaborations and
knowledge transfer. The PI aims to leverage extensive expertise at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) to advance research on Arctic marine microbial
communities using machine learning methods. The WHOI Autonomous Robotics and
Perception Laboratory (WARP) Lab specializes in adaptive sampling, marine
robotics, computer vision, autonomous robotic exploration, semantic perception,
bayesian nonparametrics, deep learning, surprise detection, and data
summarization. Objectives of this project include learning the theory and
concepts of machine learning in structured and informal settings, which include
several common programming languages and toolkits. Using this base, the PI and a
graduate trainee will apply the tools and techniques of machine learning to
predict spatiotemporal distributions of Arctic marine microbes, their use and
transformations of metals, and advance biological oceanographic sampling
techniques. The PI will accomplish this effort by designing methods for adaptive
biological sampling using flow-through systems and ocean profilers. Outcomes of
the project will include the development of a new course on Machine Learning in
the Environmental Sciences to be taught at the University of Alaska Fairbanks
and online via the University of the Arctic. Career development and mentorship
of the graduate student will include training in computing fluency in the
Software Carpentry program and subsequent training as an instructor. As part of
the knowledge exchange with WHOI, the PI will host an Oxford Nanopore minION
sequencing workshop in Woods Hole to share this cutting edge technology, and
lead cross-cutting discussions on the use of machine learning in advancing this
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.