* 1833298
* Workshop: Hazards and Disaster Researchers Meeting: Improving Post-Disaster Rapid Reconnaissance Research; Broomfield, Colorado; July 11-12, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Lori Peek, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 06/30/2020
* USD 99,999.00

This grant provides funding for a special NSF RAPID grant focused workshop on
July 11-12, 2018, that immediately follows the Natural Hazards and Disasters
Research Meeting being held in Broomfield, Colorado. As the United States has
experienced more frequent and intense disasters that have affected larger
numbers of people, the hazards and disasters research community has mobilized in
response. Following each disaster, large numbers of core as well as situational
researchers from locally-affected areas and across the nation, many with NSF
RAPID grant funding, launch new studies to understand the impacts of these
events on both the affected population and the built environment, to explore the
root causes of the disasters, and to trace long-term recovery trajectories among
population groups and across communities. This special workshop provides a forum
to take stock of what the community has learned from past disaster
reconnaissance research and to develop best practices for future disaster
investigations. The workshop is open to all members of the hazards and disasters
research community and will convene engineers, social scientists, and public
health researchers who received NSF RAPID grants in 2017 as well as those who
have ongoing hazard and disaster research projects. The funds will be used
principally to support travel costs for NSF RAPID awardees making presentations
at the workshop. This workshop will contribute significantly to the NSF mission
of promoting the progress of science in our understanding of hazards and
advancing the national health and prosperity by using this understanding to
reduce damage from future events.

This work will improve rapid reconnaissance research. The specific objectives
are to: 1) identify salient research needs based on the experiences of RAPID
grantees, leaders of disaster research coordination networks and researchers
with ongoing investigations, 2) integrate new and emerging hazards and disaster
researchers into the existing coordination networks through information sharing
activities; and 3) generate improved research coordination, data collection, and
data sharing capabilities by combining the experiences of this diverse group of
emerging and established hazards and disaster researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.