* 1833296
* Collaborative Research: On how the Bengal-Nicobar fan deposition influenced carbonate cementation in the incoming sediment to the Sumatra subduction zone (IODP Exp 362)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Marta Torres, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Johnson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,732.00

The precipitation of carbonate cements, like calcite, changes the physical and
mechanical properties of sediments. Depending on the nature of the sediment and
its location relative to zones of seismic activity, like subduction zones,
carbonate cementation may decrease porosity and permeability and increase
sedimentary section rigidity. It can also impact the slip on faults and
earthquake rupture processes. Precipitation of carbonate during the alteration
of sediments in subduction zones with burial and increasing temperature (i.e.,
diagenesis) can also provide an important sink for carbon, which may be released
from rocks undergoing alteration deeper in the section or by devolatilization
and other water-rock interaction processes. Thus, carbonate precipitation in
subduction zone sediments can have a significant impact on the carbon cycle.
This research examines the formation of carbonate cements in siliciclastic rocks
in a major submarine fan deposit within the Sumatra subduction zone. Processes
related to the alteration of siliciclastic sediments and their cementation by
carbonate will be studied as will processes related to microbially-mediated
carbon cycling. Research activities include petrographic investigation of
mineral and textural relationships of sediment and cement grains using state-of-
the-art imaging technologies. The geochemistry of samples, including stable
isotope analyses of carbon, oxygen, and strontium and trace metal compositions
of the sediments and their constituent materials will be carried out to try and
identify signatures of different processes leading to the formation of carbonate
cements. The study will also include work to characterize intergranular pore
spaces and grain boundary relations, especially with regard to changes in
porosity, permeability, and mineral dissolution features. Project goals include
(1) determining the role of carbonate cements in porosity reduction and rock
property evolution in subduction zone siliciclastic sediment packages; (2)
evaluating the impact of carbonate cement precipitation on the carbon cycle; and
(3) determining the thermal and chemical conditions that lead to carbonate
cement formation in subduction zone sediments. Broader impacts of the work
include student training and incorporation of research into courses. The
investigators will work with organizations associated with their home
institutions to attract members of groups underrepresented in the sciences and
engage them in the research. The investigators will work with students and
educators to develop materials to be used in secondary education settings. The
project supports two investigators whose genders are underrepresented in the
sciences, one of whom serves as a role model for minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whereas we have a solid understanding of
carbonate formation driven solely by carbon cycling, either recrystallization of
biogenic carbonate or precipitation of methane-derived authigenic carbonate,
another mechanism that may significantly influence the formation of sediment
cements is where silicate mineral alteration during diagenesis produces
bicarbonate and cations that favor precipitation of carbonate minerals.
Diagenetic carbonate precipitation efficiently sequesters carbon. Because
carbonate in sediments may be released during diagenesis from subducted rocks by
devolatization and/or fluid-induced dissolution of calcium carbonate, knowledge
of carbonate-carbon inventories in input sediment sequences to subduction zones
is important to constrain the inputs to Earth's surface carbon reservoirs.
Furthermore, the formation of diagenetic carbonate cements changes the physical
and mechanical properties of the hosting sediment, altering its permeability and
mechanical strength. The cementation process and the role of silicate weathering
on authigenic carbonate formation in marine systems is not well understood. This
work documents the relative roles of the coupled carbon-silica system in
generating carbonate cements and depositing carbon-bearing minerals in cores of
subduction-related siliciclastic sediments. Sediment samples from the Nicobar
Fan from the Sumatra subduction zone were selected because they exhibit
significant carbonate cementation, having been recently collected on an
International Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) drilling expedition to the Indian
Ocean. The research focuses on testing the hypothesis that Nicobar Fan carbonate
cements formed at depth during burial and diagenesis due to the generation of
alkalinity from the alteration of non-carbonate siliciclastic material. Research
tasks include (1) comparing the relative roles of carbonate formation through
traditional carbon cycling pathways with those via the proposed coupled
silicate-carbonate system; (2) identifying chemical reactions in the sediments
that lead to carbonate formation; and (3) understating conditions that promote
carbonate precipitation from subsurface marine silicate alteration. Sediment
samples will be examined petrographically and subjected to X-ray elemental
mapping and cathodoluminescence imaging by field-emission scanning electron
microscopy. Samples will also be analyzed geochemically. High-resolution carbon,
oxygen and strontium isotopes and clumped stable isotope analyses will be
carried out in addition to analyses of trace element composition. Data will be
used to determine the role of subsurface marine silicates in carbonate cement
formation and identify sediment fabric/porosity changes associated with it.
Results will contribute to our understanding of the interdependence among fluid-
rock reactions, element cycling, and porosity reduction in siliciclastic-
dominated systems that experience methanogenesis and will improve our
understanding of global carbon budgets, sediment rheology, and faulting in
subduction zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.