* 1833909
* Workshop: Seventh Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization Conference November 8-10, 2018 in Alexandria
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Vinka Craver, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 06/30/2019
* USD 34,940.00

Nanotechnology is enhancing the performance of or adding new properties to
materials used in diverse areas like agriculture, medicine, energy, consumer
products, environmental technologies, automotive products, and even the film
industry. Sustainable nanotechnology attempts to ensure that novel industrial
operations and products are sustainable in terms of their environmental,
societal and economic dimensions. The current scenario now for most
nanotechnology applications is not sustainable due to the use of large amounts
of non-renewable raw materials and energy, as well as the production of by-
products potentially toxic for humans and the environment. The 7th Sustainable
Nanotechnology Conference will bring together academicians, researchers,
governmental workers, policy makers and industrial employees to discuss and gain
a better understanding of best practices and approaches to develop sustainable
nanotechnology. It is expected that a wide range of experts, including materials
scientists, industrial partners, students, government officials, social and
physical scientists, toxicologists, and engineers will attend this conference.
The funds requested will support travel expenses for about 20 research students
including females, minorities, and those from underrepresented groups to work in
sustainable nanotechnology. Hence, the conference will provide networking and
educational opportunities for young scientists at various career stages. In
addition, funding will be used for an award to an emerging investigator, travel
support to plenary speakers, and some general conference expenses. We expect
that participants from all over the world will attend and ensure a knowledgeable
group to facilitate up to date presentations and inspiring discussions and the
promotion of nanotechnology related to sustainable
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds to support the
seventh annual conference of the "Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization" (SNO)
to be held from November 8-10, 2018 in Alexandria, Virginia (Washington DC).
Such a conference has as its goal the bringing together of researchers in order
to discuss the latest findings in the field of sustainable nanotechnology and to
form collaborations which promote synergy in the research. Current sustainable
nanotechnology attempts to ensure that novel industrial development is
sustainable in terms of environmental, societal and economic dimensions.
&lt;br/&gt;This conference is unique since it is the only one focused toward
cutting edge nanotechnology and how it relates to sustainability across
disciplines involved in the development of new knowledge in the field. The goal
of the conference is to promote open-dialogue on the sustainable implications
and applications of nanotechnology. This specialized conference on sustainable
nanotechnology, involving the best intellects in this area, will enable a more
responsible approach to the development of nanotechnology by instilling the
importance of sustainability in the initial research, in addition to the end
products. The conference will benefit scientists by identifying sustainable
research goals that will yield necessary information to allow policy makers and
manufacturers to define a path forward using accumulated data. This will result
in improved risk assessment and management strategies and yield helpful
information for developed or developing companies in the manufacturing of
nanomaterials and nanotechnology products that improve
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.