* 1833852
* Developing a Growth Mindset Model to Build Resiliency in STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Seher Atamturktur, CUNY Bronx Community College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 4,999,921.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This project at Bronx
Community College and Lehman College, both Hispanic-Serving Institutions in the
City University of New York system, will fund 575 scholarships in 10 groups of
students who are pursuing associate degrees at Bronx Community College and
baccalaureate degrees at Lehman College across STEM fields. Many of the
participating students will be from New York's 15th Congressional District and
surrounding area. This district is the poorest in America, with 34.2% of local
residents living below the poverty level, as compared to 12.7% nationwide. The
scholarship students will receive: (1) optimized student success supports (i.e.
pre-College Summer Boot Camp, First Year Seminar, intensive advisement, a
transfer bridge program); (2) scholarships and financial aid; (3) faculty
mentoring; (4) active learning and collaborative research; (5) academic support;
(6) opportunities to earn income as Supplemental Instruction Leaders; (7)
professional development opportunities through participation in conferences,
workshops, fairs, and STEM clubs; and (8) career advisement and internships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty and Supplemental Instruction Leaders will be
trained to help students intentionally build a growth mindset, the perspective
that intelligence and academic success can be improved over time with effort and
with the development of specific skills. There is evidence that students with
growth mindsets develop the resiliency to overcome failures and set-backs. While
there is ample evidence linking growth mindsets to improved academic
performance, there is little evidence regarding what specific activities help
students to develop growth mindsets and, in turn, improve their academic
performance and persistence. This project will develop and test a Growth Mindset
Development Model that creates a "roadmap" for developing growth mindsets. This
information has the potential to help colleges and universities across the
nation increase the number and diversity of college students who complete STEM
studies and enter the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.