* 1833521
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 Conference on Decision and Game Theory for Security (GameSec)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Quanyan Zhu, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 8,000.00

The Conference on Decision and Game Theory for Security (GameSec), established
in 2010, aims to bring together researchers who aim to establish a theoretical
foundation for making resource allocation decisions that balance available
capabilities and perceived security risks in a principled manner. GameSec 2018
presents a valuable opportunity for researchers to share their results and learn
about the state of the art in the application of decision and game theory in
security. It will also offer PhD and MS research students a unique platform to
learn the recent advances in this area and encourage them to take initiatives in
research and produce more results. This award is for travel grants to students
to support their participation in this important event.

This conference focuses on analytical models based on game, information,
communication, optimization, decision, and control theories that are applied to
diverse security topics. The connection between theoretical models and real
world security problems help establish a feedback loop between theory and
practice. The conference helps to promote a "science of security" with a
theoretical foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.