* 1833173
* Meteorological Controls on Dust Emission and Transport in a Closed Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Robert Frouin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 02/28/2023
* USD 651,009.00

By mass, dust is the most pervasive aerosol in the Earth's atmosphere. Dust
plays an important role in the Earth's weather and climate since mineral
aerosols affect the hydrological cycle, oceanic and terrestrial nutrient budget,
and radiative energy budget. A large fraction of the total atmospheric dust load
is due to emission from closed topographic depressions (closed basins), yet
little is known about the meteorological processes controlling dust emission
from such topographic features. The project aims to address this gap in
understanding by elucidating the meteorological controls on dust emission and
transport in a closed basin via observational and numerical analysis of dust
storms originating in the Salton Basin, a closed sub-sea level basin in extreme
southeastern California that experiences frequent dust
storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous field studies have focused on elucidating
the meteorological controls on dust emission and transport within the largest
dust sources in the Sahara, yet the initial results presented here suggest that
the meteorological processes fundamental to dust emission and transport in a
closed basin are very different from those over the expansive source regions in
the Sahara. This project will focus on the role of warm Foehn events on dust
emission. The Salton Sea is the large shallow lake that fills the lowest
portions of the Salton Basin, which was accidentally created in 1905 by
engineers attempting to irrigate the Imperial Valley. New legislation enacted in
2017 is resulting in a massive reduction in freshwater input to the Salton Sea
and it is expected that the level of the Salton will drop so much over the next
decade that its surface area may shrink by 100 to 200 square miles. This project
will also elucidate the effect of the drying of the Sea on the meteorological
processes responsible for dust emission and estimate how the expanding dry playa
will influence the total dust burden for the basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Broader Impacts of this research center on using the new scientific findings to
inform policy and improve human health outcomes from exposure to airborne dust
for the quarter-million people living and working in the affected area.
Scientific results will be communicated with stakeholders via the state's Salton
Sea Management Program (SSMP) in order to inform policy decisions, particularly
in terms of those management activities aimed at reducing dust emission from the
dry playa. Additionally, a forecast version of WRF-Chem will be developed and
validated in order to provide 5-day forecasts of dust concentrations for the
region. The main goal of these forecasts will be to afford vulnerable groups,
health care providers and first responders an opportunity to mitigate adverse
human health and safety risks associated with local dust storms. The Principal
Investigator (PI) will work with the SSMP's Public Outreach Committee in order
to reach relevant stakeholders and improve the utility of the forecast
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.