* 1833605
* S-STEM: Scholars and Leaders Program
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Peggy Fitch, University of St. Francis
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 12/31/2023
* USD 649,677.00

This project funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-
achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at the
University of St. Francis (USF) in Joliet, Illinois. Throughout its five years,
this project will provide 12 scholarships to two groups of six students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in Biology and Biochemistry. The USF Scholars and
Leaders Program (SLP) will address the workforce needs in the greater Chicago
area for highly qualified biology and biochemistry professionals. SLP students
will be drawn from local high schools, where 63% of students are from low-income
households and over 70% are underrepresented minorities, for whom college
affordability and the need to earn an income are significant barriers to
matriculation. The project will build on campus resources such as academic
support services, availability of supplemental instruction for introductory
classes, a well-developed leadership training program, and summer research
opportunities. New support measures and programs that will be developed for the
scholarship recipients include development of leadership skills through
experiential and community involvement, peer mentoring to assist with the social
transition to campus life, participation in a STEM-focused service project, and
inclusion of students' families in campus and program activities. These
activities will strengthen the university's natural science programs and, as a
result, will benefit all current and future biology and biochemistry majors.
Both SLP students and the many students who arrive after the grant period will
benefit from the leadership component, from local internship networks expanded
via the project, and from the family involvement component, which can be
critical for first-generation students. Preparing low-income students for
rewarding high-wage employment in areas of local and national need will benefit
individual students, their families, and the local and national economies. Best
practices and lessons learned from this project will be documented and shared
with other institutions with similar characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main goals of the SLP program are to increase the number of academically
talented, low-income students from local high schools who enroll in USF biology
or biochemistry degree programs, to support them to graduate in four years and
to pursue careers or graduate study in these fields, and to sustain and
institutionalize SLP practices that have a documented positive effect on
recruitment, retention, and graduation of these students. The program builds on
USF's existing student support services, scholarship programs, first-year
experience course, peer mentoring, and leadership program. New components will
include a specific program orientation, faculty mentoring, experiential
leadership activities with local high schools, internships, research, and
others, family engagement activities, and cohort activities focused on career
building. The project hopes to accomplish four objectives: (1) to recruit and
enroll 12 academically talented first-year students from local high schools into
biology and biochemistry degree programs; (2) to retain 11 out of 12 SLP
participants to graduation by enhancing the academic and student support
services for Scholars and to analyze how these services affect the success of
the Scholars; (3) to enhance the leadership program elements to better prepare
Scholars for careers or graduate-level study; and (4) to institutionalize the
curricular and support practices deemed most effective by research and
evaluation of program activities. The project will include an in-depth
examination of the impact of deliberate leadership building on the success of
these students by (1) examining how the leadership program impacts students'
STEM leadership self-efficacy, (2) defining which program elements influence
students' beliefs about their ability to persist in STEM education and to
succeed in STEM careers, and (3) determining which program elements are
particularly influential for Hispanic students. The results of this inquiry will
help develop a deeper understanding of the factors that affect the recruitment,
retention, graduation, and postgraduate success of talented low-income students
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.