* 1833156
* EAGER:  Developing High-Throughput CRISPR/Single-cell RNA-seq Screening in Maize
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Dennis Shasha, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project seeks to combine two powerful, new approaches to accelerate
breeding of crops adapted to environmental stresses, providing new tools to deal
with agricultural challenges such as minimizing loss from drought or heat. One
of the technical approaches used in the project, known by its acronym CRISPR --
creates genetic variation much the same way it occurs randomly in nature but
with much greater speed, ease and target precision. The second technique, known
as single-cell RNA-sequencing, allows researchers to measure activity of,
potentially, every gene in a single cell. Together, the two methods allow a
"miniaturization" of the breeding approach -- testing many crop variants to find
ones with useful agricultural traits. Different, single cell variants can be
generated by the millions using CRISPR, subjected to a stress in which only the
fittest cells survive, and those cells analyzed for the precise changes that
allowed them to survive using single-cell RNA-sequencing. This method, used in
conjunction with classical breeding approaches, can serve as a resource for
plant breeders and geneticists working to understand the genetic regulators of
traits that are important for stable crop production. In the education goals of
the project, the investigators will extend a successful program that trains
talented New York City high student interested in a career in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project aims to develop
pooled CRISPR/single-cell RNA-seq screens in maize protoplasts to introduce a
novel approach to plant breeding and genetic analysis. Using CRISPR and
associated endonucleases like Cas9, large-scale genetic screens will be carried
out in which a diverse set of guide-RNAs is transfected into a pool of millions
of cells. The cells are then subjected to a selection; survivors identify
beneficial perturbations while underrepresented genotypes in the pool identify
genes necessary to survive the stress. Coupled with single-cell RNA-seq, this
approach provides a sensitive readout of genetic pathways, and has been used
successfully in animal cells. The method has not yet been applied to plants and
could not only represent an increase in the scale of crop screening but also
reveal genetic targets for plant breeding that have previously been obscured by
genetic redundancy. With the ability to screen millions of cells, libraries can
also be transfected at titers that lead to multiple guides per cell, effectively
allowing higher order mutants to be screened quickly and easily. Many important
stress tolerance traits are known to be mediated at the cell level, and marker
assisted selection allows screening for targeted pathways that regulate tissue
level traits. The project will assess the efficiency of CRISPR in maize cells in
pilot experiments that target the auxin signaling pathway using auxin response
markers as a selection tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.