* 1833330
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: New Urban Geographies of Domestic Work
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Caitlin Alcorn, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 15,240.00

This doctoral dissertation improvement project will examine the shifting spatio-
temporal organization of paid domestic work in the 21st century. Today, in
contrast to past live-in arrangements, domestic work is much more likely to be
performed by day workers who often live far away from their employers. This
shift in employment arrangement represents a significant spatio-temporal
reorganization of the sector as workers' daily commutes might now vary, along
with their daily and weekly working hours, the number of employers for whom they
work, and time spent interacting with each of them. This project will consider
the significance of this reorganization by advancing theories in urban geography
and the geographies of work, as well as contributing to renewed social science
research interest in the micro and macro patterns of mobility. This project
focuses on the domestic employment relationship, but the findings will
contribute to the ongoing reformulation of concepts to better understand labor,
work, and employment in the 21st century that is increasingly service-oriented,
insecure, and spatially fragmented. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.

This project pays close attention to the increasing spatial and temporal
fragmentation of paid domestic work and its significance for workers, employers,
and wider society. The project is centered on the following questions: (1) How
has the spatio-temporal reorganization of paid domestic work impacted the daily
lives of domestic workers and employers, particularly the household organization
and management strategies of each? (2) What are the implications of these
spatio-temporal changes for: a) the domestic employment relationship, and b)
domestic worker organizing efforts for better working conditions? (3) How might
longstanding social relations associated with the employer-employee relationship
and the place of paid domestic work in society be changing in response to the
reorganization of the sector? These research questions will be answered through
a mixed methods approach including content analysis of domestic employment job
postings and news media sources, descriptive data analysis of government data,
participant observation of union activities, key informant interviews with union
leaders, and in-depth interviews with domestic workers and employers. Interviews
with workers will include the collection of time-diaries to develop time-space
paths as a way of understanding the lived experience of navigating this
increasingly fragmented work. The study will investigate these questions in
Brazil but will be translatable to other contexts where domestic work is also a
significant part of the economy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.