* 1833322
* I-Corps: Market research for unmanned aircraft system imaging of agricultural fields
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Katherine Rainey, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact of this I-Corps project is to promote the use of drones in
agriculture and natural resource commercial endeavors and research. Due to
scale, logistics, and lack of rural broadband internet access, there is a
surprising lack of data in agriculture and agronomic research. At the same time,
farmers and agronomists are in one way or another adapting to precision
agriculture crop management and need high-resolution data at the landscape
scale. This project will drastically reduce the time needed to generate accurate
crop growth metrics from drone imagery, and then act on the information.
Development of this project will improve data-driven decision-making in
agriculture and agronomic research, including plant breeding and sustainable
crop management. Data from our technology can be used for drone-based yield
prediction for economic and value-chain applications, with information provided
sooner than is available from current methods.

This I-Corps project will reduce the cost and time to analyze unmanned aircraft
system imagery of crop fields for quantification of metrics describing crop
health, growth, and development, proactively during the season. The technology
is software and workflows that use techniques from remote sensing,
photogrammetry, and computer vision to automatically extract replicate images of
research plots and management zones from raw drone imagery of crop fields,
instead of relying on expensive and massive image ortho-mosaics and high-grade
GPS measurements for plot extraction and analysis. The innovation can be applied
in the field by eliminating the need for internet access or high-performance
computers. The innovation also provides custom zoning of metrics, and quality
control of the data generated. The innovation is an inexpensive method of high-
throughput field phenotyping in the plant sciences. The innovation can
contribute significantly to early-season yield prediction for a range of
decision-making and forecasting applications. Implementation of regular
consideration of growth analysis using inexpensive aerial imagery in the seed
industry will improve genetic gain and product placement in precision
agriculture management zones. Precision agriculture management will be
facilitated by real-time, responsive, high-resolution assessments of crop
health. Improved crop modeling and yield predictions are economically valuable
to many sectors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.