* 1833337
* Fifth International Conference on the Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life - Den Haag, Netherlands, July 7-12, 2019
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Joseph Sisneros, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 03/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides partial support for The Fifth International Conference on
the Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life will take place in Den Haag, Netherlands,
July 7-12, 2019. This meeting follows the very successful meetings on the same
general topic held in Nyborg, Denmark (2007), Cork, Ireland (2010), Budapest,
Hungary (2013), and Dublin, Ireland (2016) The major goal of the conference will
be to define the current state of knowledge on the impact of underwater noise
and, in particular, explore the progress made in this field in the three years
since the previous Conference. The extension of renewable energy and petroleum
projects to offshore waters, the prospect of industrial development of
previously pristine waters (e.g., polar regions), and recent proposals to open
new areas for petroleum lease (e.g., US Atlantic coast) has resulted in greater
interest in the effects of underwater noise on aquatic life on the part of
regulators, industry, and scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting should
help shape future research and understanding of effects of noise on aquatic
life. Based on experience from the earlier meetings, the interactions and
networking that took place has resulted in new collaborations between
investigators, a broader understanding of the science that can be used in their
work by regulators, a better understanding of regulatory issues by scientists
and industry, and substantial cross-fertilization of experimental design and
approaches by investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.