* 1833016
* RII Track-4: Investigating 3-D Dispersed Smart Antenna Arrays for Nearly Full Spherical Scanning by New Radios (NRs)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Saeed Latif, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 170,046.00

Non-Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The existing 4G cellular systems
have stretched their capabilities to a limit that they can no longer be extended
or incrementally improved to meet the mounting demand for high bandwidth-
consumptive mobile services. As the demand for large bandwidth and high data
rate for mobile applications is at all-time high, future 5G (5th Generation)
mobile terminals must operate at unused millimeter wave (mmWave) bands. It is
also expected that existing lower frequency 4G bands will continue to be needed
for wide area coverage. In this project, it is proposed to investigate the
performance of a new generation of smart dispersed array antenna architecture
for future 5G new radios (NRs). The mmWave arrays will be integrated into
recently designed 4G/LTE multi-slot antennas for interoperability between cells
of 4G networks and future 5G heterogeneous cells. This will provide a unified
connectivity platform for existing and emerging connected services. This
fellowship will be a unique opportunity for the PI and a graduate student to
access state-of-the-art facilities and advanced fabrication equipment. The
project outcomes will be utilized to attract members of minority and
underrepresented groups to engineering education in the Gulf Coast region. This
will also boost the University of South Alabama?s recruiting effort to attract
outstanding undergraduate students, and drive up new mobile-based economic
development opportunities in the Gulf Coast and in the State of
Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of project is to investigate the performance of 3-D dispersed antenna
arrays that will be implemented in multiple planes of mobile terminals for
future 5G networks, called New Radios (NRs). Orthogonal arrays dispersedly
located on various planes of NRs will be studied for Multiple-Input Multiple-
Output (MIMO) operation and beam scanning in nearly full spherical region.
Miniaturized metasurface-inspired antenna array elements will be based on Dolph-
Tschebysheff amplitude weighting, where excitation co-efficient of elements will
be related to Tschebysheff polynomials. Smart beamforming algorithm will be
developed for a fine scan step with narrow beamwidths in all planes. Two types
of array elements will be integrated into a newly designed 4G multi-slot-based
MIMO antenna system that will enable NRs to operate in almost all 4G/LTE bands,
and multiple mmWave bands, such as 28 GHz and 39 GHz. This will enable NRs with
a harmonized connectivity platform for existing and future wireless services.
Dispersed arrays, equipped with advanced beamforming and associated feed
networks will be developed using 3D printing technology. In this collaborative
project, PI Latif and a graduate student will model, simulate and design smart
arrays, and implement several prototypes and evaluate the MIMO performance of
both LTE and 5G antenna systems. The proposed project will provide the PI a
strong platform to develop a thriving research program at the University of
South Alabama with a long-lasting impact on his research career in the field of
5G/mmWave technology, that will be benefit other academic institutions, and
wireless and auto industries in the State of Alabama.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.