* 1833499
* Supporting Low-Income Students for Success in STEM Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2024
* Nick Flynn, West Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,545.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at West Texas A&amp;M
University. The project will address the need to recruit, retain, and graduate
students in STEM fields, including biology, chemistry, and physics. This project
will provide scholarships to two cohorts of 15-students (30 total) who meet
scholarship requirements that include first year student status, SAT/ACT scores,
majoring in a target STEM field, high school rank, an academic recommendation
letter, and a scored essay. Student support activities include peer mentoring,
faculty mentoring, relational coaching, career skill development, and leadership
training. This project will also support a redesign of six first-year courses in
chemistry, biology, and physics, with the goal of increasing student success in
these gateway courses. It is expected that participation in program activities
will help prepare and encourage the Scholars to enter STEM careers or graduate
programs following graduation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has four
objectives centered on retention, success in gateway courses, student
engagement, and graduation. The first objective is to increase first to second
semester and first to second year retention rates of low-income, academically-
talented students in targeted STEM fields by 10% by 2024. The second objective
is to increase student success in gateway courses. The third objective is to
increase low income academically talented student graduation rates by 10% by
2024. The fourth objective is to increase student engagement and participation
in High Impact Practices. Student engagement will be assessed with the National
Survey on Student Engagement. This project will use evidence-based practices in
mentoring, non-cognitive and leadership skill development, and course redesign
to attain these objectives. Intellectual contributions include evaluating the
extent to which the combined effect of project interventions affect scholars in
areas including first-year/senior engagement, retention, graduation, senior
participation in high impact practices, as well as examining the correlation
between student engagement and retention. Results of this project will be
disseminated to the Texas A&amp;M System using the System website, and
nationally via scientific conferences and articles in chemistry, physics, and
biology journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.