* 1833988
* Experimental assessment of the long-term ecological and evolutionary consequences of engineered nanoparticles
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Lin Jiang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2022
* USD 322,459.00

Nanomaterials are materials with at least one critical dimension below 100 nm.
Engineered nanomaterials, which constitute the building blocks of modern
nanotechnology, are those engineered and manufactured by humans. Many engineered
nanomaterials, including nanoparticles, nanotubes, and nanowires, display novel
physical and chemical properties that are desirable for applications within the
medical, industrial, commercial, and environmental sectors. As a result, a large
number of commercial products using nanotechnology have been on the market, with
thousands of tons of nanomaterials being produced each year. However, with the
rapid development of nanotechnology, there is a greater risk for people and
environment to be exposed to more nanotechnology-based products. Indeed,
nanomaterials are known to enter the environment through both intentional and
unintentional releases. Thus, a comprehensive understanding of the environmental
impacts of nanomaterials is needed. However, much of the research on the
environmental impacts of nanomaterials has focused on the responses of
individual organisms or species after short-term exposure (from a few hours to a
few days) to nanomaterials. There is little knowledge on how ecological
communities, in which organisms interact with individuals of the same and other
species, respond to engineered nanomaterials on longer timescales. It is
imperative to fill this knowledge gap so that we can avoid potentially serious
environmental consequences. In recognition of this pressing issue, this project,
led by Lin Jiang and Yongsheng Chen of Georgia Institute of Technology, will
investigate the long-term ecological and evolutionary consequences of cerium
oxide (CeO2) nanoparticles, a type of metal oxide nanoparticle with various
industrial applications. The findings of this project will contribute to a more
complete understanding of the effects of engineered nanomaterials on the natural
ecosystem. The project will also provide high-quality research training for
graduate and undergraduate students, including those from underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on their previous work on the molecular,
cellular, and species-level responses to engineered nanoparticles, the research
team will use freshwater bacteria and protozoans as model organisms to evaluate
the novel hypothesis that nanoparticles influence the strength of interactions
between species, often more strongly than their non-nanoparticle counterparts,
with ensuing consequences for population dynamics, community assembly, and
biodiversity evolution. This project will fill a significant gap in our
knowledge by applying ecological principles to understanding the effects of
nanoparticles on species interactions and associated consequences. The proposed
research will advance knowledge in four specific areas. First, it will address
potential dynamical consequences of nanoparticles by studying their impacts on
predator-prey interactions and population dynamics. Second, it will explore the
likelihood that nanoparticles alter outcomes of competition by changing species
relative competitive ability. Third, it will test the idea that nanoparticles
may influence community assembly through modifying interactions between earlier
and later colonizing species. Fourth, it will extend nanotoxicity investigations
to the evolutionary timescale by investigating nanoparticle impacts on adaptive
radiation. Consequently, the proposed research marries nanotoxicology with
population biology and community ecology, contributing to the further
development of nanotoxicology as an emerging
discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.