* 1833538
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: S.E.P.S.I.S.: Sepsis Early Prediction Support Implementation System
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Muge Capan, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 111,054.00

Sepsis, infection plus systemic manifestations of infection, is the leading
cause of in-hospital mortality. About 700,000 people die annually in US
hospitals and 16% of them were diagnosed with sepsis (including a high
prevalence of severe sepsis with major complication). In addition to being
deadly, sepsis is the most expensive condition associated with in-hospital stay,
resulting in a 75% longer stay than any other condition. The total burden of
sepsis to the US healthcare system is estimated to be $20.3 billion, most of
which is paid by Medicare and Medicaid. In fact, in June 2015 the Centers for
Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services (CMS) reported that sepsis accounted for over
$7 billion in Medicare payments (second only to major joint replacement), a
close to 10% increase from the previous year. This pervasive drain on health
care resources is due, in part, to difficulties in diagnosis and delayed
treatment. For example, every one hour delay in treatment of severe sepsis/shock
with antibiotics decreases a patient's survival probability by 10%. Many of
these deaths could have been averted or postponed if a better system of care was
in place. The goal of this research is to overcome these barriers by integrating
electronic health records (EHR) and clinical expertise to provide an evidence-
based framework to diagnose and accurately risk-stratify patients within the
sepsis spectrum, and develop and validate intervention policies that inform
sepsis treatment decisions. The project to bring together health care providers,
researchers, educators, and students to add value to patient care by integrating
machine learning, decision analytical models, human factors analysis, as well as
system and process modeling to advance scientific knowledge, predict sepsis, and
prevent sepsis-related health deterioration. In addition to the societal impact
that clinical translation of these findings may bring, the project will provide
engineering and computer science students and health services researchers with
cross-disciplinary educational experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will apply engineering and computer science methodologies to analyze
patient level EHR across two large scale health care facilities, Mayo Clinic
Rochester and Christiana Care Health System and to inform clinical decision
making for sepsis. The multi-institutional, interdisciplinary collaboration will
enable the development of health care solutions for sepsis by describing and
accurately risk-stratifying hospitalized patients, and developing decision
analytical models to personalize and inform diagnostic and treatment decisions
considering patient outcomes and response implications. The Sepsis Early
Prediction Support Implementation System (S.E.P.S.I.S.) project aims will be to:
1) Develop data-driven models to classify patients according to their clinical
progression to diagnose sepsis and predict risk of deterioration, thus informing
therapeutic actions. 2) Develop personalized intervention policies for patients
within the sepsis spectrum. 3) Develop decision support systems (DSS) for
personalized interventions focusing on resource implications and usability
within a real hospital setting. The team will 1) identify important factors that
uncover patient profiles based on Bayesian exponential family principal
components analysis; 2) develop hidden Markov models (HMMs) and input-output
HMMs to identify clusters of patients with similar progression patterns within
the sepsis spectrum; 3) provide an analytical framework to support sepsis
staging in clinical practice using bilevel optimization. They will 1) predict
short- and long-term individual patient outcomes using multivariate statistical
models and simulation; 2) develop semi-Markov decision process and partially
observable semi-Markov decision process models to identify timing of therapeutic
actions and diagnostic tests. Furthermore, the team will 1) predict demand for
resources and develop and validate a hybrid mixed integer programming and
queueing model to optimize system level allocations; 2) utilize human factors
analysis and usability testing to assess the implementation of the DSS.