* 1833703
* Collaborative Proposal: Community Facility Support for OpenTopography -- a Cyberinfrastructure Facility for Topographic Data and Services
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Viswanath Nandigam, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 04/30/2022
* USD 385,247.00

This Division of Earth Sciences Instrumentation and Facilities Program (EAR/IF)
award to the University of California San Diego supports a one-year
collaborative project with Arizona State University (EAR-1833632) and UNAVCO,
Inc (EAR-1833643). The award allows for continued maintenance and operation of a
web-accessible cyberinfrastructure platform, OpenTopography (OT). OT provides
web-based access to airborne light detection and ranging (lidar) topography data
and data products and topographic data from portable terrestrial laser scanning
(TLS), radar ranging, and photogrammetry at a range of scales in support of
surface Earth process research, research training and education. The
availability of high resolution digital topographic data and shallow water
bathymetric data has been revolutionary for Earth and environmental sciences and
engineering contributing to study of Earth surface processes (e.g., earthquake
and volcanic processes associated crustal deformation, landslides, riverine
sediment transport), vegetation dynamics and human modification of Earth's
surface. Since OT's founding in 2009, over 62,000 unique users (registered users
&amp; guests) have run over 240,000 custom point cloud and raster jobs,
processing nearly 4 trillion points. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most OT data sets are
high resolution (&lt;1 m/pixel or &gt;1 sample/sq. meter) but OT also provides
access to global raster data (30-100 m/pixel). OT currently holds 256 LiDAR
point cloud datasets covering ~217,000 km2. More than a trillion points are
available for on-demand processing and download. The cost of data acquisition
for topographic data hosted within OT data have an estimated value of $30
million. OT distributes data at various product levels at no cost to users and
at least 290 peer-reviewed articles along with numerous theses and other
publications have been produced using OT resources. OT draws on airborne LiDAR
and terrestrial laser scanning (TLS) data sets from numerous sources including
the EAR/IF supported National Center for Airborne Laser Swath Mapping Facility
(NCALM) and the GAGE Facility hosted TLS instrument pool deployments that are
funded through NSF and external research projects. Hosted data also includes
airborne LiDAR data sets flown for EarthScope science projects, Critical Zone
Observatories, NOAA, US Bureau of Reclamation, USGS, Bureau of Land Management,
the US Forest Service and numerous state airborne LiDAR data sets and Space
Shuttle Radar Topography Mission (SRTM) global datasets. This support is
congruent with NSF's mission of promoting the progress of science and may
advance the national prosperity and welfare through improved public access to
high resolution digital georeferenced topographic data sets with applications to
geohazards assessment and mitigation including improved flood
forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.