* 1833069
* RII Track-4: Inverse Methods of Hydraulic Fracturing for Enhanced Geothermal Systems in a Deep Mine
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Liangping Li, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 03/31/2024
* USD 266,356.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geothermal energy is a renewable
resource that potentially can be used to generate electricity. The extraction of
geothermal energy from the deep rock requires a man-made geothermal reservoir
created by injecting liquid into the rock at high pressure to cause fractures, a
process known as hydraulic fracturing. However, our knowledge of fracture
development is limited by internal processes within the rocks that have proven
challenging to characterize. This fellowship will establish a long-term
collaboration between the PI and researchers at Idaho National Laboratory to
develop tools that will more effectively estimate the rock properties. This will
be done by incorporating data collected from hydraulic fracturing experiments
conducted in a deep mine into a state-of-the-art numerical model for fracture
propagation. The proposed research will provide comprehensive training for the
PI and a graduate student on hydraulic fracture modeling. The proposed project
also has the potential to build a partnership between the PI's home institution
and commercial entities that are interested in developing hydraulic fracturing
techniques for enhanced oil recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand and
quantify fracture growth and the exchange of the heat between rock and fluid in
a geothermal reservoir. This will be achieved by leveraging the newly developed
network flow-Discrete Element Model (DEM) by Idaho National Laboratory (INL) to
model fracture propagation and building on hydraulic fracturing experiments
conducted at the Sanford Underground Research Facility in South Dakota, a mined
underground research laboratory. Research objectives and methods include: (1)
modeling hydraulic fracture propagation under stimulation using network flow-DEM
method; and (2) estimating geomechanical properties using monitoring data (e.g.,
pressure and temperature) via iterative normal-score ensemble smoothing, a novel
inverse method developed by the PI for dealing with non-Gaussianity (i.e.,
connectivity). The proposed coupling of the network flow-DEM method and the
iterative normal-score ensemble smoother is unique and will provide a framework
for assessing the uncertainty of fracturing propagation due to the heterogeneity
of lithology in geothermal engineering systems. The method will be designed to
be scalable for other geothermal projects and provide important societal
benefits of more efficient geothermal engineering design. This project will
foster collaboration among the PI, INL, and industry in a range of potential
projects such as carbon sequestration and deep borehole waste disposal, and will
fill gaps in the field of geomechanical modeling at the PI's home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.