* 1833048
* RII Track-4: Pore-Scale Transport Phenomena in Li-O2 Battery Electrodes Characterized by Nano-Tomography
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Xianglin Li, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2022
* USD 219,312.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rechargeable batteries with high
specific energy and power are the key for high-performance and long-range
electric vehicles as well as many portable power applications. The lithium-
oxygen (Li-O2) battery has great potential as the next generation energy storage
technology. However, the current achievable specific energy (i.e., energy per
unit mass) for Li-O2 batteries is a factor of ten lower than its theoretical
limit and their current power performance are still far below the acceleration
performance required for electric vehicles. Both of these limitations are
partially due to the sluggish mass transfer of oxygen in the electrode.
Increasing the specific energy requires fundamental knowledge of pore-scale
material transport in battery electrodes. To fill this knowledge gap, the PI
will work with collaborators at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU) to measure and
reconstruct the pore-scale structure of Li-O2 battery electrodes and propose
criteria for fundamentally improving the electrochemical performance of Li-O2
batteries. Research findings from this Fellowship will also be integrated into
curriculum development efforts to transmit the new theory and knowledge to young
researchers, train undergraduate and graduate students, and nurture a skilled
and educated professional workforce to grow local industry and
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
collaboration with Prof. Shawn Litster and access to the unique X-ray Computed
Tomography Facility (XCFT) at CMU, made possible by this Fellowship, is the key
to reconstructing high-resolution (~50 nm) pore-scale structure and for
subsequent studies of Li-O2 batteries. The reconstructed three-dimensional nano-
tomography of customized battery electrodes will 1) be integrated with
statistical models to transfer pore-scale morphology to electrode-level
properties; 2) be coupled with fluid dynamics models to predict its
electrochemical performance; and 3) facilitate the understanding of pore
structure evolution caused by the solid Li2O2 precipitation/depletion during
discharge/charge. The new knowledge and theory, as well as the new techniques,
developed in this project will enable research and development of advanced
electrode materials to significantly improve the specific energy and power of
Li-O2 batteries. The profound scientific significance will last beyond this
Fellowship and promote electrochemical technologies with high energy and power
density such as fuel cells, Li-ion batteries, metal-air batteries, super
capacitors, and redox flow batteries. The success of this project will initiate
a longstanding collaboration between the PI and Prof. Litster to pursue new
knowledge and foster more collaborative research between the University of
Kansas and CMU. It also provides an excellent opportunity for one graduate
student to receive systematic training on conducting scientific research,
initiating collaborations, and disseminating research findings each
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.