* 1833497
* EAGER: Controlled Pulsed-Combustion-Based Actuation for Soft Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Nestor Perez-Arancibia, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 07/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project explores the
use of combustion to power soft robots. Chemical fuels use much less mass and
volume compared to batteries with the same energy, and combustion can be used to
generate large forces. However, combustion-based systems are at a much lower
state of maturity than electromechanical solutions. This high-risk project will
contribute to three key elements for the realization of soft robots powered by
rapid chemical reactions: 1) a model for the robot dynamics, 2) a design
framework for the actuators, and 3) a theory of control synthesis for obtaining
desired motions. This project will advance the national welfare by enabling the
creation of low-cost soft robots for applications such as search and rescue and
environmental monitoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of fast, powerful
and autonomous soft robots, capable of performing complex and precise tasks,
requires the invention of new actuation and control methods. In order to achieve
this vision, this project will introduce a systems-and-control-based methodology
for the development of controllable modular robots composed of autonomous
pulsed-combustion-powered soft modules, capable of exerting large periodic
forces at high speeds. This objective will be achieved by introducing new
approaches for the control of pulsed explosions for actuation, the use and
advancement of modern and optimal techniques for the control of pulsed-
combustion driven soft actuators, and the development of new real-time methods
for the control of modular soft robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.