* 1833985
* Linking Community College Students to Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Joseph Richardson, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics
(S-STEM) project supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at the University of South
Alabama. Throughout its five years, this project will fund 48 unique students
who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in chemical, civil, electrical, mechanical,
or computer engineering for up to three years. The students receiving the
scholarships will be transfer students from regional community colleges, and
programs will be implemented to support their transition, academic success, and
professional development. The project will also include efforts to strengthen
collaboration with feeder colleges that will both better serve students and
build foundations for future recruitment and support
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students with financial need are attracted to
community colleges because of the relatively low cost of education and proximity
to home. Frequently, these students do not complete associate's degrees or
transfer to a university to complete professional degrees because of financial
obstacles. If they do transfer, adjusting to the university curriculum and
environment is challenging and can inhibit academic success. Furthermore, not
having completed gateway courses can extend time to graduation. To address these
challenges, this project will incorporate the following: i) academic pathways to
reduce the time to graduation for engineering transfer students, taking
advantage of recent reverse-transfer agreements between the University of South
Alabama and regional community colleges, ii) formalization of faculty and peer
mentoring activities and reporting for standardization of implementation of
advising and mentoring, and iii) concerted efforts to build communication and
collaboration capacity with targeted regional community colleges, including
recruitment visits, student advising, and annual faculty workshops. The project
team will implement strategies, including a cohort-building seminar and team-
based advising with faculty and peer mentors, to facilitate transfer student
integration into the College of Engineering community. Further, the research
team will investigate the effect of the evidence-based, yet contextually novel
approach to advising on student academic and professional
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.