* 1833218
* EAGER: CDS&amp;E: An Open-Source Software Package for Assessing and Controlling Photocatalytic Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Bryan Wong, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Photocatalysis is the process by which sunlight is captured and used to provide
energy for chemical reactions accelerated by catalytic materials. A good
photocatalytic system is one which absorbs light efficiently, and also
efficiently uses the photo-generated electrons to promote catalytic reactions.
The interaction between light and chemical/material systems enables numerous
photocatalytic applications, all of which contribute to renewable energy that
can be used for applications as diverse as solar fuel generation, environmental
remediation, and chemical manufacturing. The capability to fully harness these
photocatalytic systems has tremendous potential to grow as we further our
understanding of the light-initiated processes that occur in these systems. The
physics and chemistry underlying photocatalytic processes are extremely
complicated. Trial-and-error approaches to identifying new light-harvesting and
photocatalytic materials have been aided in recent years by the development of
computational techniques to calculate and understand the efficiency of
photocatalytic processes using predictive quantum mechanical techniques. This
project will further advance those techniques and provide a new, open-source
software package for the general catalysis community to assess the efficiency of
photocatalytic processes. The availability of fully open-source codes and
computational capability encourages both students and researchers worldwide to
obtain a deeper understanding of how these approaches and tools can be used to
assess photocatalytic efficiencies and hasten the discovery of new
photocatalytic materials and operating conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will utilize excited-state quantum computational methods to probe the
electron dynamics in photocatalytic systems. The excited-state computational
approaches used in this project will be coupled with quantum control algorithms
to ultimately manipulate photo-induced reaction dynamics. The use of quantum
control approaches in photocatalytic systems will have ground-breaking
implications across multiple chemical engineering domains by providing a defined
way to control reaction dynamics. Specifically, these computational techniques
will give rigorous bounds on the wavelengths/frequencies of light that will lead
to the desired reaction products. As such, the software tool developed in this
EAGER project can serve as both (1) a diagnostic tool to verify that the correct
frequency of light is indeed being used as intended in a photocatalysis
experiment, as well as (2) a predictive tool for calculating the allowed
frequencies of light required to control photocatalytic systems (which may be
obtained as data sets obtained from calculation or experiment). Consequently,
these computational methods open new avenues of cross-cutting research by
establishing a rigorous formalism for manipulating the electron dynamics and
understanding the optimal efficiencies that are possible in photocatalytic
systems. Finally, the broader impacts of this project will result in an open-
source suite of tools that both computational and experimental researchers in
the CBET and catalysis communities can easily use for future development. The
availability of the fully open-source codes developed in this project encourages
researchers worldwide to get a detailed "look under the hood" to obtain a deeper
understanding of how these algorithms are numerically incorporated in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.