* 1833525
* Developing a functional marker gene for Fe oxidation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Clara Chan, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 439,086.00

Iron (Fe) is the 4th most abundant element in Earth's crust (5% by mass) - its
abundance and chemical properties make it a critical element in biological and
environmental processes. As a nutrient, Fe availability is a key determinant of
ecological success. In soils and aquifers, Fe oxides (rust minerals) sequester
many other nutrients and toxic metals, therefore controlling bioavailability and
transport. Thus, the formation of Fe oxides affects water, food, and ecological
resources. Fe oxides can be formed by iron-oxidizing bacteria (FeOB), which have
been implicated in soil formation, corrosion, water purification, and
bioremediation. However, since Fe can also oxidize abiotically, it is currently
unclear to what extent microbes actually influence Fe oxidation in these and
other environmental processes. Thus, the primary goal of this proposal is to
develop a gene-based assay for microbial Fe oxidation, by determining the key
gene(s) involved. A gene-based assay, coupled to systems-level understanding,
would allow to determine controls on FeOB activity, and perhaps use these
organisms for soil and water remediation. This project will train a range of
students in interdisciplinary problem solving for geomicrobiology. Outreach will
include an annual camp for 5th-8th grade girls, who are low-income minorities.
Investigators will also develop new training modules on metatranscriptomic best
practices and incorporate experiments into undergraduate classes. The team will
present project findings to the general public through venues such as Science
Cafe and Coast Day.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent genomics, proteomics, and
metatranscriptomics work strongly suggests that an outer membrane cytochrome,
Cyc2, is a widespread Fe oxidase in FeOB, and also suggests a potential role for
another outer membrane cytochrome MtoA, a homolog of the Fe reductase MtrA. When
cyc2 or mtoA is found in genomes or transcriptomes, does this indicate microbial
Fe oxidation capability/activity? To answer this, there is a need for evidence
that cyc2/Cyc2 or mtoA/MtoA is specific to Fe oxidation. A challenge is that
FeOB isolates typically grow exclusively on Fe(II), making it impossible to know
which genes are specifically expressed for Fe oxidation. This study takes
advantage of a group of FeOB isolates that also grow on other electron donors:
Sideroxydans lithotrophicus and Thiomonas spp. Most of these strains are not
well-characterized, so investigators will develop these as model, facultative
FeOB to test which genes are specifically expressed during Fe oxidation, using
transcriptomics and RT-qPCR. Beyond cyc2 and mtoA, they aim to determine
additional key genes in the Fe oxidation pathway, so that they can propose a
suite of markers, which they will test in environmental metatranscriptomes from
an Fe-rich peatland and acid mine drainage sediments. The proposed work
represents the next steps required to truly determine FeOB roles in the
environment. A robust set of Fe oxidation genetic markers would allow
biogeochemists to better understand the influence of FeOB on Fe cycling, and
further, how they couple Fe oxidation to cycling of C, N, P, S, As, and other
metals important to water and soil quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.