* 1833297
* Pilot Research on Agricultural Growth in a Changing Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2023
* Les Field, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 10/31/2023
* USD 22,961.00

Paragraph 1: &lt;br/&gt;Several journalistic accounts report that environmental
change in Greenland is expanding possibilities for Greenlandic agriculture.
However, environmental change in the Arctic, including in Greenland, Canada and
Alaska, is not straightforward in the sense of simply creating opportunities
that enables the production of more food and other crops for the Greenlandic
population or export. Agricultural history in Greenland goes back over 1000
years and understanding contemporary agricultural changes must be contextualized
by a deeper ethnographic inquiry. Greenland offers a compelling window into
present-day and historical processes of social and economic change, which
anthropological fieldwork and analysis can elaborate and analyze. Understanding
agricultural development at high latitudes could prove to be of substantial
national interest. This research will provide important insights into the
potential of agriculture in other Arctic regions, such as Alaska, and how
agricultural development may be developed to provide healthy food and economic
opportunity to very remote rural populations with few employment options.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paragraph 2: &lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the
environmental and sociocultural characteristics of agriculture in Southern
Greenland, and, ultimately, the economic and political implications of
agricultural production for the emergence of a potentially independent nation-
state in Greenland. This is a proposal to conduct two exploratory research field
trips focused upon contemporary agriculture in Southern Greenland in the era of
rapid environmental change. The first trip will focus on the capital city of
Nuuk, interviewing natural resource managers, government economist, and
academics about agricultural potential in Greenland and its social and political
context. The second trip will investigate the extent of new agricultural
interests and practices through ethnographic interviews in specific farming
communities. This EAGER project will not only investigate the extent of
agriculture current in Greenland and the aspirations of Inughuit (Greenlandic
Inuit) for agricultural production, but the PI is committed to testing a new and
developing northern social science methodology of co-producing knowledge with
arctic communities. The researcher will work closely with Inughuit to set out a
research agenda, and a commitment to training scholars from under-represented
communities and regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.