* 1833370
* 2018 Gordon Research Conference on Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere: Connecting Volatiles and the Climate System from Leaf to Planet; Switzerland; June 10-15, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Mark Potosnak, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2019
* USD 28,540.00

This project supports the 9th international Gordon Research Conference titled
"2018 Gordon Research Conference on Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere:
Connecting Volatiles and the Climate System from Leaf to Planet." Biogenic
hydrocarbons are volatile compounds that are released naturally by vegetation
and play an important role in ecosystems and atmospheric chemistry across a
variety of scales. The conference will impact society by improving the
understanding of biosphere-atmosphere trace gas exchange and the role of human
activities in global environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The participants
in this Gordon Research Conference will accomplish four important results.
First, the most up-to-date science of biogenic hydrocarbon biosynthesis,
ecological functions, ecosystem-atmosphere interactions, emissions, atmospheric
transport, and associated chemical transformation will be summarized. Second,
the conference participants will devise new research strategies to address
emerging questions in the field of biogenic hydrocarbons in a world undergoing
rapid physical and chemical changes. Particular emphasis will be placed on
developing research strategies to quantify the contribution of biogenic
hydrocarbons on secondary aerosol formation. A third outcome of this Gordon
Research Conference is the participation of junior scientists in the oral and
poster presentations described above. The meeting organizers will also make
special efforts to invite and secure the participation of female colleagues. A
final outcome of this conference will be to encourage the participation and
engagement of scientists from diverse fields to explore the potential for cross-
disciplinary, state-of-the-art science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the
various topics associated with biogenic hydrocarbons, the 2018 Gordon Research
Conference on "Biogenic Hydrocarbons and the Atmosphere" will take place in
Switzerland from June 10-15, 2018. NSF funding will provide support for
registration fees and/or travel support for participants, with preference given
to post docs and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.