* 1833801
* Workshops to Increase Capacity for Competitive S-STEM Proposals
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2022
* John Krupczak, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 06/30/2022
* USD 372,516.00

Many low-income students attend institutions of higher education that do not
have the infrastructure to support writing and submitting successful proposals
to the federal government. This project will conduct a series of workshops and
webinars to help 40 institutions of higher education to prepare and submit
effective proposals to the NSF Scholarships in STEM program. The proposed
workshops address the need to support STEM faculty in designing support systems
to meet the diverse needs of talented low-income students. Faculty members in
direct contact with students frequently have keen awareness of the challenges
faced by talented low-income students in completing STEM degrees. This awareness
is especially true for faculty at two-year colleges, teaching intensive
institutions, and university branch campuses. Despite their familiarity with
student needs, these faculty are often unfamiliar with current effective
practices in curricular and co-curricular activities that support student
success. Such practices include: active learning in gateway courses; tutoring,
study-groups, and supplemental instruction programs; effective incorporation of
industry experiences, internship opportunities, and research participation; and
the role community building and peer support in promoting retention and degree
completion. The workshops will help faculty to identify critical areas in which
their students need support and develop a project plan that unites local
institutional needs and opportunities. In addition, the workshops will emphasize
projects that both support students and generate knowledge to advance the
understanding of factors that affect the success, retention, transfer, and
graduation in STEM of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
implement a workshop model that uses an asset-based approach to the professional
development of STEM faculty members. The workshop's asset-based perspective
acknowledges the faculty's awareness and insights into the challenges faced by
talented low-income students at their institutions. Workshop activities will
then seek to align existing faculty insights with effective evidence-based
practices in STEM education and the requirements of the S-STEM funding program.
The workshops will also provide faculty with guidance from a network of
educators with experience in the NSF S-STEM program and in supporting
academically talented low-income students. The workshops will utilize a regional
focus will help to maximize participation by reducing transportation time and
costs. This series of workshops and webinars aims to improve the quality of
student support structures in proposals submitted to the NSF S-STEM program.
They also aim to advance the S-STEM program goals of increasing the number of
academically talented low-income students who complete STEM degrees and enter
the workforce, and to generate and disseminate new knowledge about effective
practices in STEM education. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically high-achieving students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to
generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.