* 1833752
* Interdisciplinary STEM Education and Mentoring for Transitioning to STEM Success
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Kevin Bennett, Hood College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 05/31/2024
* USD 650,000.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Hood College. Throughout the
five-year award, this project will fund 12 four-year scholarships and 6 two-year
scholarships for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in biology,
biochemistry, chemistry, environmental science, mathematics, computer science,
and computational science. The project seeks to increase the number of STEM
graduates who are low-income and academically talented, with a focus on
underrepresented groups. The project aims to expose and educate students in
multiple STEM disciplines so that they may contribute to future workplaces that
are highly interdisciplinary. The Scholars will be supported academically until
graduation, as well as to conduct research and to present their research at
professional conferences. The project has the potential to enhance
interdisciplinary collaborations among Hood College's four STEM departments and
strengthen its existing relationship with Frederick Community College, by
recruiting transfer students from Frederick Community College to become
Scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to expand the current knowledge
base for student supports and curricular enhancements to develop best practices
in preparing students to enter an interdisciplinary STEM workforce. The project
will develop and provide first-year student supports with a strong emphasis on
interdisciplinary STEM learning. The longitudinal academic supports, including
mentoring, will assist students as they progress through their academic career.
The project will develop and implement an innovative Summer Transition program
to prepare rising juniors (including transfer students) for an increase in rigor
as they move to upper-division STEM course work. The project will analyze
qualitative and quantitative data to determine the efficacy of the STEM First-
Year Seminar and Introduction to STEM Research Methods courses in supporting
persistence to a STEM degree. The project will also analyze the efficacy of the
Summer Transition course in preparing juniors for upper-division course work,
thus increasing retention in STEM degree programs. The project will also
investigate how the interdisciplinary STEM cohort model increases student self-
efficacy and preparedness to contribute to the STEM workforce. The project seeks
to generate evidence that can be used by other institutions seeking to develop
interdisciplinary STEM programs to prepare undergraduate students for a diverse
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.