* 1833777
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: The Role of Tradition in Cultural Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Neil Norman, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2020
* USD 23,461.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Neil Norman of the College of William &amp; Mary,
Madeleine Bassett will undertake archaeological research to study the impact of
pastoralist political economies on the timing and nature of Islamic Period
religious change in the Horn of Africa. The Islamic Period (ca. AD 800-1400)
marked a time of transformation in the Horn of Africa: In the span of a few
centuries, urban centers emerged along the Somali coast and thousands of
ancestral Somali pastoralists converted to Islam. Previous scholarship on
religious change has centered on large-scale, sedentary agricultural societies.
Africanist scholars, for example, have effectively demonstrated the importance
of Islam in the history of eastern Africa and the Indian Ocean World, focusing
predominantly on the sedentary societies of the Swahili coast. Through the
archaeology of pastoralist settlements in Djibouti, this project focuses instead
on seasonally mobile pastoralist societies, and the ways in which their economic
networks, political systems, and local ecologies defined the conditions and
limits of religious transformation. Ultimately, this research seeks to answer
two related questions: How did local actors influence or participate in the
process (i.e., timing and nature) of religious change in Djibouti? Specifically,
how did local actors shape the creation and use of religious spaces through
time? This project is well positioned to address these questions because it
utilizes archaeological methodologies that allow the systematic collection and
analysis of material evidence related to religious practices across space and
time. This project is significant because it will shed new light on the process
of Islamic Period religious change in the Horn of Africa, and more broadly on
the nature of religious change among mobile, pastoralist societies. The issue of
religion and religious change is relevant, and often violence related, in many
regions of the world today and the results of this research have the potential
to shed interpretive light on current day processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will examine how and when Islam spread to seasonally mobile pastoralist
communities living along the Somali Coast by mapping the organization and
evolution of religious infrastructures across pastoralist landscapes. It will be
conducted in eastern Djibouti, an important area in the spread of Islam from the
Arabian Peninsula through the Horn of Africa. Under the supervision of Dr.
Norman, Bassett will examine the spatial and diachronic patterning of Islamic
Period structures and artifacts at a large, pastoralist seasonal aggregation
site in the Ambouli River drainage of eastern Djibouti. This project will test
the hypothesis that pastoralist political economies - and the social and
religious institutions at their center - influenced how pastoralists integrated
Islam into their daily routines and seasonal settlement practices. As the first
study in eastern Africa to date pre-Islamic and Islamic-Period stone structures
using a combination of OSL (Optically Stimulated Luminescence) and AMS
radiocarbon dating methods, this project will develop the first detailed
chronology for the integration of Islamic architectural elements into
archaeological sites along the Somali coast. By establishing a solid
chronological sequence for Islamic architectural elements, this project will
bolster understandings of when and how eastern Africa's rural pastoralist
societies converted to Islam and improve general chronologies for the spread of
Islam in Africa. In so doing, this project will make significant contributions
to anthropological theory by extending the scope of research on religious change
to include pastoral societies and their political economies. Finally, one
broader impact of this project will be the creation of a database of information
about pre-Islamic and Islamic Period archaeological sites and
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.