* 1833738
* Creating Retention and Engagement for Academically Talented Engineers
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2025
* Adam Kirn, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project at the
University of Nevada, Reno, will support the success of 32 high-achieving
students with demonstrated financial need. Throughout its five years, this
project will support two cohorts of 16 students who are pursuing baccalaureate
degrees in Materials Science and Engineering, as well as Civil, Chemical,
Electrical, Environmental, and Mechanical Engineering. Cohort-building
activities will include an academic boot camp before the students' first college
semester, and courses taken by all cohort members. The project will provide a
monthly seminar series on topics such as internships, industry mentoring,
undergraduate research, and international exchange programs. The project's
activities have been positively linked to academic success. This project aims to
achieve broader impact by contributing to state and federal strategic workforce
diversification goals. Project activities that support these goals include
engineering outreach programs and courses on engineering design for K-12
educators. It is expected that the project will generate new knowledge about how
engineering education can be improved to better serve the growing number of
lower-income, academically talented students entering college. The project will
educate graduates who are prepared to directly enter graduate school or work in
industry, thus contributing to developing a diverse, flexible, and well-educated
STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A mixed-methods research design will be
used to study the effects of implemented practices on the self-efficacy and
engineering identity of the student cohorts. The explicit research objective is
to add to existing knowledge about student characteristics and issues that help
low-income, academically high-achieving students succeed in engineering and
related disciplines. This project will fill gaps in knowledge about the
development of self-efficacy and engineering identity in low-income,
academically talented students. The project will also identify the most
effective combinations of curricular and co-curricular activities that
strengthen individual students' self-efficacy and identity, with the goal of
developing intervention techniques that retain engineering majors through
graduation and placement in industry or graduate school. Quantitative measurable
outcomes will include increased student retention, increased cohort self-
efficacy and identity statistics, higher-than-average graduation rates for the
cohorts using evidence-based programs, and successful placement in industry or
graduate school. Qualitative measurable outcomes, determined by participant
interviews and surveys, will include attainment of academic and personal goals,
increased leadership skills and confidence levels, and established sense of
community. These outcomes will be an important contribution to knowledge about
recruitment and retention of low-income, academically high-achieving students in
the engineering disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.