* 1833789
* Mentoring, Research, Leadership, and Community to Increase Undergraduate Retention and Graduation in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* George Grevera, St Joseph's University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,028,441.00

Mentoring, Research, Leadership, and Community to Increase Graduation in
STEM&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the National Science Foundation's
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM)
program, this project will support high-achieving, low-income students with
demonstrated financial need at Saint Joseph's University. Throughout its five
years of funding, this project will provide four-year scholarships to two
cohorts of eight students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees biology,
chemistry, computer science, mathematics, or physics. The project will provide a
suite of student support and engagement activities, including long-term research
opportunities, structured faculty and peer mentoring, leadership skill
development, and career advising. These activities are designed to increase
recruitment, retention, and successful graduation in STEM fields of study.
Through academic and social nurturing, this project aims to produce cohorts of
graduates who can become intellectual leaders and role models in their
respective disciplines and in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will provide the following support components: aggressive recruitment and
outreach to high schools with a high proportion of the targeted student
population, intensive faculty mentoring, peer mentoring, undergraduate research
and internship opportunities, leadership and community service programs, cohort
building activities, and career development. The project will investigate
variation in the effectiveness of mentoring interventions on retention and
graduation rates of academically talented, low income students, with particular
attention of the processes of faculty/student interaction. They will investigate
what factors influence the effectiveness of these interactions. In assessing
impacts of social interaction on identity, this research will generate insights
that can be useful to similar programs for low-income students at similar
institutions. Saint Joseph's University will develop recommendations based on
their results and disseminate the recommendations to other programs seeking to
increase the retention, interest, and career trajectory of STEM students from
low-income backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.