* 1833057
* RII Track-4: Determining the Importance of Select Olfactory Proteins and Diapause-Related Protein in Aedes Albopictus Mosquitoes
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jonas King, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 09/30/2021
* USD 124,580.00

Non-Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;Recent genome editing technology offers the
ability to make changes to the DNA in almost any organism. When applied in
insects, it is an effective means of studying insect biology, as well as a
potential means of controlling insects that are harmful to human health and to
the crops that contribute to the national food supply. In this project the
Principal Investigator (PI) and one graduate trainee will visit the world's
premier insect genome engineering research center, the Institute for Bioscience
and Biotechnology's Insect Transformation Facility in Rockville, MD, and learn
the methods associated with genome-editing technology through hands-on training
and guided research. The PI and graduate trainee would also attend a workshop to
learn to understand and communicate the current outlook on genetically modified
insect technology and its safe use to the public. As the PI and graduate trainee
are located at a land grant university with a strong entomological and
agricultural presence, this opportunity would allow them to conduct research on
genetically modified insects, communicate the most current trends of thought in
this field, and collaborate with agricultural scientists in the region for years
to come. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;Insect genome
editing technology using CRISPR/Cas9 has recently been shown to be an effective
means of studying insect development, physiology, and ecology, as well as a
potential means of controlling insects that are harmful to human health and to
crops that serve as the nation's food supply. At the Institute for Bioscience
and Biotechnology's Insect Transformation Facility, the PI and his student will
learn the methods associated with this technology through hands-on training and
guided research. The primary scientific goals will be to use CRISPR/Cas9
technology and embryonic microinjection to ablate the genes thought to be
involved in blood feeding and cold weather-induced developmental delay, or
overwintering, in the mosquito, Aedes albopictus. Understanding how Aedes
albopictus mosquitoes seek human hosts for blood feeding could potentially lead
to novel means of repellent development or towards a better understanding of the
evolution of human host-seeking in this important group of vector mosquitoes.
Understanding overwintering behavior of this species is important for
identifying the mechanisms involved in its ability to expand its host range into
more temperate areas and to change behaviors in response to ecological
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.