* 1833999
* Enhancing the Transfer Experience through a Collaborative Cohort Program for Engineering Scholars
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Fariborz Tehrani, Fresno City College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 02/29/2024
* USD 699,856.00

This five-year project aims to contribute to the national need for well-educated
engineers. It will support the success of at least thirty low-income, high-
achieving STEM undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need at Fresno
City College, a two-year institution. Specifically, the project will provide
two-year scholarships to five cohorts of students who are pursuing an
associate's degree or certificate in engineering at Fresno City College. At
least thirty students will be supported at Fresno City College, two of whom will
receive an additional two-year scholarship to complete a bachelor's degree in
engineering at California State-Fresno. At Fresno City College, the Scholars
will participate in program orientation at the beginning of each fall semester,
pursue a transfer pathway curriculum designed to transition students to a four-
year university engineering program, attend bi-weekly seminar events and monthly
meetings with faculty mentors and peer mentors, serve as peer mentors for
succeeding cohorts of Scholars, and participate in undergraduate research
projects in collaboration with California State-Fresno. Fresno City College is a
Hispanic-serving institution and recruiting will focus on women and students
with disabilities, thus increasing the potential of the project to broaden
participation in engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to increase degree completion of low-income, high-achieving
engineering undergraduates. The project includes a research plan to determine
factors that influence student identity and sense of belonging. The researchers
will test the hypothesis that engaging Fresno City College students in a
collaborative, cohort experience will support students' movement from the
periphery of learning to the center of a community in which learning is a
collective experience guided by community membership. This project has the
potential to create new knowledge about how the socio-cultural context of
students from an area of concentrated poverty, such as Fresno, experience
community and develop a STEM identity. This project is funded by the NSF
Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which
seeks to increase the number of low-income, academically high-achieving students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and
to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.