* 1833135
* EAGER: A novel mechanism for the regulation of cytokinin signaling in plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* George Schaller, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 06/30/2023
* USD 295,152.00

Cytokinins are plant hormones that regulate many agronomically important traits,
including plant architecture, biomass, senescence, disease resistance, drought
resistance, and grain yield. A better understanding of cytokinin signaling will
enable optimization of crops to improve their performance in various
agricultural settings. The goal of this project is to uncover how the cytokinin
hormone signal regulates gene expression in plants, and thereby controls plant
growth and development. State-of-the art mass spectrometry approaches will be
used to identify regulatory modifications on proteins and how these
modifications change during the cytokinin response. The proposed research will
provide excellent training opportunities for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows. In addition, through a local partnership, the project will establish a
summer program aimed at developing education and science awareness through
participatory activities that integrate science with
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current paradigm for cytokinin signaling involves
a two-component His-Asp phosphorelay similar to that found in prokaryotes. In
this model, phosphorylation of the type-B response regulators (RRs) on a
conserved Asp residue regulates their transcriptional activity, thereby
controlling the transcriptional response to cytokinin. The goal of this project
is to test the hypothesis that Ser/Thr phosphorylation of the type-B RRs also
serves to regulate their activity. The prediction is that rapid cytokinin-
dependent changes in Ser/Thr phosphorylation will occur, and that these will
activate the type-B response regulators independently of Asp phosphorylation.
Phosphoproteomic approaches will be employed to identify in vivo phosphorylation
sites of the type-B response regulators and to characterize their
phosphorylation dynamics in response to cytokinin. The regulatory significance
of Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites will be tested by mutating the residues to
phosphomimic (Glu) and non-phosphorylatable (Ala) versions of the residues, and
their activity examined in a reporter system. Uncovering a Ser/Thr regulatory
mechanism for the type-B RRs will fundamentally alter our model as to how
cytokinin signal transduction occurs in plants, and also yield novel information
on how the evolutionarily ancient two-component signaling pathway has been
adapted to the needs of a eukaryote.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.