* 1833694
* Breaking the Cycle through Computational Physics: Preparing West Virginia's Rural, First Generation College Students for the Careers of the Future
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Gay Stewart, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need this project at West Virginia
University. Specifically, this project will provide 20 scholarships to support
rural Appalachian students majoring in Computational Physics. Scholars will take
a sequence of small physics-majors-only courses designed to form a cohort of
Scholars, who build personal connections that will support them through their
university career. The courses will also provide career development and
instruction in Self-Regulated Learning. Rural students often come to college
without the study skills required to be successful. These skills will be
developed through course policy and specific exercises built into the
introductory physics sequence. The project will also allow Calculus 1 to become
a corequisite, rather than prerequisite, for Physics 1. This modification will
support student success in both physics and calculus. Scholars will also be
supported by frequent, intrusive advising, and study skill and career planning
assistance, practices have been shown to improve retention. The career guidance
will be provided throughout the Scholar's coursework in targeted classes,
through individual advising, and through a sequence of professional development
activities. This project is expected to help solve a critical national problem:
rural students are less likely than others to major in STEM disciplines. The
targeted Appalachian students in this project can become examples of how higher
education can be the path to economic transformation and the future. Because
computational careers offer opportunities to work remotely, some students will
return to their communities, demonstrating that higher education is compatible
with a sustained connection to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many students
do not enter the university with the self-regulation skills required for
success. However, students can develop these skills after they arrive. Using an
extensive institutional dataset, this project will measure the effects of
carefully designed and communicated course policy and assignments, reinforced by
explicit instruction. In addition, it will use additional data on students'
beliefs and behavior collected in the calculus and physics classes. The project
will determine if these interventions improve retention and lead to improved
self-regulation. Scholars will receive quantitative feedback on the effect of
their behavior on their course grade. The project will determine if this
feedback is effective in producing positive changes in behavior and how the
feedback should be delivered for maximum effect. The modified co-requisite
requirements and the integration of policies that encourage the development of
self-regulated learning could produce a generalizable model for improving
retention of rural STEM students in other areas of the country. Thus, the
research from this project could have benefits that extend beyond the cohorts of
students supported in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.