* 1833005
* RII Track-4: A Reflective Learning and Association Control Framework based on Adaptive Dynamic Programming: Architecture and Applications in Robotics
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Zhen Ni, South Dakota State University
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,899.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;Data efficiency and learning speed are two
of the major bottlenecks for applying biologically-inspired control methods in
many domains. The project's goal is to address these fundamental challenges by
introducing a new adaptive dynamic programming-based learning control framework
and integrate it into space robot navigation and scouting applications such as
the Mars Rover. The scientific contribution of this project will promote
interdisciplinary research in computational intelligence, machine learning,
control and robotics. In addition to space applications, the proposed structure
can also be applied to robot-assisted pedestrian evacuation application and
cyber-physical power systems and is expected to impact general systems beyond
this project period. Due to geographic isolation, South Dakota doesn't have a
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) research center, and
research collaboration opportunities on space technology is very limited. This
project will expand the principle investigator (PI)'s research capacity through
an extended visit and collaboration with NASA Ames Research Center located in
San Jose, CA, and transform the PI's career path from theoretical
algorithm/architecture development towards a new direction in complex space
applications. Meanwhile, the outcomes of this project align well with the South
Dakota's and South Dakota State University's strategic plans. The collaboration
fits well with NASA's mission to Mars and technology
roadmaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will fundamentally advance the learning and association of
biologically-inspired control methods. Three major contributions to the
scientific field are expected. First, a new experience network is proposed and
systematically integrated into a model-free adaptive dynamic programming-based
learning control framework. The PI will design an experience replay tuple (i.e.,
state-action-reward pair) based on backward temporal difference information from
historical data. This design can avoid the model network/prediction noted in
existing literature and significantly save computation resources. Second,
instead of a uniform sampling method, the PI proposes a prioritized sampling
method based on the Bellman's estimation error. This new method is expected to
enhance the controller's reflective learning performance with useful long-short
term memory. The stability and convergence properties will also be analyzed.
Third, this project is closely tied with NASA on robot and optimal control for
space program. This new learning control structure will be integrated for robot
navigation, exploration and scouting in unknown spaces. The PI and the
collaborator will use both a virtual reality platform and a real Rover facility
to analyze the control performance of the proposed algorithm at NASA Ames. The
PI's outreach and dissemination plans will cultivate the scientific curiosity of
K-12 students and motivate their interest in STEM programs. Moreover, the
integration of the project's cutting-edge research results into the PI's new
courses will aid retention of current STEM students. Specific plans include a
workshop for a local middle school, a distance course for demographically
diverse institutions, and development of new courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.