* 1833891
* Amplifying Strategies for Enabling the Success of Penn State Science 2+2 Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Andrew Belmonte, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This S-STEM project at
Pennsylvania State University (Penn State) aims to increase the success of
science students who transfer to the University Park campus from one of its 19
Commonwealth Campuses. Over a five-year period, this project will provide
scholarships to 180 transfer students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
science; the scholarships will be given in five annual cohorts of 36 students.
This project builds upon two currently successful programs to improve science
learning and success, with the goal of amplifying effective approaches across
all 20 campuses of Pennsylvania State University. Currently, over 20% of the
Eberly College of Science students at the Penn State-University Park campus are
part of the Penn State 2+2 plan. Students in the 2+2 plan begin their studies at
one of the 19 Penn State Commonwealth campuses with the intention of completing
their science degree at the flagship campus at University Park. Science students
in the Penn State 2+2 plan are more likely to come from lower-income families,
and they graduate at a rate almost three times lower than science students who
begin their academic careers at the University Park campus. This project aims to
ensure that science students have equivalent graduation rates regardless of
their campus of origin. In addition, it aims to enlarge the community of
mathematicians participating in curricular reform, to improve the ways that
college mathematics is taught across all Penn State campuses. Penn State has a
unique institutional structure: it is not a university system, but a single
university that is geographically distributed. This structure provides an
opportunity to study and improve student pathways in 2+2 programs, and to
provide a national model for efforts to retain science students who transition
from two-year colleges to four-year institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to extend and combine two distinct strategies that have proven
effective in increasing the learning, retention, and success rate of science
students at Penn State. The first strategy is the Science Dean's Scholars
Program, which provides science students in the Penn State 2+2 Plan with a
dedicated academic adviser, peer mentors, an annual scholarship, programming,
and guidance on professional development. The Science Dean's Scholars Program
has achieved a 95% graduation rate for the participating Scholars. The second
strategy is a two-semester calculus sequence taught in the context of biology
and the life sciences, using research-based pedagogical approaches and involving
undergraduate Learning Assistants in the instructional team. These changes have
increased student success (a grade of C or better) from 55% to 85%. This project
will support more 2+2 students as Science Dean's Scholars or as Learning
Assistants in the biology-based calculus course, and expand the biology-based
calculus course to the Penn State Commonwealth campuses, with a goal of tripling
the number of students in that course sequence. A detailed evaluation of
outcomes will allow the methodical investigation of the impact of the Science
Dean's Scholars Program and the calculus transformation, and examine how the two
interventions may interact to support student learning and persistence. Key
questions will focus on the effectiveness of each program component, outcomes of
changes in the calculus curriculum, and the adoption of proven active learning
approaches across all campuses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.