* 1833065
* RII Track-4: A Functional Genomics Approach to Explain the Evolution of Large Bodies and Long Life Spans
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Scott Glaberman, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* J.D. Swanson
* 09/30/2019
* USD 81,556.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We use reptiles, specifically giant
tortoises, to study the processes behind aging and cancer. Mammals, including
humans, have long been used to study these topics, with obvious applications for
improving health. However, it is becoming clear that all kinds of animals -not
just mammals- have evolved ways of delaying aging and avoiding cancer. Thus,
focusing on mammals limits our arsenal for understanding how biology has solved
these major physiological challenges. In this project, we will investigate which
genes have allowed giant tortoises to mitigate cancer and other biological
processes in order to grow so big and live so long. Specifically, we will use
cells from long-lived, giant tortoises and their small tortoise relatives to see
whether certain genes related to aging and cancer behave differently in these
two types of tortoises. This work will not only expand how we look at the
importance of animal diversity for meeting challenges in human health, but will
also shed light on why we see such amazing diversity in animal life spans and
body sizes in nature. The project also has a large outreach component including
the development of high school learning modules to teach students cutting-edge
technologies in genetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evolutionary theory predicts that natural
selection should drive species to grow bigger and live longer because of an
improved ability to defend against predators, compete for resources, and invest
in offspring. Despite such advantages, there is a major constraint to the
evolution of increased body sizes and life spans: the risk of accumulating
genotoxic and cytotoxic damage that comes with living longer and having more
cells, which can ultimately lead to cancer. Yet, some species have overcome
these barriers and have evolved remarkably large body sizes and long life spans,
sometimes within a narrow window of evolutionary time. Here, we examine the
function of key genes related to longevity and cancer resistance in giant
tortoises as compared to their smaller, shorter-lived relatives. These candidate
genes have recently been identified from analyzing the newly sequenced genomes
of giant Galapagos and Aldabra tortoises. Specifically we will use cell lines
from both giant and small tortoises to evaluate the influence of these candidate
genes on critical processes including DNA repair, apoptosis, necrosis, and cell
viability. Our unique study design, pairing gigantic tortoises with their much
smaller relatives, will address a major paradox in biology, and show how
evolution has overcome the costs of being large and long-lived. The project also
has a large outreach component including the intellectual transfer of advanced
cell culture and gene editing technology among universities, the development of
high school learning modules, and the development of educational panels and
videos for zoos on the biology of cancer and aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.