* 1833420
* Investigation of the triple oxygen isotope systematics of shales in the Precambrian
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Ilya Bindeman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 02/29/2024
* USD 243,667.00

Shale is a major sedimentary rock type that records the composition of the
Earth's crust and its weathering. As the process of weathering proceeds with a
great excess of water, the oxygen isotope value in shales reflects the isotopic
value of water interacting with the rock and the temperature of weathering.
Using triple oxygen isotopes (17O/16O versus 18O/16O) systematics in the main
sedimentary rock type, shale and associated diagenetic silica, the investigator
proposes to gain insight into paleoenvironmental and weathering conditions
during early Earth's history. His collection of shales covers 3.5 billion years
and spans the major snowball Earth glacial and greenhouse episodes, the Great
Oxidation Event, the Neoproterozoic appearance of multicellular life in oceans,
and the appearance of life on land. As part of the educational component, this
project will support a graduate student. As an outreach of this effort, the
investigator will lead a one-day workshop at the American Geophysical meeting in
San Francisco in 2020, to which he will invite colleagues working on this topic,
as well as those interested in the advent of precise microanalytical and rare
isotope methods for the Precambrian. He will additionally develop a set of
standards for 17O that span a large range in delta 18O and delta 17O values for
cross-laboratory calibration purposes and make it available to the community for
analysis of sedimentary and other materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will: 1) make measurements, using the investigator's newly constructed high-
precision 17O extraction line, of a collection of shales across geologic history
that has been previously characterized for delta 18O, Titanium isotopes, and
chemical composition; 2) describe long-term and geological interval-specific,
triple oxygen trends of maturing lithosphere, evolving hydrosphere and/or
increasing continental subaerial extent; 3) examine triple oxygen signatures of
quartz within shales and zircons through time, and 4) build a geochemical box
model of coupled hydrosphere-crustal evolution with additional 17O input
parameters that will permit resolution of previous controversies related to
hotter environments in the Archean versus low delta 18O hydrosphere based on
their measurements and those generated by other
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.