* 1834682
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Human Adaptation to Long Term Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 25,200.00

MS Katharine Napora and Dr. Victor Thompson of the University of Georgia will
undertake research on the effects of climate shifts on the Native American
groups who lived along the Georgia Coast from 4500 to 3100 years ago. This
research will clarify the temporal relationships between abandonments of coastal
shell ring village sites and environmental change. This research into the
dynamics of human-environmental interactions on the Georgia Coast contributes to
broader knowledge of responses to major climatic change, long-term environmental
trends, and differential resilience during pivotal transitions in the
southeastern U.S. This project will contribute information about how such groups
were able to adapt to dramatic ecological shifts. This work will also provide
opportunities both for undergraduate researchers to gain experience in
dendrochronological methodologies and for the broader public to learn about the
deep cultural and environmental history of the Southeast coast through outreach
and educational events held during the course of the project.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To conduct this research, the project will examine terminal
radiocarbon dates from shell middens and create a 6000-year bald cypress
ringwidth chronology from excavated samples from the region. Dendrochronology is
a methodology uniquely suited for an integrated study of events experienced at
the human timescale and understood within the context of a deep time framework.
Using tree-ring data combined with modeling the final occupational dates of
large terminal Late Archaic sites, this research aims to reconstruct climatic
conditions and provide a more precise timeline of shell ring abandonments for
the northern Georgia Coast. This study will generate annual-scale data on
environmental conditions during this period and will model extant and new
radiocarbon dates from shell ring and shell midden sites to compare to the
dendrochronological sequence, allowing for greater precision in understanding
the timing of shifts in subsistence and settlement
traditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.