* 1834949
* Synthesis of high-value alkynes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/27/2018,09/30/2018
* Gregory Dudley, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tarek Sammakia
* 09/30/2018
* USD 26,326.00

Through this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry
is supporting Prof. Gregory B. Dudley of Florida State University to develop new
methods for the synthesis and strategic application of alkynes. The alkyne
functional group is becoming increasingly prominent as chemists place greater
emphasis on conservation (atom economy), efficiency (step economy), and
simplicity (click chemistry). New methods for alkyne synthesis are needed to
fuel the growth of modern alkyne chemistry. The research efforts at Florida
State University will focus on de novo creation of CC triple bonds by
fragmentation, retro-cycloaddition, and other entropically favorable processes.
Special emphasis will be placed on the synthesis of alkynes that are needed for
specific applications in the molecular sciences but that cannot be prepared by
direct substitution of acetylene. Strategic applications of the resulting
alkynes will be developed as an integral part of the research process, including
the chemical synthesis of bioactive natural products and of strained
cycloalkynes of relevance to bioorthogonal chemistry. The strained cycloalkynes
will be designed and evaluated in collaboration with the co PI, Prof. Igor
Alabugin of Florida State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alkynes are high
energy hydrocarbons containing triple bonds. The impact of alkyne chemistry
transcends traditional boundaries of chemical synthesis. Alkyne chemical
reactions are instrumental to many techniques in bioimaging, pharmaceutical
synthesis, advanced materials research, etc. These techniques therefore depend
on convenient access to the requisite alkynes. The proposed research is expected
to lead to more efficient production of high-value alkynes and to a better
fundamental understanding of alkyne reactivity. This research program is fully
integrated with university education efforts. The organic methodology and
synthesis research opportunities associated with this project will prepare
student participants to excel in an innovation-based economy. Science
communication is an important part of this preparation. In addition to
disseminating research results to the scientific community, program participants
communicate broadly with the public, including K-12 students, through various
outreach programs. These programs target local and global audiences to promote
awareness of the increasingly global, diverse, and multidisciplinary chemical
sciences.