* 1834208
* Global and regional perspectives of Pleistocene paleoceanography in the western Pacific warm pool based on new sites from IODP Expedition 363
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Yair Rosenthal, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 536,128.00

The Western-Pacific Warm Pool (WPWP) is a major source of heat and moisture to
the atmosphere, being a region of deep atmospheric convection and heavy
rainfall. Small perturbations in sea surface temperature of the WPWP influence
the location and strength of convection in the rising limb of the Hadley and
Walker circulations, perturbing planetary scale atmospheric circulation,
atmospheric heating, and tropical hydrology, as well as heat and CO2 storage in
the thermocline and their transport to the Indian Ocean through the Indonesian
Throughflow. Models disagree how departures from modern climatology will affect
the hydroclimate conditions in this area i.e., whether more intense droughts or
stronger monsoonal rains should be expected. Either way, these changes can
disrupt the lives of many people in regions so affected, devastating local
economies of heavily populated regions through crop failure, landslides,
flooding of coastal regions, and loss of human and wild lives. International
Ocean Discovery Program (IODP) Expedition 363 sought to document the regional
expression and driving mechanisms of climate and paleoceanographic variability
throughout the Neogene (~0-20 My) in the WPWP on millennial and orbital time
scales in response to changes in radiative forcing and varying background
climate states, in order to improve predictions of climate change in this
region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research on two of the cores
collected during Expedition 363. Orbital-scale benthic isotope record will be
generated at Site U1486 in the Manus Basin, ~200 km north of Papua New Guinea
(PNG) spanning the late Pliocene (~2.25 Ma) to Present. The oxygen isotope
stratigraphy will be key for interpreting proxy reconstructions of hydroclimate
variability obtained at this site, including XRF analysis of terrigenous
riverine inputs originated from PNG and planktonic foraminiferal isotope and
elemental records. Benthic foraminifera carbon isotope and trace metal records
will be used to assess how changes in intermediate water temperature and carbon
content affected the WPWP hydrography through the mid-to-late Pleistocene and
their implications to the regional and global climate. A second site (U1485) on
the northern margin of PNG close the Sepik/Ramu River mouths, characterized by
very high sedimentation rates, will be used to reconstruct climate conditions
during previous interglacials of the past 500 My. Specifically, both planktonic
and benthic isotope and elemental records will be generated for Termination I
and the Holocene, and compared with Terminations II and IV and the following
warmer-than-present interglacial peaks (i.e., Eemian/ MIS 5e and MIS 11) to
assess how the WPWP upper ocean responded to deviations from boundary conditions
similar to those predicted for the next century. Funding supports a postdoctoral
scientist and research opportunities for undergraduate
students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.