* 1834879
* 2018 Plant Cell Dynamics (PCD) Meeting; May 29-June 1, 2018; University of Wisconsin-Madison
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Simon Gilroy, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 05/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

Uncovering fundamental mechanisms of organelle and cell dynamics is required for
a comprehensive model of plant growth and development as well as for
understanding how plants adapt to their environment. Such knowledge is critical
for fundamental advances in basic plant cell biology and promoting future
applications to agriculture. The 2018 Plant Cell Dynamics conference, to be held
May 29-June 1, 2018 at the University of Wisconsin, Madison campus will focus on
providing opportunities for plant cell biologists to learn quantitative
approaches to analyze cellular dynamics and function, including live cell
imaging and computational tools. It will also provide a venue for students,
postdoctoral scientists, and new investigators to interact with established
leaders in the field of plant cell biology, thus providing positive impacts on
career development for students and trainees at all levels. By encouraging and
supporting attendance of trainees from underrepresented groups, the conference
will broaden participation in this developing field, which employs techniques of
quantitative, predictive, and theory-driven biology, and encourages
multidisciplinary approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will include
keynote talks from experts in the field of plant cell biology on methodology
appropriate for quantitative studies that probe how plant cells integrate
metabolism, cytoskeletal organization, and vesicle trafficking in overall
cellular function. In addition, there will be opportunities for oral and poster
presentations by trainees and participation in hands-on workshops on sample
preparation, long-term time-lapse imaging, and image
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.