* 1834548
* Multi-scale Dynamics of White-nose Syndrome in North America
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Andrew Kramer, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 09/30/2021
* USD 100,135.00

Forecasting the spread of epidemics or invasive organisms at continental scales
is complicated by processes acting at multiple scales on varied landscapes. Yet
such forecasts are crucial for managing and halting epidemic spread. This
project uses computational tools from mathematics, computer science,
epidemiology and ecology to understand and predict the spread of a devastating
disease of cave-dwelling bats, white-nose syndrome, which is caused by the soil
fungus, Pseudogymnoascus destructans. This project addresses two specific
problems. First, it seeks to identify the corridors along which white-nose
syndrome is likely to spread and the locations most at risk, using the spatial
pattern of past spread and an approach called network analysis. New methods will
be used that will speed up computations, turning the computer model into a more
useful tool in management and control. Second, the local, random processes that
affect individual caves will be linked to the process of spread at regional to
continental scales. This multi-scale linkage will be the first to use a
simulation modeling method, called the equation-free approach, to estimating
epidemics when data are limited, which is most of the time in such
circumstances. The combining of these two approaches will provide a more
accurate understanding how white-nose syndrome has spread already and how it is
likely to spread in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The economic benefit that
bats provide to agriculture in the United States by eating insects has been
estimated to be $4-50 billion each year. This project will contribute tools for
controlling the spread of white-nose and the resulting losses to agriculture, as
well as the serious impacts it has on the bats themselves. It is expected that
the approaches and tools developed in this project for white-nose syndrome could
also be applied to other wildlife diseases, as well as for the regional and
continental spread of human pathogens. The scientists involved will communicate
their practical findings directly to the land and natural resources managers and
to the public. The project will also have educational benefits through the
transfer of skills from the field of mathematics to ecology and epidemiology.
The project will also provide exciting research opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students.