* 1834754
* Student Support for the 50th North American Power Symposium (NAPS),To Be Held in Fargo, ND, September 9-11, 2018.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Rajesh Kavasseri, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 01/31/2019
* USD 17,500.00

This proposal requests funds from the National Science Foundation (NSF) to help
subsidize student-related expenses towards travel, registration, and
accommodation for the 50th North American Power Symposium (NAPS) hosted by North
Dakota State University, in Fargo, North Dakota, from September 9-11, 2018.
NAPS, as a non-profit, and student-centric conference, will bring together
students, faculty, and researchers in the power and energy systems area. The
symposium is technically co-sponsored by the IEEE Power and Energy Society and
anticipates around 150 student-led paper presentations - which will be
disseminated through IEEE's digital library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits primarily lie in the symposium's efforts in recognizing
students as the workforce of the research enterprise, and thereby, uniting the
nation's faculty, industry members, and the student body engaged in the field of
power systems to present and discuss research in established and emerging topics
of concurrent importance to the nation and the National Science Foundation. An
important element of the conference is the feedback available to every student-
presented paper from peers and experts in the field, which will help shape early
career-research in the right directions. The broader impacts lie in the
conference's inclusive and student-centric stance which will strongly encourage
student attendance, promote interactions, and provide numerous opportunities for
professional development. Support to undergraduates and minorities will help
provide the right mix of inspiration, encouragement, and mentorship at the right
time in their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.