* 1834786
* Conference: 2018-2020 Rustbelt RNA Meetings
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Auinash Kalsotra, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 05/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This award will support attendance by early career researchers at the annual
Rust Belt RNA Meetings to be held in Columbus, OH (October 26-27, 2018); in
Cleveland, OH (2019); and in Pittsburgh, PA (2020). The topics covered by the
meetings include all aspects of RNA biology. The format is a combination of
talks and posters, which aims to promote scientific exchange in both formal and
informal settings. Additional activities, including workshops and panel
discussions, will provide professional development and mentoring opportunities
for early-career scientists. There will be ample opportunity for sharing latest
research results and for networking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent years have
witnessed breakthroughs in diverse areas of RNA science, including the epi-
transcriptome, RNA-mediated regulation, functional characterization of non-
coding RNAs and RNA-binding proteins, and genome-wide, multi-disciplinary
approaches to decipher the networks that underlie cellular and organismal
differentiation and development. The upcoming meetings will encompass the full
scope of these topics and draw regional participation to provide students and
senior researchers with opportunities to learn and share RNA-related research.
Attendees will be exposed to new conceptual developments, as well as new tools,
including computational, biochemical and biophysical approaches. The meeting has
and will continue to foster collaborations among diverse scientists from
institutions of various types and sizes. A hallmark of the meeting will continue
to be strong participation by students at undergraduate, graduate and
postdoctoral levels. Scholarships and dedicated recruiting efforts will be aimed
at encouraging attendance by scientists from underrepresented groups. This
meeting serves to expose students (often for the first time) to the breadth and
quality of research seen at national meetings, while preserving a welcoming,
informal atmosphere. These qualities, in combination with the meeting's
accessibility and affordability, make it an invaluable asset to the Midwest
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.