* 1834822
* Understanding Wave Energy Transport Through the Complex Chromosphere and Transition Region
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Michael Hahn, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2023
* USD 418,387.00

Plasma waves appear to be responsible for much of the heating of the
chromosphere, transition region, and corona of the Sun. Fluid motions in the
photosphere provide power for the waves, but the precise excitation mechanism is
yet unknown. Once excited, the wave energy must be transmitted to the corona.
However, recent observations have shown that the interface region between the
photosphere and corona (i.e., the chromosphere and transition region) is
complex. Thus, it is known how wave energy propagates through the interface
region. These issues hinder the development of coronal heating models, which are
limited by our poor understanding of the wave properties at the base of the
corona. To tackle these important science problems for solar physics, this
three-year project will use data from the Interface Region Imaging Spectrometer
(IRIS) to measure the properties of waves in the interface region of the solar
atmosphere. The main science objectives of the project are to: (1) identify
where plasma waves are generated; (2) determine how wave energy propagates from
the photosphere to the corona; and, (3) specify the wave boundary conditions at
the base of the corona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this three-year research
project, archival data from IRIS will be analyzed to address the following three
major issues. First, determine where MHD waves are generated. It is currently
unknown whether waves are generated mainly in the photosphere and propagate up
through the interface region or whether the waves are generated within the
interface region. The photosphere exhibits various fluid motions that can
generate waves, such as the buffeting of magnetic field lines by granular
motions. But, the waves can be reflected by the strong density gradients at the
transition region and so not reach the corona. Global acoustic p-modes at the
photosphere could launch acoustic waves, but they must undergo mode conversion
if they are the source of the Alfvenic waves observed in the corona.
Alternatively, waves may be generated in the chromosphere, for example, by
reconnection. The IRIS data will be used to determine the wave modes and sources
and sinks of wave power through varying heights in the interface region and
thereby identify signatures of these processes and other possible ones. Second,
measure the propagation of waves from the photosphere into the corona. Wave
reflection and damping may prevent much of the wave power from reaching the
corona. This project will determine how waves are transmitted through the
interface region by observing the propagation of waves along structures and by
measuring the power spectrum of the waves. These measurements will then be
compared to existing observations and spectra of lower lying photospheric
fluctuations and of Alfvenic waves in the higher lying corona. The analysis will
determine where Alfvenic waves are reflected, if there is conversion of wave
power from longitudinal to transverse modes or vice versa, and where wave energy
is dissipated. Results will be compared to theories for the propagation,
reflection, and damping of waves throughout this complex region. Third and
final, characterize the wave modes and power at the base of the corona in order
provide the critical boundary conditions needed for models of coronal heating.
By comparing the amplitudes and phases of velocity and intensity fluctuations
one can constrain the relative contribution of compressible versus
incompressible waves. IRIS has sufficient spatial resolution to see torsional
oscillations and thereby estimate the Alfvenic wave energy content of torsional
versus kink waves. By studying the power spectrum of the waves, it will be
determined whether the fluctuations are already turbulent at the base of the
corona or whether the turbulence develops in the corona at larger
heights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will have broader impacts
through postdoctoral training and public outreach. The project will train a
postdoctoral research scientist in the field of solar physics and in techniques
for the analysis of spectroscopic observations. The research and EPO agenda of
this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery,
learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.