* 1834241
* EAGER: Collaborative research: Shifting control from negative plant-microbe feedback to nutrient limitation: predictions from dominant tree traits and ecosystem nutrient economies
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Chris Blackwood, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2023
* USD 183,035.00

Forest ecosystems are globally important due to their biological diversity and
influence on carbon and nutrient cycles. In forests worldwide, fungi and tree
roots form a mutually-beneficial relationship that provides food to fungi in
return for helping trees gain access to soil nutrients. This relationship is
increasingly recognized as a key trait for predicting long-term forest dynamics.
Tree species can be divided into two categories based on whether the fungi grow
inside the root cells ("arbuscular mycorrhiza") or on root surfaces
("ectomycorrhiza"). This research addresses whether biochemical differences
between mycorrhizal tree types have cascading effects on the soil microbial
community and other members of the plant community. Specifically, the project
will test the novel hypothesis that the type of mycorrhizae formed by the
dominant trees in a forest determines whether the trees and other plants are
more likely to be limited by nutrients or by disease (pathogens).
Ectomycorrhizal trees produce leaf and root tissue that is more difficult to
decompose than the tissue from arbuscular mycorrhizal trees, reducing nutrient
availability but also the ability of plant pathogens to persist since many
pathogens grow on dead plant tissue when between live hosts. Thus, the
mycorrhizal type of the dominant tree species is predicted to create a soil
environment that either reduces nutrient availability (under ectomycorrhizal
trees) or enhances the speed and severity of plant-pathogen interactions (under
arbuscular mycorrhizal trees). This project merges ecological theories about
drivers of plant populations and communities, providing a powerful general
framework that may transform our understanding of how shifts in tree species
composition affect future ecosystem dynamics. The project outcomes will also
include training the next generation of scientists and a public forest
restoration project that will establish plots of differing mycorrhizal tree
types, engage volunteers, help educate the public, and contribute to our
understanding of forest restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
involve experimental manipulations and bioassays to test the overarching
hypothesis that the relative importance of nutrient limitation and pathogen-
mediated negative feedbacks in temperate forests depends on the type of
mycorrhizal symbiosis of dominant tree species, which is an indicator for an
integrated set of leaf and root traits. Three geographic areas with previously
characterized mycorrhizal gradients will be studied. Experiments will involve
manipulating nutrient and pathogen abundance to determine the response of adult
tree roots and establishing seedlings to the hypothesized limiting factors in
different soils. In addition, pathogens in the microbial communities will be
characterized through both sequencing and isolation, and prevalent isolates will
be used in bioassays to test Koch's postulates and determine their ability to
affect plant community assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.