* 1834466
* Workshop: NSF CISE CAREER Proposal Writing Workshop and Longitudinal Study [2018, 2019, 2020]
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2018,09/30/2021
* Jack Snoeyink, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 269,406.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is the NSF's most
prestigious grant bestowed on outstanding tenure-track faculty members to
support their exceptional research and educational activities. This grant
supports organization of the next three CISE CAREER Proposal Writing Workshops
at NSF headquarters and nearby conference facilities for workshop venue, in
spring 2018, 2019, and 2020, in coordination with NSF staff. Each workshop
expects 250-300 junior faculty members from all CAREER-eligible principal
investigators in NSF-supported disciplines at U.S. universities and colleges to
attend. Preferences will be given to junior faculty in CISE-related disciplines.
Several fellowships of travel will be given to junior faculty from HBCU/MEI and
under-represented groups, including women, to attend the workshop. The
presentations by recent CISE CAREER awardees will be hosted online and the
slides and videos will be available on the workshop website for other faculty
members who might not be able to attend the workshop in
person.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one-day workshop will consist of the
presentations on the CAREER solicitation and CISE other programs with question
and answer (Q&amp;A), talks given by recent CAREER awardees, program director
panel presentation and Q&amp;A, as well as program-specific discussions with NSF
program managers. The opportunities to interact with NSF program managers will
be valuable to junior faculty in developing competitive CAREER proposals. These
workshops will help prepare junior faculty in CISE-related disciplines to
develop outstanding research and education activities at their universities and
write competitive CAREER proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.