* 1834901
* Meeting: Travel for Students and Postdocs to attend the 14th Congress of the International Society for Developmental and Comparative Immunology in Santa Fe, NM, June 17-21, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Michael Criscitiello, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 05/31/2019
* USD 14,817.00

This award supports the attendance of students and postdoctoral fellows at the
14th Congress of the International Society for Developmental and Comparative
Immunology in Santa Fe, NM on June 17 - 21, 2018. The Congress enhances research
in immunology through presentations of current research and discussions of
immune function in a wide variety of organisms. Comparative and evolutionary
studies of the immune responses in non-mammalian species have led to
groundbreaking work, such as the identification of the function of receptors in
pathogen recognition and host defense. These immune strategies have been major
discoveries that have advanced the wider field of immunology. The Congress will
promote discussion between early career scientists and students with leaders in
the field of comparative immunology, providing valuable opportunities for young
scientists to interact with them and establish professional networks essential
to their careers. Understanding how different animals respond to infections can
enhance knowledge of human responses to infections and potentially lead to new
therapies.

The 14th Congress of the International Society for Developmental and Comparative
Immunology brings together scientists who study the immune systems of different
species. Studies of comparative immunology have led to groundbreaking
discoveries such as Toll-like receptors and RNAi as a host defense mechanism.
The conference is designed to maximize formal and informal interaction between
scientists at all levels. Supported participants will submit a summary of a
session of their choosing. These reports will be compiled into a meeting report
that will be published and disseminated through publication in the ISDCI
journal, Developmental and Comparative Immunology. Organizers have a commitment
to gender balance and encourage attendance by underrepresented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.