* 1834750
* NSF's ChemMatCARS: A synchrotron X-ray national facility for chemistry and materials research at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2025
* Matthew Tirrell, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 03/31/2025
* USD 10,350,000.00

The Division of Chemistry, the Division of Materials Research and the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities provide continuing support to NSF's ChemMatCARS. This is a national
user facility for frontier research in chemistry and materials science employing
synchrotron X-rays at the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory.
Various stations at NSF's ChemMatCARS serve a broad national and international
community of scientists providing some unique capabilities not found anywhere
else in the world. Research activities address vital societal issues, including
the development of new energy sources, biomolecular materials inspired by
biological processes, studies of interactions that help in understanding the
rules of life, environmental remediation processes, and new materials and
catalysts important for a wide range of industries. The midscale-funded facility
serves as a training ground for researchers at all levels and carries out
numerous activities to develop and diversify the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This user facility provides a unique high
brilliance X-ray resource for the study of advanced small-molecule
crystallography, liquid surface and interface scattering, and anomalous small
angle X-ray scattering. Advanced instrumentation at NSF's ChemMatCARS enables
forefront research of ordered and disordered solids, liquids and interfaces on
the atomic, molecular and mesoscopic length scales over a range of time scales
from nanoseconds to minutes. Users of NSF's ChemMatCARS take advantage of its
unique capabilities to address a wide variety of scientific problems. Examples
of crystallographic research topics include studies of electron density
distributions, disorder in thermoelectric materials, photo-responsive materials
essential to capture solar light for energy production and storage, capturing
reactive intermediates in photosynthesis models and catalysts, and studying
phason strain (face distortion) in quasicrystals under high pressure. Additional
illustrations are studies of three-dimensional delta-pair distribution function
(3D-delta-PDF) that provides detailed and quantitative information on defects,
disorder and lattice dynamics, examination of explosives under extreme
conditions, metal-organic frameworks for gas adsorption and separation,
inorganic materials for catalytic, electronic and magnetic applications, and
ferroelectric assemblies. The synchrotron provides the most powerful probe of
molecular and mesoscale structure at liquid/liquid and liquid/surface interfaces
which are essential to the understanding interactions between macromolecules
(e.g., proteins) and cell membranes that underlie many life processes and
provide information to determine the rules of life. This area also provides
information on organized assembly of nanoparticles at liquid interfaces with
specific optical, catalytic, sensing, and electromagnetic functionalities. The
anomalous small angle X-ray scattering (ASAXS) for the study of metal ion
distribution near polyelectrolytes, colloids, and nanoparticles from bulk
materials. ASAXS is the only technique that can measure the distribution of
specific elements within the bulk environment of disordered materials. This is
used to study the effect of metal ions on nucleic acids RNA and DNA and to gain
understanding and improve separations processes of lanthanides and actinides
that is useful in processing radioactive waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.