* 1834859
* Workshop: Environment and Security Science and the U.S. National Security Community
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Geoff Dabelko, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Leah Nichols
* 01/31/2020
* USD 64,695.00

U.S. national security institutions increasingly incorporate environmental
change considerations into assessment, preparation, and operational dimensions.
The scope of environmentally-related national security questions has broadened
from a near exclusive focus on causality and violent conflict onset in
developing countries to include the use of environmental assessment and
cooperation to build trust and confidence in their areas of operation and as a
means of better understanding of risks in a wide range of foreign and security
policy arenas. However, national security practitioners typically do not have
the structures, opportunities, or clear incentives to have longer-term
engagement with a broad range of research agendas and findings. The national
security community typically engages with environmental scholars through
commissioned applied research targeted at specific ongoing problems and the
findings of this work are often proprietary. Therefore, both environmental
researchers and national security practitioners have limited understandings of
the connections between their domains. This workshop and engagement effort
builds on a nearly thirty-year history of U.S. environment and security research
and practitioner efforts, that are diverse yet relatively limited, to expand the
dialogue between researchers and practitioners and to identify key environmental
science questions in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will bring
together scholars who conduct research on environmental security topics,
environmental researchers from across the spectrum of relevant sciences, and
national security practitioners. The planned structured dialogue will 1) develop
a wider set of environment and security researcher-practitioner connections, 2)
expand the number of scholars and practitioners with greater knowledge of the
key actors and tools across both the research and practice, 3) build a shared
understanding of the state of environment and security research, 4) identify key
environmental science questions relevant to security considerations, and 5)
identify specific research opportunities and challenges. The workshop will
facilitate greater understanding of questions, methods, and research between
members of the environmental science and engineering research community and U.S.
national security community. Workshop participants will identify promising lines
of scientific inquiry likely to contribute to advancing the national welfare and
securing the national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.