* 1834696
* Frictional strength evolution and earthquake nucleation
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Robert Viesca, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 245,382.00

Earthquakes are generated by the rupture of geologic faults. Understanding these
hazardous events requires developing mathematical model descriptions of sliding
friction and fault rupture. Earthquake forecasting relies on these models, which
are constrained by laboratory data and assume phenomenological laws. However,
model predictions are highly sensitive to the chosen laws. The PI recently
developed a new analytical approach to examine such sensitivities. He
demonstrated that existing models of earthquake nucleation and slip may preclude
a minimum nucleation size (or minimum earthquake size). Such a minimum size was
thought to be required in prior fault models. Here, the PI and his team extend
this work to unify existing phenomenological laws for fault friction and the
understanding of dynamic rupture nucleation. The expected solution can realign
the theoretical framework of earthquake physics with growing observational
evidence that threatens the paradigm of a minimum earthquake size. Consequently,
this project has critical implications for earthquake modeling and forecasting.
It also provides support for a graduate student and a postdoctoral associate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the fundamentals of the nucleation
and propagation of an earthquake-generating fault rupture. Theoretical models of
fault rupture are often based on so-called rate- and state-dependent friction
laws, where fault strength depends on the slip rate of the host rock as well as
its sliding history, or state. Our understanding of the seismological
implications of earthquake nucleation and sliding friction relies on these
phenomenological laws. Traditionally, these laws are thought to imply that a
minimum fault size is necessary to nucleate an earthquake. An increasing body of
experimental friction data has led to several formulations for frictional
strength evolution. However, these different formulations produce disparate
model predictions for earthquake nucleation. The PI recently developed a new
analytical perspective in which the occurrence of slip instability and
earthquake nucleation in previous formulations are end-members of a non-linear
solution. This approach moves past the classic linear perturbation analysis and
eliminates the need for a minimum nucleation size. Here, the PI and his team
extend this work to a generalized form of the rate- and state-dependent friction
law that advances and unifies the understanding of the so-called aging and slip
laws. In this effort, the team examines previous and new descriptions of sliding
friction, their role in models of the earthquake process and their seismological
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.