* 1834711
* Lightning HOx: Laboratory and Photochemical Modeling Studies of Hydroxyl (OH) and Hydroperoxyl (HO2) Generated by Atmospheric Electrical Activity
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* William Brune, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 09/30/2022
* USD 536,373.00

This project focuses on laboratory experiments to study the generation of
extremely reactive chemical species, known as radicals, that are formed during
lightning. An atmospheric radical is a very reactive atom or group of atoms that
has the ability to remove or change many pollutants in the atmosphere. The goal
of this research is to understand the conditions under which these radicals are
produced by lightning and how they influence global and regional atmospheric
chemistry. Atmospheric radicals are important because they affect the lifetimes
of pollutants and greenhouse gases in the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory generated electrical sparks and
corona over a wide range of conditions will be used to study lightning-generated
NOx (LNOx) and lightning-generated HOx (LHOx). The ratio LHOx/LNOx will be
measured as will its dependence on: (a) spark intensity, frequency, length,
radius, and number; (b) corona intensity and spatial extent; (c) time between
generation point and the chemical sensors; (d) the ratio of HOx/NOx production
as a function of all of these factors; (e) the relationships among the
production of HOx, NOx, and O3; (f) the relationships of the production of HOx,
NOx, and O3 to spark and corona characteristics; (g) the influence of pressure,
water vapor, and OH reactivity on these relationships and on the calculated OH
exposure; and (h) the OH exposure measured by decreases in a volatile organic
compound (VOC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These laboratory measurements will be
simulated with photochemical box models to determine the initial HOx/NOx ratio
and the resulting OH exposure for comparison with measured values. The
information from these laboratory and modeling studies will be parametrized for
inclusion in a global chemical transport model, which will be used to understand
the global and regional implications of LHOx on atmospheric
oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.