* 1834222
* Collaborative Research: Modeling of Secondary and Tertiary Gravity Waves from Orographic Gravity Wave Forcing and Comparison with Satellite Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jia Yue, Hampton University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2022
* USD 75,138.00

This collaborative project involving both NWRA and Hampton University supports a
study of atmospheric dynamics within the region of the Earth's atmosphere that
is not accessible by low Earth orbiting satellites or by balloons. Air that is
associated with the wind flow over mountainous terrain is disturbed by a class
of 'primary' atmospheric gravity waves (GWs) that is called 'mountains waves'
(MWs). These waves break or reach critical levels in the lower or middle
atmosphere at altitudes below 70 km. This process not only creates small-scale
secondary GWs with horizontal wavelengths considerably less than that of the
MWs, but also creates horizontal 'body forces' (i.e., horizontal accelerations
localized in space and time). These in turn are thought to excite a broad
spectrum of secondary GWs with horizontal wavelengths larger than that of the
MWs. The main objective of the research is to quantify to the extent possible
the effect that secondary and tertiary GWs from MW attenuation has on the
thermosphere (the neutral atmosphere above 200 km) via this multi-step coupling
process. The research includes a unique combination of detailed, targeted
modeling combined with data analyses studies. A graduate student associated with
Hampton University would participate in the research work
described.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several different simulations would be used in
sequence to simulate the entire process. Data from the Gravity field and steady-
state Ocean Circulation Explorer (GOCE) satellite would be analyzed to extract
GWs parameters observed for specific regions on Earth, and the simulations will
be compared to these satellite observations. The project will involve applying
these results to the study of MWs to investigate the extent to which secondary
and tertiary waves that affect the thermosphere are produced. The research if
successful should significantly advance the research community's understanding
of the process of momentum transfer from orographic forcing to the thermosphere
via GWs in this multi-step coupling process. This research is expected to lead
to a much better appreciation of the variability and structure of the
thermosphere from these processes (i.e., space weather from below) thus helping
to achieve a significant broader impact because a predictive capability might
possibly be developed for such thermospheric wave structures were this momentum
transfer process be understood much more completely as a result of research work
represented by this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.