* 1834928
* I-Corps: Point-of-Care Skin Cancer Imaging Device
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Negar Ebadi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project includes the
development of an imaging system which addresses the current clinical need for a
non-invasive imaging methodology that could image the skin over its depth with
high resolutions while offering large histopathological contrasts between
malignant and normal tissues. This will provide invaluable assistance to
dermatologists with respect to improving tumor detection accuracies. The target
market for this device would be the global dermatology diagnostic devices market
which is expected to reach a value of USD 5.3 billion by the year 2025. Medical
professionals who practice dermatology in clinics, established equipment
manufacturers, and product distributors are the main stakeholders of this
market. The proposed system will be ultimately integrated in a single framework,
resulting in a compact (handheld) and real-time imaging device at very low
manufacturing costs. By diagnosing tumors at an early stage, the proposed device
will save tremendous amounts of time, effort, and patient discomfort and provide
significant cost reductions for both the individual patient and the nation?s
healthcare system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project investigates
potential commercial markets for a new skin cancer imaging device developed
based on the "Synthetic Ultra-Wideband Millimeter-wave Imaging" approach. In
this approach, an ultra-wide imaging bandwidth in the millimeter-wave regime
that cannot be realized by any conventional design method is assembled
synthetically, resulting in significant improvements in the resolution of the
acquired images. This approach is expected to enable the millimeter-wave imaging
technology to be applied to skin imaging and skin cancer detection. The proposed
technology has proven to be effective through proof-of-concept experiments.
Firstly, statistically significant contrasts have been observed between the
millimeter-wave dielectric properties of normal skin and two of the most common
types of skin cancer, basal cell carcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. These
results verify the potential of the proposed system to provide
histopathological-contrast-based evaluations of skin lesions. Furthermore, the
feasibility of employing the proposed imaging method for skin cancer detection
has been confirmed using realistic skin-mimicking phantoms containing spherical
tumor models. The final developed product will be a hand-held, point-of-care
millimeter-wave imaging device which provides significantly higher image
resolutions compared to the state-of-the-art
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.