* 1834719
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MobiHoc)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Mario Gerla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This award will fund student travel grants to the 2018 Mobile Ad Hoc Networking
and Computing (MobiHoc) symposium, enabling meritorious students to share
information and preliminary research results with leading scientists in the
field. Most students attending the Conference will be working on topics related
to mobility, wireless communications and mobile, personal applications. They may
discover new directions for their research that can lead to new intellectual
contributions. These contributions will be documented in their theses and
papers. Similar opportunities of discovering new research directions will be
offered by the interaction with well-established researchers in the field and by
the attendance of inspiring talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mobihoc Conference
is part of a series of annual conferences sponsored by ACM SIGMOBILE. It
addresses the challenges in the areas of mobile computing and wireless and
mobile networking. Mobihoc serves as a highly selective, premier international
forum addressing networks, systems, algorithms and applications that support
mobile computers and wireless networks. In addition to the regular conference
program, Mobihoc 2018 will include a set of workshops, panels, research
demonstrations, tutorials and a poster session that includes the ACM Student
Research Competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.