* 1834497
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: re-wiring of montane pollination networks under severe drought stress
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Fernanda Valdovinos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 05/31/2020
* USD 44,369.00

A severe drought is expected in the western Rockies in 2018, following the
second-lowest snowpack on record the preceding winter. The drought will
dramatically alter which species are present in the ecosystems of the Rockies
and their relative abundances. The drought thus presents an unusual opportunity
to study how pollination networks (the connections between interacting
pollinator and plant species) are affected by disturbances. This is important
given that extreme environmental events are expected to become increasingly
common and that pollination is critically important for the maintenance of both
wild plant populations and the productivity and security of many agricultural
crops. Specifically, this project is focused on 1) how species in ecosystems can
form new connections to other species after disturbances; 2) how new connections
can be predicted even following major disturbance; and 3) the implications of
new patterns of plant-pollinator relationships for understanding ecosystem-level
responses to disturbance. This work will contribute to better understanding of
how networks (including other ecological networks, and other network types such
as economic, engineered, and social networks) respond to disturbances,
particularly in terms of the formation of new
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use existing plant-
pollinator network field data from non-drought years (2016 and 2017) to build
and test mechanism-focused models of network structure, based on plant and
pollinator abundances, competition between pollinators for flowers, and data on
plant and pollinator physical traits (such as body size). Model predictions will
be compared with field data from the severe drought year (2018) in which it is
anticipated that there will be a strong reduction in which species are present
(for example, many long-lived plant species may not bloom when drought-stressed)
as well as substantial changes in relative abundances of flowers and
pollinators. In particular, the project will also assess how well this new
network model performs relative to existing alternative models (none of which
currently perform well in predicting interactions). The researchers will then
use models to assess generally how substantial capacity for re-wiring will
affect system-level responses to perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.