* 1834425
* Collaborative Research: Improving Representational Competence by Engaging with Physical Modeling in Foundational STEM Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Eric Davishahl, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2024
* USD 291,864.00

This project is a collaboration between Whatcom Community College engineering
and math faculty and Western Washington University psychology faculty. The
project will investigate how to help students develop representational
competence, a key skill needed for success in STEM fields. The project will
design learning activities connected to physical models created by 3D printers
and assess the impact of these activities on student learning. By creating 3D
models that students can grasp in the hands, teachers may be able to help
students learn key concepts in the classroom. If these 3D models help students
gain skills in math and use those skills in other STEM courses, the students may
be more likely to succeed and graduate. This project will test this 3D model
approach and will help researchers understand how to best prepare engineering
and other STEM students from a variety of backgrounds for STEM success. This
project has the potential to increase both the number and diversity of STEM
students who earn a degree and gain future employment in engineering and other
high demand STEM fields. The project will share designs for the 3D models and
related teaching material with other institutions. Teachers across the country
will be able to add these tools to existing courses without the need to create
new courses or change entire programs, creating a simple and efficient way to
help STEM students learn better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of research
indicates that well-developed spatial skills are prerequisite to the development
of representational competence (i.e. the fluency with which a subject expert can
move between different representations of a concept as appropriate for learning,
communicating or problem solving). Additionally, it is known that these spatial
skills can be improved through targeted training. With the advent of 3D printing
technologies, faculty have a powerful tool readily available to develop physical
models for learning activities that target specific learning goals. The project
team will develop and assess physical modeling activities and supporting
curriculum specifically designed to target development of representational
competence. With three years of funding, this project proposes three goals: (1)
Develop physical models and associated learning activities that embed practices
thought to develop representational competence in multiple content areas in
Statics and Integral Calculus; (2) Assess the effectiveness of the models and
activities on improving representational competence in the context of
traditional coursework in Statics and Integral Calculus; and (3) Identify the
characteristics of modeling activities that make them effective for all learners
and/or subgroups of learners. The project will develop replicable modeling
curriculum for these classes with sets of activities and model designs. The
project will also make available a rubric and taxonomy to classify various
attributes of model-based learning activities, serving as a case study for
applying this framework to other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.