* 1834662
* RAPID: Exploring the Dynamics and Thermodynamics of the Sun's Corona with Total Solar Eclipse Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Shadia Habbal, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 05/31/2020
* USD 215,232.00

This one-year RAPID project is aimed at improving present understanding of the
dynamics and thermodynamics of the Sun's corona during total solar eclipses.
Total solar eclipses continue to yield unique observing conditions, enabling an
uninterrupted spatial coverage of coronal structures from the solar surface out
to several solar radii. The main objective of this project is to build a state-
of-the art instrument for solar eclipse observations that capitalizes on the
unique diagnostic capabilities of coronal forbidden lines. These lines are best
observed during total solar eclipses, and they are used to explore the dynamics
and thermodynamics of the coronal plasmas within the first few solar radii above
the solar surface, where the solar wind and coronal mass ejections originate and
are accelerated. To achieve these science objectives, this project capitalizes
on the pioneering insights achieved with the latest solar eclipse observations
on 2017 Aug 21 of forbidden line emission, including imaging and spectroscopy.
Knowledge gleaned from observations of the Sun's corona during the upcoming
total solar eclipses on 2019 July 2 and 2020 December 14 will fill a much-needed
gap in ongoing investigations of the physical processes controlling the coronal
plasmas and magnetic fields. These observations will also impact the science
programs to be executed by the future DKIST. The PI has been leading solar
eclipse observations since 1995, and she will continue to engage and inspire
women faculty, postdocs, graduate and undergraduate students, through their
involvement with the unique scientific endeavors offered by the expeditions. The
PI will present the results of the observations at conferences and will publish
them in refereed journals. She will also share the knowledge with the general
public through lectures, with emphasis on the magic of our closest star and its
impact on our immediate environment. The research agenda of this RAPID project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objective of this one-year RAPID project is to build a state-of-the art
instrument for solar eclipse observations that capitalizes on the unique
diagnostic capabilities of coronal forbidden lines. Coronal forbidden lines are
best observed during total solar eclipses, and they are used to explore the
dynamics and thermodynamics of the coronal plasmas within the first few solar
radii above the solar surface, where the solar wind and coronal mass ejections
originate and are accelerated. Dominated by radiative excitation, emission from
coronal forbidden lines in the visible and near infrared, as well as the
continuum, can yield the chemical composition, temperature, density, non-thermal
motions and outflows of the different constituents of the coronal plasma.
Valuable insights into the dynamics and thermodynamics of the different
manifestations of coronal heating processes can thus be gleaned. Recent eclipse
discoveries have shown that the temperature of the outflowing plasma is
dominated by 1,000,000 K, while emission from closed structures and the bulge of
streamers, is at 2,000,000 K. They revealed that prominences, which are 100
times cooler and denser than the corona, are invariably enshrouded by the
hottest material there, and directly linked to coronal structures, even when
they erupt. Chromospheric material from prominences escapes, unaltered, with the
hottest coronal material in CMEs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project capitalizes
on the pioneering insights achieved with the latest solar eclipse observations
on 2017 Aug 21 of forbidden line emission, including imaging and spectroscopy.
In this project, the team will build a state-of-the-art instrument that expands
the wavelength coverage of the existing imaging suite of Fe IX, X, XI, XIII, and
XIV emission lines by adding lines from different charge states of Ar, Ni and S.
This enhances the diagnostic capabilities of the innovative imaging spectrometer
to be built during this project by including the near UV and near IR wavelength
ranges. The upcoming 2019 July 2 and 2020 December 14 total solar eclipses over
Chile and Argentina offer an opportunity for coordinated multi-site
observations, which has been successfully proven with the observations acquired
during the 2017 August 21 total solar eclipse over the mainland U.S. Multi-site
observations, with identical instrumentation, maximize data acquisition and
enable studies of changes in coronal structures on time scales of tens of
minutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.