* 1834894
* The Impact of Energetic Neutral Particles Raining Down on the Thermosphere due to Charge Exchange Reactions in the Upper Ionosphere and Polar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Larry Gardner, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 322,823.00

The upper atmosphere in the polar regions contains a layer of weakly ionized gas
(the ionosphere). Ionized particles such as hydrogen and oxygen ions drift
upward in response to heating via electric fields and particle precipitation
from the near-Earth space and can reach velocities as high as 10-20 km/s for
hydrogen and 3-5 km/s for oxygen. These energetic ions interact with surrounding
neutral gas (the thermosphere) and energetic neutral atoms are produced in
charge exchange reactions. Light hydrogen atoms escape the atmosphere but heavy
neutral species such as oxygen cannot escape and reverse direction. In the polar
cap ionosphere-thermosphere system, this gives rise to a continuous Polar Rain.
This award will investigate how the energetic neutrals affect circulation,
temperature, density, and wave activity in the coupled ionosphere-thermosphere
system. The research will contribute to the community effort of modeling of
space plasma disturbances by including previously unincluded effects of the
energetic neutral particles and by providing a better specification of the
required model resolutions. The project will also support a graduate student and
contribute to creating a diverse workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will
involve (1) inclusion of new terms in the fluid equations to account for
additional types of the ion-neutral and neutral-neutral coupling that are
currently not considered, including thermal loss due the energetic atom cooling
due to collisions with background neutrals, (2) running a comprehensive set of
simulations using the coupled models for various conditions, and (3)
investigating effects of different disturbance types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.