* 1834850
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: Agrarian Labor and Colonialism
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Raymond Hunter, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2020
* USD 24,419.00

Raymond Hunter will work alongside colleagues in Peru to study the development
of commercialized economies by interrogating labor relations under colonialism.
While there have been many previous studies of the development of colonial
economic systems, prior research has given less attention to the creative role
of agrarian workers in developing economic systems. This project will provide an
alternative perspective by clarifying how the decisions of agricultural workers
impact the structure of emerging economies. These processes play out over long
periods of time - frequently over centuries. Archaeology is ideal to understand
changes that emerge over extended periods of time, and further, can provide
important insight on the actions of populations that may not be recorded in
archives. The project contributes to anthropological theory by developing a
conceptual framework to evaluate agrarian labor regimes under colonialism. In
doing so, the project engages with an emerging body of anthropological and
archaeological literature that explores how global systems are created and
shaped by non-elite actors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will examine how
the agrarian laborers ultimately responsible for agricultural production engaged
with the emerging markets through which the product of their labor was
dispersed. The work will be conducted in the Cusco region of Peru, a critical
nexus of agricultural production and economic development during the Andean
Colonial Period (1532-1824 A.D). In Cusco, large quantities of agricultural
goods were produced to supply markets in burgeoning mining towns. This
production involved newly introduced products and foreign forms of labor
organization that were central to the emergence of the colonial economy. The
research team will employ a variety of archaeological methods to clarify how
agrarian workers negotiated these shifting conditions over the course of the
Colonial Period. By combining data from excavations with extant data from a lake
core the research will assess shifting patterns of land use, environmental
change, production, and consumption during this period of
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.