* 1834656
* EAGER: Design and Fabrication of a Novel Micro-Reactor for Molecular Sampling of Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Nicole Labbe, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 10/31/2019
* USD 81,128.00

High-temperature gas-phase chemistry, such as the chemistry responsible for
powering engines and supplying electricity from power plants to homes, is
complicated. But it is critical to understand these chemical processes to make
advancements in energy efficiency and pollution reduction. Few experiments exist
that can get a full chemical picture of the chemistry occurring in complex
reacting systems, since many of the critical molecular species formed are
unstable with very short lifetimes. This work focuses on the development of new
micro-reactors that can probe the chemistry on the order of microseconds to
directly measure the fundamental chemistry of gas-phase reactive systems. When
coupled with other diagnostics, these micro-reactors will give a nearly full
chemical picture of the chemistry that occurs. If successful, these proposed
micro-reactors will be a valuable research tool that will significantly enhance
the ability of the field to measure the chemical products of gas-phase
reactions, leading to more accurate kinetic models with wide ranging
applications from engine design to air quality
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposed work is to design
and fabricate a novel micro-reactor for advanced chemical diagnostics for
combustion and gas-phase reactive flows. While micro-reactors have been used to
study pyrolysis (thermal decomposition) reactions previously, these reactors are
limited in their experimental capabilities due to the reactive nature of the
base material, silicon carbide (SiC) with oxygen and uncertain pressure and
temperature conditions in the reactor. To directly address these issues,
computational analysis will be employed to redesign the geometry of the reactor
to produce stable thermodynamic fluid properties within the reactor, leading to
accurate determination of reaction temperature and pressure. Then, these
reactors will be fabricated using a combination of 3-D printing, casting, and
micro-drilling methods. Two sets of reactors are planned: one set will be made
of SiC for comparison to existing pyrolysis reactors and a second set will be
made of non-reactive materials, such as quartz or sapphire, for fuel oxidation
study. Performance characterization of these reactors will be completed through
a series of experiments that probe the temperature and pressure behavior of
fuels in a reactive environment. This powerful new instrument has the potential
to help unravel still unanswered questions such as how soot is formed and
destroyed, what are the dominant reaction paths for ignition, and how do
pollutants interact with ozone in the upper
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.