* 1834971
* On the Source and Loss of Inner Belt Electrons
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Xinlin Li, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 03/31/2024
* USD 360,180.00

This project is a follow-on to successful NSF funded programs supporting the
Colorado Student Space Weather Experiment (CSSWE) CubeSat. The CubeSat took
measurements of energetic electrons in the Earth's radiation belts.
Understanding the populations of inner radiation belt electrons is important to
national security and commercial interests. The energetic electrons can damage
or destroy space craft functioning. The resulting scientific results from the
project will lead to improvement of predictive space weather models. This fits
directly into the goals of the National Space Weather Strategy and Action Plan,
released in 2015. The proposed work will fund a female graduate student in STEM
and maximize the science return from the NSF funded CSSWE CubeSat.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CSSWE CubeSat recently discovered that Cosmic Ray
Albedo Neutron Decay (CRAND) produces a population of electrons in the inner
radiation belt and contributes to electron populations elsewhere in the
radiation belts. The proposed research will determine the relative contribution
of CRAND electrons in the inner belt, the solar cycle dependence of the CRAND
population, and the pitch angle scattering rate and lifetime of trapped inner
belt electrons. Electron observations from the CSSWE will be analyzed along with
DEMETER/IDP and SAMPEX/PET satellite data. Established CRAND models
incorporating diffusive small-angle atmospheric scattering and non-diffusive
wide-angle scattering will be generated and fit to the satellite data. The
proposed work is unique in that it seeks to understand the precipitation loss of
inner radiation belt electrons including the contribution from the CRAND
produced population. The CRAND population was not known to be significant before
the new results from CSSWE published within the last few
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.