* 1834924
* AccessINCLUDES: Linking the knowledge and results of NSF disability-related projects and projects within the NSF INCLUDES National Network
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Sheryl Burgstahler, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2022
* USD 249,966.00

The University of Washington's DO-IT (Disabilities, Opportunities,
Internetworking, and Technology) Center, which has decades of experience in
designing welcoming, accessible, and usable courses, research, websites, videos,
and electronic documents, leads the AccessINCLUDES project. AccessINCLUDES
addresses the broadening participation challenge that individuals with
disabilities are underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) fields. AccessINCLUDES brings the work of the NSF INCLUDES
National Network together with the work of DO-IT to address the intersection of
identity with an emphasis on disability-related issues. AccessINCLUDES links to
the NSF INCLUDES Network by sharing knowledge and results from NSF disability-
focused projects and their network organizations to better prepare the NSF
INCLUDES National Network to: 1. address disability-related issues in their
research (e.g., design interventions to be accessible; recruit, support, and
report outcomes for participants with disabilities); 2. make meetings,
trainings, courses, and other project activities welcoming and accessible to
individuals with disabilities; 3. design project resources and products to be
accessible to individuals with disabilities; and 4. develop durable, new
collaborations between multiple stakeholders and organizations that lead to
future innovative projects and resources that are inclusive of individuals with
disabilities. Ultimately, including more individuals with disabilities in STEM
fields broadens participation and enhances these fields with their unique
perspectives and expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individuals with disabilities
inform all aspects of the project. Participants include (1) current and future
NSF INCLUDES Design and Development Launch Projects, Alliances, and the
Coordination Hub, and (2) disability-focused broadening participation. All
project activities support and disseminate outcomes from three conferences, one
two-day on-site and two half-day webinars, all designed to be accessible to
individuals with disabilities. Conference participants engage in an online
community of practice focused on the project goal and objectives and conference
development. In the conferences AccessINCLUDES participants, informed by
research and practice with respect to broadening participation; STEM,
disabilities, change management, and organizational development, advance
knowledge relevant to increasing the success of individuals with disabilities
through research, instruction, activities, and products of NSF INCLUDES
projects. Resources collected and developed and the two dissemination webinars
are tailored to the needs of the NSF INCLUDES National Network, so that they
have lasting value for making Network projects more inclusive of individuals
with disabilities. The project ensures long-term impact by building on two
associations, NSF INCLUDES projects and NSF-funded disability-focused projects,
and creating durable relationships among projects that enhance the
infrastructure for STEM broadening participation research and practice;
increasing the participation of people with disabilities in STEM; and
disseminating transformational research and practice to enhance understanding
and promote replication and impact in the NSF INCLUDES National Network and
other STEM and disability-focused organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.