* 1834774
* RI: Student Travel Program for the 2018 International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Michael Cox, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 05/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supports travel costs for approximately 20 U.S. select students
participating in the Doctoral Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the 26th
International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning (ICCBR), which will take place
from the 9th to 12th of July 2018 in Stockholm, Sweden. This is the premier
international conference for researchers in the field of case-based reasoning
research across a fully international research community. This activity will
bring together a broad community of researchers in the field of AI, and in
particular, in research involving systems that encode, retrieve, and re-use
experiences, enabling an automated form of reasoning-by-analogy. The activity
supports junior researchers at a critical early-career stage, and creates the
opportunity to bring in participants who might not have attended an AI
conference due to lack of resources. This is especially true for those at
smaller institutions and those which have less developed AI programs. Engaging
such participants has the potential to draw more talent into AI research,
improve research ideas in their formative stage, and engender collaborations
across the breadth of disciplines. This event provides students with invaluable
exposure to outside perspectives on their work at a critical time in their
research and enables them to explore their career
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.