* 1834215
* CAREER: A Dual-VM Binary Code Reuse Based Framework for Automated Virtual Machine Introspection
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Zhiqiang Lin, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 519,970.00

Virtual Machine Monitors (VMMs) and hypervisors have become a foundational
technology for system developers to achieve increased levels of security,
reliability, and manageability for large-scale computing systems such as cloud
computing. However, when developing software at the VMM layer, developers often
need to interpret the very low level hardware layer state and reconstruct the
semantic meanings of the guest operating system events due to the lack of
operating system level abstractions. This semantic gap problem has been a road
block for a decade for many VMM level applications such as virtual machine
introspection (VMI), malware analysis, and virtual machine
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to design and develop new
approaches, practical techniques, and efficient implementations to automatically
bridge the semantic gap for VMM layer programs including VMI. In particular, a
dual-VM, binary code reuse based framework is formulated and applied to
automatically bridge the semantic gap. Such a framework directly enables a large
set of legacy utility software to automatically become VMI software. Meanwhile,
the research includes developing a set of practical enabling techniques such as
memory exclusive kernel version inference, and integrates these techniques with
efficient implementations from binary rewriting. The results of this research
are to significantly increase the productivity of virtualization software
development as well as the security of virtualization software, and also open
new opportunities for automated system administration, intrusion detection, and
incident response.