* 1834897
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES: EAGER: Examining Collective Impact in a Community-University Partnership to Broaden Girls' Participation in Science from Middle School to High School Graduation
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Nilanjana Dasgupta, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,271.00

This project is conducting research that is applying the collective impact
framework to examine specific components of a multi-organizational partnership,
with emphasis on the backbone infrastructure and functionality of the
collaboration. The multi-organizational partnership, which is focused on
broadening the participation of minority teenage girls in STEM, involves K-12
schools, colleges and universities, industry, and STEM research organizations.
An important contribution of the proposed research is to understand how this
multi-organizational partnership functions without a traditional backbone
organization. There are five research questions: (1) What key features (roles,
relationship types, individual attributes) within and between organizations make
the collaboration successful? (2) To what extent does this collaboration satisfy
the five defining criteria of collaborative impact strategies? (3) What
components of the organizational network within the partnership serve as
backbone support? (4) How was the backbone developed and sustained over time in
tandem with other collective impact elements? (5) To what extent are the
features of the backbone replicable and scalable to other collaborations between
universities and STEM-focused community organizations?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research was created in response to the NSF INCLUDES
Dear Colleague Letter: Announcement of an Effort to Expand the NSF INCLUDES
National Network (NSF 17-111). The DCL states that EAGER Proposals should
produce findings and results that will generate new insights for the NSF
INCLUDES National Network, suggest potential strategies for engaging NSF's
existing broadening participation activities in the Network and/or highlight
lessons learned that could inform the NSF INCLUDES Launch Pilots and Alliances
as they develop. The NSF INCLUDES program focuses on catalyzing the STEM
enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research findings that are being generated from
this project inform the collective impact framework for STEM broadening
participation networks, and it will inform researchers, educators, families and
industry about how to advance broadening participation efforts for inclusive
STEM education, research and workforce development. Together with other NSF
INCLUDES Network activities, this research is contributing to positive,
transformative change within the U.S. STEM workforce and research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.