* 1834882
* SaTC: Student Travel Support: Privacy Enhancing Technologies Symposium (PETS) 2018
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Nicholas Hopper, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 05/31/2019
* USD 18,000.00

This award funds student travel fellowships for U.S. students attending PETS
2018, the Privacy Enhancing Technologies Symposium. PETS addresses the design
and realization of privacy services for the Internet and other data systems and
communication networks by bringing together anonymity and privacy experts from
around the world to discuss recent advances in, and new perspectives on, online
privacy. PETS topics range from privacy-oriented cryptography and formal
definitions of privacy to addressing human behavior and incentives around
privacy, and researchers come from a variety of disciplinary backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation in conferences such as PETS is an extremely
important part of the student experience for both undergraduate and graduate
researchers, providing the opportunity to interact with peers and more senior
researchers while hearing about leading edge work in privacy. The support
requested in this proposal will enable the participation of U.S. students who
would otherwise be unable to attend PETS 2018, with a focus on supporting
students from groups historically underrepresented in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.