* 1834451
* GEM:  Cold Dense and/or Heavy Plasma Controlling the Magnetopause Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Kyoung-Joo Hwang, Southwest Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 319,837.00

The effects of oxygen ions, flowing out of the ionosphere, on the processes that
allow mass, energy, and momentum from the solar wind to penetrate into the
magnetosphere is an open question of critical importance in understanding the
way the Geospace system works to protect the Earth. This is also a critical
element affecting how space weather disturbances are generated in our vicinity.
The Geospace system is composed of: (1) the upper regions of our atmosphere, (2)
the ionosphere (which is an embedded layer of ions within this region), and (3)
the magnetosphere (which is the extension of the Earth's magnetic field into
space). The solar wind is the hot upper atmosphere of the sun, which gravity is
unable to contain, blowing outward carrying with it solar magnetic fields. Only
a few percent of the energy in the solar wind actually leaks into the
magnetosphere, which acts as a magnetic shield, but this is enough to power
severe space weather disturbances near the Earth. One way solar wind mass and
energy leaks into the magnetosphere is through magnetic reconnection which is,
essentially, the breaking of the Earth's magnetic field lines and joining with
the interplanetary magnetic field lines, accompanied by explosive energy
releases. In another process, solar wind momentum and mass are transmitted
across the magnetopause through large vortices (called Kelvin-Helmholtz waves)
that develop at the interface between the fast solar wind and the much slower
magnetospheric plasma. However during disturbed space weather conditions, heated
ionospheric oxygen ions flow outward and mix with the hotter more tenuous
hydrogen ions in the dayside magnetosphere. Their presence alters the conditions
for magnetic reconnection and for the formation of Kelvin-Helmholtz waves. This
modulates the entry of the solar wind in unknown ways. This project will combine
a coordinated set of spacecraft and ground-based observations with global models
to investigate how these processes change in the presence of cooler denser
ionospheric-origin oxygen ions and what controls the amount of these oxygen ions
that reach the magnetosphere. New knowledge about how the Geospace system works
is expected to result from this investigation. The broader impacts are
significant including: the further training of a postdoctoral researcher who is
also a co-I on the project, the support of two female scientists (one being the
PI), which contributes to diversity in the field, and a plan for participating
in outreach activities involving high school and undergraduate students.
Knowledge gained from this work will also be of interest to researchers studying
solar system, astrophysical and laboratory plasmas and will in the long-term be
an important component in improving the ability to forecast space weather
disturbances of importance to society.

The methodology of the study will combine both statistical and case studies of
coordinated observations that connect the dayside magnetopause with outflows
from the upper ionosphere or plasmaspheric drainage plumes from the inner
magnetosphere. The coordinated observations of magnetosphere and ionosphere
parameters will be taken from the MMS, THEMIS, Cluster, Van Allen Probes, DMSP,
and FAST satellite datasets; solar wind parameters from ACE and Wind satellites
upstream of the Earth; and information on the magnetopause/magnetosphere from
ground-based observations including magnetograms, radar and all-sky imagers.
Simulations of the global magnetosphere will be used to aid in interpreting the
observations.