* 1834157
* Scholarships To Attract and Retain Students in Graduate Engineering and Computer Science Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* S. Keith Hargrove, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,998.00

This five-year project will provide scholarships to support the success of
thirty low-income, high-achieving STEM graduate students with demonstrated
financial need. Helping these students earn advanced degrees will contribute to
the national need for well-educated scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and
technicians. The scholarships will support students who are pursuing master's
degrees in computer science or engineering. In addition to providing financial
support, the project will support the success of the Scholars through cohort
building activities, graduate student support services, seminars, summer
internships, and mentoring. Tennessee State University is an Historically Black
College or University, with a high population of students from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields. Thus, this project can contribute to broadening
participation in STEM careers, a goal with national and regional
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objective of this project is to
increase the number of academically high-achieving, low-income students who
obtain a master's degree in engineering or computer science at Tennessee State
University. To accomplish this goal, the project will implement evidence-based
activities that support recruitment and retention of graduate students pursuing
master's degrees. These activities include: a seminar series and graduate
student symposium that incorporate scholarly presentations, career planning, and
professional development; a new engineering and computer science graduate
student group to encourage social and intellectual connections among students;
summer internships with industry partners; and a new engineering student
orientation program to acclimate new graduate students to the University and
facilitate connections among student cohorts. The effectiveness of these
activities will be analyzed to identify affordances and barriers to recruitment,
retention, and graduation with an advanced degree. This project may serve as a
model for attracting and retaining students, including underrepresented minority
students, in engineering and computer science graduate degree programs. As such,
this project will investigate: (1) the extent to which participating in the
project activities moderates the Scholar's experiences, well-being, and future
career plans; (2) the extent to which being an underrepresented minority
student, if applicable, impacts the Scholar's experiences, well-being, and
future career plans; and (3) whether access to online, culturally responsive
coaching about academic careers affects satisfaction in the master's program,
interest in pursuing a Ph.D. in STEM, and/or interest in pursuing STEM faculty
positions. Research findings will inform engineering and computer science
broadening participation efforts by other researchers and stakeholders in STEM
graduate education. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income, academically high-achieving students with demonstrated
financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the
education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.