* 1834748
* EAGER: Observations of Falling and Lofted Snow in Windy Environments
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Aaron Kennedy, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 166,563.00

Snowflake size and shape are important considerations for numerical modeling of
snowfall and real-time detection by weather radars. One of the lesser-understood
factors that influences snowflake structures, densities and number
concentrations is wind. Traditional methods to make ground or near-ground
observations of falling or lofted snow in high wind conditions are difficult.
Newer instruments, such as those used for airborne research, are expensive or
have other limitations. In this project, the research team will deploy a new
balloon-borne instrument to make measurements of snowflakes from the surface to
the top of the precipitation layer. A set of additional instrumentation will
also be deployed to complement those measurements in a field campaign that will
involve students from elementary school to graduate level. The first order
impact of the award will be to test a new, inexpensive technology for making
measurements of snow. The larger potential impact of the work would be to
improve model representation of snow for improved weather forecasts. The award
also includes a significant education and public outreach component, leading to
improved public understanding of science and training of the next generation of
researchers.

The main goal of this award is to improve observational knowledge of the
microphysical aspects of snow during windy conditions. It is difficult to make
ground or near-ground observations of falling or lofted snow using traditional
techniques due to blurring of the images, flow around instruments, and the lack
of ability to vertically profile. In addition, advanced instruments for
snowflake classification are either expensive or unavailable for small
deployments. In this project, the research team will make use of a combination
of instruments, featuring the Particle Size, Image, and Velocity (PASIV) probes
developed at the National Severe Storms Lab. The PASIV can be attached to a
balloon for a vertical profile of particle counts and number concentration
estimation. At the ground level, the research team will make use of a camera-
strobe light setup where the focal plane of the camera is 1-2m from any
potential flow disruption. Additional instruments will include a cloud particle
imager and disdrometer. The field site is within view of the operational WSR-88D
radar and the UND C-band radar. Overall, the design of the field experiment is
set to answer two main questions: 1) How do microphysical properties of ice-
phase hydrometeors vary over horizontal and vertical scales of 100m to 10km
within falling and lofted snow events, and 2) How well do varying instrument
designs function in windy environments? The intended broader impacts include a
significant outreach and education plan associated with the field campaign. A
graduate student will be funded by the project and approximately 20
undergraduate and graduate students will participate in the planning, teaching,
forecasting, and collection of data for the field campaign. K-12 outreach will
include snowfall and visibility measurements made by students during winter
events, the development of a winter-weather curricula, and teaching of the unit
to tribal groups through partnership with an existing EPSCoR award. Outreach via
media and tours will also be conducted.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.