* 1834650
* Oceanographic Technical Services, 2018-2022, R/V Pelican
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Joseph Malbrough, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Continuing Grant
* James Holik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 754,264.00

Louisiana Universities Marine Consortium (LUMCON) proposes to support technical
services on R/V Pelican, a 116-foot, general purpose research vessel operated by
the consortium as part of the Academic Fleet which is scheduled by the
University National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS). LUMCON requests
support for basic services only; they will provide one technician on each
seagoing research project. In addition, the technical services group will
maintain, calibrate and provide for qualified users items from their pool of
shared-use research instrumentation. The budget in this proposal is for the
first year of a 5-year continuing grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Program
received the annual report on 2/1/2018. As required, the report provided
information regarding 2017 operations as well as outlining plans and a proposed
budget for 2018. Research vessels in the Academic Fleet provide support for
researchers from a variety of federal and state agencies, as well as some
private sponsors. All users (or the appropriate funding agencies) share support
for basic technical services on the vessel equally, via a day-rate, with each
paying a share of the costs based on fractional usage of the vessel. The rates
are negotiated annually with the NSF Program
Manager&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts &lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of
the present proposal is under Merit Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal
Guidelines (NSF 13-589). It provides infrastructure support for scientists to
use the vessel and its shared-use instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded
oceanographic research projects (which individually undergo separate review by
the relevant research program of NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and
operation of shared-use instrumentation allows NSF-funded researchers from any
US university or lab access to working, calibrated instruments for their
research, reducing the cost of that research, and expanding the base of
potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.