* 1834496
* Collaborative Research:  RAPID:  Capturing initial eco-evolutionary dynamics of a novel chemical invader
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Tia-Lynn Ashman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2020
* USD 99,231.00

Strong human-mediated selection can cause rapid evolution in traits that alter
ecological dynamics. Such eco-evolutionary processes may also lead to
unpredictable changes in biological systems. The application of herbicides, for
example, causes a range of responses in plants such as death, stunted growth, or
the alteration of flowering times of survivors. Plant populations exposed to
herbicide often evolve resistance. It is not known if these herbicide-induced
changes can affect other key ecological components of a community such as plant-
pollinator interactions. This research will examine the potential for cascading
eco-evolutionary effects of herbicide application within crop associated weed
communities. The researchers will take advantage of the impending widespread
application of the novel herbicide dicamba. The work is specifically designed to
capture the initial dynamics of dicamba's use in agriculture. This research will
focus on the crop-associated weed community and its interaction with insect
pollinators. Ultimately, this project has broad implications for the health and
resilience of agricultural systems following human-mediated influences. The
evolution of these wild species may have substantial effects on agricultural
sustainability, the economics of food production, and human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eco-evolutionary forces studied here are likely
to create evolutionary responses that lead to significant ecological change. An
understanding of these phenomena is incomplete, however, as few natural systems
have so far been examined for direct links between evolving traits and
ecological impacts. Moreover, the initial dynamics in such systems are rarely
captured. The proposed research takes advantage of the upcoming widespread
application of a new herbicide to study its cascading effects on ecological and
evolutionary processes in crop-associated weed communities, including important
natural pollinators. This work will test four hypotheses concerning the initial
ecological and evolutionary processes. Ecological processes to be studied
include the role of phenotypic plasticity in invasion dynamics and changes in
pollinator abundances and diversity. Evolutionary processes include plant
species losses and reductions in genetic diversity. The work will use a
combination of field studies and genetic analyses to capture the initial
processes in a dynamic that is expected to proceed very rapidly. This research
will provide key insight into a critical stage of eco-evolutionary processes
that occur at the agro-ecological interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.