* 1834880
* MERIF: A Forum for CISE-supported Midscale Experimental Research Infrastructure projects Projects
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Lawrence Landweber, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,972.00

The computer and networking systems research communities recognize the
importance of conducting verifiable, repeatable experimental research at scale
on highly decentralized Midscale Experimental Research Infrastructures (MERI).
In the past decade the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp;
Engineering (CISE) has supported multiple research infrastructure projects,
including the Global Environment for Network Investigations (GENI), and NSF
Future Cloud projects including CloudLab and ChameleonCloud. The potential of
MERI projects to support transformative research grows as experiments are
envisioned that span multiple infrastructures providing complementary services.
These experiments place new demands on each infrastructure to coordinate
development and implement common protocols and interfaces to support
interoperability and ease-of-use by experimenters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to create a community-led research coordination entity known as
the MERI Forum (MERIF) to help achieve these objectives. MERIF will convene the
CISE research infrastructure development community, experimenters, and other key
stakeholders to communicate, cooperate and collaborate on MERI development. The
project embarks with 6 primary responsibilities:&lt;br/&gt;1. Advancing the
Federation and Harmonization of MERIF projects to enable and simplify their
use;&lt;br/&gt;2. supporting Education and Outreach to integrate the use of the
diversity of MERIF project resources in academic courses, including use by
underserved populations;&lt;br/&gt;3. hosting workshops to focus on midscale
infrastructure solutions for a future national computation fabric that enables
research experimentation into future networking and computing
architectures;&lt;br/&gt;4. convening regular research community meetings to
identify the needs of MERI research users;&lt;br/&gt;5. reaching out to domain
science communities to identity and initiate mutually beneficial collaborations
between MERI projects and large-scale science and engineering projects;
and&lt;br/&gt;6. engaging university Leadership to increase awareness and help
sustain MERIF projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.