* 1834856
* Pairing of Incoherent Fermions in Quantum-Critical Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Andrey Chubukov, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 345,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education on fundamental properties of electrons in quantum
materials. Electrons, carrying negative charge, repel one another via the usual
Coulomb interaction. However, there are certain circumstances within materials
where this repulsive interaction is screened and becomes attractive at certain
distances, which can lead to the formation of electron pairs and
superconductivity. Yet, the same screened Coulomb interaction also tends to
scatter electrons and thereby destroy their coherent motion, which in turn is
destructive for superconductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key goal of this
project is to understand the delicate interplay between these two competing
tendencies. The PI will analyze specific models relevant to current experiments
with the aim to understand when a superconducting state is most stable, and how
to increase the temperature at which superconductivity is destroyed, thereby
extending the temperature range that is useful for applications. Such
understanding could lead to general conclusions about the complex behavior of
electrons in materials and is also relevant for practical uses of
superconductivity in, for example, energy storage, magnetically levitated
trains, superconducting power lines, MRI imaging, and particle
accelerators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems the PI proposes to study are
quite general and are of interest to a broad community of physicists. The
project could have an impact on several other areas of science, such as
mathematics and high-energy physics. A major component of this project is the
mentoring and training of graduate students who will be involved in all aspects
of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on strongly correlated electron systems, which are at the center of
experimental and theoretical activities in condensed-matter physics. The PI will
address several fundamental problems related to physics near a quantum critical
point (QCP), where interaction with a critical boson gives rise to strong
correlations and non-Fermi-liquid behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems
considered include the competition between fermionic incoherence and a strong
tendency towards Cooper pairing, the interplay between pairing of incoherent
fermions and superconductivity, the comparison of analytical theory with Quantum
Monte Carlo data, and the special role of backscattering near a critical point.
Near a QCP towards spin or charge order, the interaction with soft fluctuations
of the order parameter destroys fermionic coherence either on the whole Fermi
surface or in some (hot) portions of it. The same interaction also tends to bind
fermions into Cooper pairs. The PI's plan is to analyze the competition between
these two tendencies. In particular, he will address the issue whether one can
get a non-Fermi-liquid behavior down to T=0, uninterrupted by the pairing. He
will next study whether the pairing of incoherent fermions leads to true
superconductivity or to pseudogap behavior of preformed pairs due to strong
fluctuations of a superconducting order parameter. His specific goal is to
understand the role of fluctuations of the shape of the frequency dependent gap,
as these "longitudinal" fluctuations likely become soft at least in some
quantum-critical systems. To do this, the PI will derive the full Luttinger-Ward
functional, whose minimization yields Eliashberg equations. He will analyze the
profile of this functional away from the minimum and verify whether the
stiffness of longitudinal fluctuations has extra smallness at a QCP. If this is
the case, there should exist an intermediate temperature range where the pairing
gap is already developed, but fermions remain incoherent and do not
superconduct. This should answer the most fundamental questions about the
behavior of a metal near a QCP.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The problems the PI
proposes to study are quite general and are of interest to a broad community of
physicists. The project could have an impact on several other areas of science,
such as mathematics and high-energy physics. A major component of this project
is the mentoring and training of graduate students who will be involved in all
aspects of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.