* 1834992
* I-Corps: Music in the Numbers
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Glenn McClure, SUNY College at Geneseo
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is driven by
novel software within an automated digital engine, performing sonification that
translates numerical sequences of archived and real-time data streams into
sound. The software has applications in multiple industries that will benefit
from ongoing interpretation of big data using non-speech audio to represent
data. The audio feed will be paralleled with visual representation, allowing the
user instant access to expanded information. The human ear is superior to the
eye for processing certain kinds of information, especially information that
changes over time. As an alternative or complement to visual analysis, audio
perception can process data in temporal, spatial, amplitude, and frequency
resolution. Shifting ongoing trend analysis and anomaly detection to audio will
reduce visual data overload. Audio interpretation allows users to multi-task
while listening to an audio stream of archived or real-time data. Sonification
offers audio icons to visually impaired users and provides an alternative
learning mode for diverse learners. It is an efficacious tool for trend analysis
and anomaly detection for diverse industries, such as health, medicine, finance,
defense, aviation, manufacturing, security, including homeland and home security
fields, and other endeavors requiring analysis of big data.

This I-Corps project was born from an Antarctic Artists and Writers Program
award from NSF's Office of Polar Programs. It represents the fusion of artistic
and scientific expertise toward the development of a new data analysis tool.
This project combines both automated sonification of data with customized
interpretation that responds to a variety of aesthetic and ethnic sensibilities.
Audio backgrounds can be customized based upon diverse music styles, including
but not limited to, jazz, calypso, classical, rock. Elements of customization
happen outside of the algorithm. The algorithm produces a melody of notes coming
from a data feed. User customizations provide an appropriate customized rhythm
track as well as a chord progression or program that would harmonize with the
melody produced. Information overload lowers employee productivity, according to
Harvard Business Review (Hemp 2009). Given this overload and data analysis needs
in many markets, this product could be launched in diverse markets, including
financial trading, intensive care medicine, factory process control, air traffic
control, security monitoring, soldier awareness, and markets with unmanageable
flows of critical real time data with resulting data comprehension and response
time errors.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.