* 1834686
* A High Order Discontinuous Galerkin Multi-Scale Approach for Kinetic-Hydrodynamic Simulations
* MPS,DMS
* 01/16/2018,08/31/2019
* Jing-Mei Qiu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 137,612.00

This research project will develop novel numerical methods for simulation of the
dynamics of rarefied gas. Compared with the widely used Monte Carlo approach,
the algorithm under development will be able to more accurately capture
complicated solution structures in long-time simulations. Moreover, physically
conserved quantities such as mass, momentum, and energy can be exactly preserved
at the discrete level. The new algorithm also has the potential to be extended
to a broader class of applications such as plasma physics, astrophysics, and
semi-conductor device simulation. Students will be trained through involvement
in the research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a
very high order mesh-based multi-scale numerical approach to modeling rarified
gas dynamics between the kinetic and hydrodynamic regimes. The approach is based
on the so-called micro-macro formulation of the kinetic equation, which involves
a natural decomposition of the problem into equilibrium and non-equilibrium
parts. The high order spatial accuracy is achieved by a nodal discontinuous
Galerkin (DG) finite element approach, and the high order temporal accuracy is
achieved by globally stiffly accurate implicit-explicit Runge-Kutta methods. Due
to deliberate design and considerations of the hydrodynamic asymptotics, the
scheme under development becomes a DG method with explicit RK time
discretizations for the Euler system in the zero limit of the Knudsen number,
and a local DG discretization of the Navier-Stokes equations for a simplified
BGK collision operator in a formal asymptotic analysis. Such a local DG method
is similar in spirit to classical approaches based on a mixed formulation of the
equations. The new scheme will be tested on problems at kinetic-hydrodynamic
scales and compared with the results from the simplified BGK model, its
ellipsoidal statistical (ES-BGK) extension, as well as with results from the
macroscopic hydrodynamic models. The project will also study numerically the
boundary layer for kinetic simulations when a diffusive hydrodynamic limit is
considered.