* 1834522
* Collaborative Research: NSF INCLUDES Alliance: National Alliance for Inclusive  and Diverse STEM Faculty (NAIDSF)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Mathieu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Cooperative Agreement
* Christopher Atchison
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,465,697.00

The National Alliance for Inclusive and Diverse STEM Faculty (NAIDSF) is an NSF
INCLUDES Alliance which intends to increase the learning, persistence, and
completion of students from underrepresented groups (URG) in STEM throughout
postsecondary education, and thereby increase their contributions to the U.S.
STEM enterprise. Broadening participation in the STEM workforce will bring
diverse perspectives, improving our nation's ability to solve complex social
challenges, and expanding the technological and innovation-based economy. The
Alliance's overarching strategy is to improve professional development and
hiring practices of STEM faculty across three interactive change strategies at
institutional, regional, and national levels. To facilitate Institutional
Change, NAIDSF will help institutions examine their practices for recruiting,
hiring, and retaining URG faculty; enhance faculty inclusive practices; develop
action plans to increase diversity among STEM faculty; provide resources to help
implement needed reforms; and provide training for the next generation of
diverse institutional leaders. Recognizing that career pathways for faculty at
2-year colleges often occur within regional ecosystems, NAIDSF's Regional Change
initiative will build Regional Collaboratives of 2-year colleges, 4-year
regional universities, local research universities, and the private sector--all
collectively developing and onboarding more faculty who are skilled in teaching
diverse student populations and increasing the number of diverse faculty in the
2-year colleges where many URG students begin higher education. NAIDSF will seek
National Change by partnering with disciplinary, URG-focused, and professional
development organizations to align faculty disciplinary experiences with their
institutional experiences that are fostered through the Alliance's Institutional
and Regional Change initiatives. Together, these efforts will create and advance
national systemic change for STEM faculty, STEM departments, disciplinary
societies, and institutional leadership.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anchored by the
Association of Public and Land-grant Universities (APLU) and the Center for the
Integration of Research, Teaching, and Learning (CIRTL), over 50 universities,
three regional collaboratives (Iowa, California, and Texas), and more than 35
cross-sector partners have already committed to collectively achieving the
Alliance goals. Using collective impact to work across sectors (diverse
institutional types and disciplinary societies) as well as across systems
(institutional leaders, departments, faculty, and professional development
systems), the Alliance aims to enhance the use of inclusive practices to
increase the diversity of the national STEM faculty at the institutional,
regional, and national levels. Goals will be evaluated through a comprehensive
plan providing both formative and summative assessments within the change
streams and across the Alliance. A set of common metrics will be used to align
activities and foci across the Alliance. NAIDSF includes both research and
evaluation teams assessing the Alliance's theories of change, immediate impacts,
and feeding back on collaborative processes. Integrating CIRTL's success in
shared leadership decision-making and APLU's engagement with multiple groups of
institutional leaders, the leadership team will develop and share Alliance
policies, coordinate activities across workstreams, and engage with leaders of
partnering and related efforts. Connecting the entire project, the Alliance
backbone will coordinate and integrate activities and provide a multifaceted
communications structure. Alliance programming is designed to be modular,
portable, and adaptable, making it both accessible and sustainable at both
institutions and disciplinary groups that vary in size, resources, and
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance is co-funded by the
NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program,
which targets increasing the number of historically underrepresented minority
faculty in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.