* 1834323
* EAGER: Toward a General Framework for Optimal Experimentation in Computational Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Woojae Kim, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,794.00

Cognitive science aims to gain detailed insight into the underlying mechanisms
of cognitive tasks. To achieve this, researchers change factors affecting a task
in an experiment and observe responses. One way to learn from such an experiment
is to build and test a computational model of stimulus-response relationships.
However, the level of detail with which a model describes a task requires as
much detail in supporting data. As observations from experiments are often
expensive (e.g., child subject), this is a rather significant barrier. The
method of optimal experiments can be a solution. It can optimize the selection
of stimuli to maximize inference from responses. Nonetheless, the difficulty in
applying the method to each new experiment has been a stumbling block. This
project proposes to lay the foundation for a general framework for optimal
experiments. The goal is to make it applicable to a wide range of modeling
problems in cognitive science. This will help cognitive scientists to develop
quantitative accounts of cognitive tasks effectively. Further, the method has
the potential to accelerate scientific discovery broadly in social and
behavioral research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conducting cognitive science
experiments guided by optimal interaction with subjects toward a clear,
quantified inference goal is a powerful idea. Such a method is particularly
enticing for behavioral experiments in which the amount of noise in response is
so great as to require many repeated measurements. Despite its groundbreaking
potential for cognitive modeling research, the method of optimal experimentation
is out of reach for most researchers in the field. The formidable task of
implementing it for each unique experimental paradigm has been an obstacle to
the realization of the methodology's promising power. The project focuses on
establishing the technical feasibility of optimal experiments in arbitrary
cognitive modeling contexts. The proposed research will define the need for the
methodology in the field clearly, identify suitable computational strategies,
and test alternative algorithms in simulation studies. The performance of
algorithms under consideration will be evaluated on a testbed of modeling
paradigms whose successful treatment would transfer to a wide range of similar
problems. The project aims to create a tangible blueprint for a general-purpose
methodology for optimal experimentation in computational
cognition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.