* 1834251
* Collaborative Research: Reliable Materials Simulation based on the Knowledgebase of Interatomic Models (KIM)
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2024
* USD 3,048,363.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports OpenKIM, a
cyberinfrastructure component of the research community that uses computer
simulations of atoms based on Newton's Laws and models for the interaction
between atoms, to attack problems in materials science, engineering, and
physics, and to enable the discovery of new materials, design new devices, to
advance the understanding of materials-related phenomena, and much more. Recent
years have seen significant advancement in the areas of materials knowledge,
discovery, and manufacturing methodologies. This includes, for example, the
development of graphene (a single atomic layer of carbon atoms, which has
exceptional mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties) and the related
class of two-dimensional materials with unprecedented material properties now
being extensively studied by scientists and engineers. Another example is the
advent of three-dimensional printing techniques that allow engineers to design
new materials from the ground up that can be tailor-made for their specific
application. Computer simulation of materials at the atomic-scale is one of the
key enabling technologies driving the current materials revolution. Although the
most accurate atomic-scale simulations employ the equations of quantum
mechanics, such computations take so long to complete, even on today's powerful
computers, that practically they are limited to a few thousands of atoms. This
is simply not enough for the study of materials properties, which requires the
simulation of interactions between millions and even billions of atoms. Thus,
materials researchers rely on faster more approximate equations, known as
interatomic models (IMs), to describe atomic interactions. These models are
fast, but typically they are only accurate for a restricted range of material
properties. This limited range of applicability necessitates the creation of
many IMs, even for a single material such as silicon. Organizing, sharing, and
evaluating the range of applicability of these IMs has been a long-standing
challenge for the materials research community. In most cases researchers have
no way of knowing which IM is suitable for their particular application.
Further, the proliferation of IMs, often designed to work only with specific
simulation programs, makes it difficult to share and exchange IMs, and to
reproduce other researchers' work, which is how science evolves and self
corrects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Knowledgebase of Interatomic Models (KIM) is
a project that is working to solve these challenges. To date, the KIM project
has developed an online framework at https://openkim.org to address the issues
of IM provenance, selection, and portability. IMs archived on this website are
exhaustively tested and can be used in plug-and-play fashion in a variety of
major simulation codes that conform to a standard developed as part of the KIM
project. The development activity of the current project will extend the KIM
framework by broadening the number and types of supported IMs, and will add new
capabilities and educational resources that will make it easy for researchers to
integrate the IMs and materials data available on openkim.org into their daily
research workflow. Further, emerging techniques in information topology and
machine learning will be applied to study and quantify the inherent uncertainty
in predictions made by IMs, and to assist materials researchers to select the
best IM for their application. Together the development, educational, and
research activities of this project are expected to significantly increase the
userbase and broader impact of the KIM project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
OpenKIM, a community Knowledgebase of Interatomic Models (KIM) for simulation.
KIM is a project for normalizing the use of IMs in molecular simulations of
materials. An IM, often referred to as a "potential" or "force field," is an
approximate method for computing the energy and its derivatives for an atomic
configuration. This project addresses both traditional "physics-based" IMs and
the new class of "data-driven" IMs introduced in recent years. In a sustained
effort, the KIM project has developed a systematic framework to address the IM
provenance, selection, and portability problems faced by materials researchers.
Before KIM, these challenges were the cause of significant inefficiencies and
inaccuracies in the research pipeline. Today, an IM available on openkim.org is
subjected to a rigorous set of "Verification Checks" that aim to ensure that its
implementation conforms to a high software-engineering standard, and to an
extensive set of "Tests," each of which computes a well-defined material
property for assessing the IM's accuracy. A researcher can come to openkim.org
and explore the predictions of KIM Models in comparison with experimental or
quantum "Reference Data" to select a suitable IM for their application. The
current project is aimed at extending KIM to become an integral component of the
workflow of researchers engaged in molecular simulation to make their work more
efficient and their results more reliable and reproducible. To achieve this
vision, the Principal Investigators (PIs) will pursue the following program of
cyberinfrastructure R&amp;D and basic research related to IM usage and science.
The cyberinfrastructure R&amp;D will include extensions to KIM standards to
support additional common IM features (such as long-range fields) and added
support for IMs having cutting-edge features that cannot yet be standardized.
Further, KIM will be integrated into existing simulation tools so that
researchers may query and retrieve data archived on openkim.org as part of their
daily workflow. This approach reduces errors, ensures reproducibility, uses a
standard tested method (embodied in a KIM Test) to obtain the desired property,
and firmly integrates the KIM framework into the workflow of computational
materials researchers. The basic research component of the project includes
three research thrusts requiring advances to enhance the reliability of
molecular simulations: (1) IM Uncertainty: The PIs will use ideas from
information topology and differential geometry to automatically generate IM
ensembles for obtaining estimates of the inherent uncertainty of the IM. (2) IM
Transferability: The PIs plan to adapt a multi-task machine learning approach to
predict an IM's accuracy for different applications. This will lead to a
rigorous, objective criterion to assist researchers with IM selection. (3) IM
Heuristics: By mining IM predictions and Reference Data archived on openkim.org,
it is possible to identify correlations similar to empirical heuristics such as
Vegard's rule and connections between microscopic properties and macroscopic
features. Detection of such heuristics will provide insights into the
limitations of IMs, help design optimal training sets, and lead to better
understanding of the properties of IMs generally. In terms of broader impacts,
the scope of the KIM project is unusually large - far beyond materials science -
due to the prevalence of molecular simulations across the physical sciences from
microbiology to geology. The project aims to maximize its impact by (1)
expanding the KIM user base, (2) engaging the materials research community
directly and through targeted research and educational efforts, and (3)
developing new relationships and collaborations with other materials modeling
cyberinfrastructures and organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation Division in the Engineering Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.