* 1834930
* Collaborative Research: Measurement of Copper Speciation in Basaltic Glasses using X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy, a New Window on Metal Solubility and Transport in Magmatic Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Antonio Lanzirotti, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 11/30/2022
* USD 87,093.00

The solubility of metals such as copper (Cu) in silicate melts can be strongly
influenced by natural properties of the magma such as pressure, temperature, and
melt composition. Understanding how such things control metal solubility,
particularly for Cu, is important for a number of reasons. It helps researchers
understand potential driving mechanisms for core formation in terrestrial
planets, or the conditions that lead to the formation of economically important
metallogenic ore deposits. It's also key to understanding how volcanic degassing
may impact metal emissions to the atmosphere. This study proposes to use
synchrotron-based X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) spectroscopy of natural
and synthetic magmatic glasses with the goal of providing the first direct,
experimental constraints on the speciation of Cu in terrestrial melts. XAFS is
currently the only methodology available for directly measuring Cu speciation in
magmatic glasses at natural concentrations with high spatial resolution. In
addition to the scientific goal of constraining which Cu species exist in melts,
this work will broaden the participation of minority students in geoscience, and
train students in state-of-the-art experimental and analytical
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be achieved through three overlapping
projects. Project 1 will include copper speciation measurements of synthetic
basaltic glasses that are produced at controlled sulfur and oxygen conditions.
This suite of synthetic glasses will have both oxygen and sulfur fugacity
carefully controlled and will then be analyzed for changes in Cu speciation
using XAFS. Project 2 includes Cu speciation measurements of natural glasses
sampled from volcanic systems. This project targets natural samples from a
sulfide-dominated system with H2O-poor melts (using samples collected from the
Kilauea summit vent between 2008 and present), samples from a sulfide-dominated
system with higher-H2O melts (from a basaltic cinder cone in the southern
Cascade Range), and from sulfate dominated volcanics from both the southern
Cascades Range and the Colima Graben in western Mexico. Project 3 will focus on
developing advanced, synchrotron-based spectroscopic techniques for Cu K-edge
XAFS of magmatic glasses, which will be applied to samples available from
Projects 1 and 2, with a focus on developing High Energy-Resolution Fluorescence
Detected XAFS (HERFD-XAFS) techniques for the analysis of Cu in geologic
materials and magmatic glasses specifically. Such new HERFD-XAFS techniques hold
the promise of providing superior spectroscopic sensitivity and resolution
compared to conventional XAFS methods for uniquely constraining the copper
ligands are present in these samples. These proposed measurements will be the
first application of these methods to magmatic glasses and will establish a new
database of spectroscopic measurements that will be available to the petrology
community. Together, this suite of studies will significantly contribute to our
understanding of metal solubility and transport in magmatic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.