* 1834769
* Supplemental Instruction with Mindset Training in STEM Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Elizabeth Rellinger Zettler, Illinois College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 298,548.00

To improve student persistence in STEM majors, this project at Illinois College
will adapt, implement, and enhance a model of supplemental instruction that was
designed at California State Fullerton (NSF Award 1432829). The enhanced
supplemental instruction model will include training to help students develop a
growth mindset, which includes the perspective that effort can overcome academic
difficulties. Advanced undergraduate students will be trained as supplemental
instruction leaders and will work under faculty mentors to lead mindset training
activities in science and math classes. It is expected that mindset training
will help students develop learning skills that they can transfer from
introductory to advanced courses, thereby increasing their academic confidence
and success. If successful in achieving its goals, this project's combination of
supplemental instruction and mindset training may be applicable to any
undergraduate STEM course. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
determine whether the integration of peer supplemental instruction with mindset
training activities (derived from research on student growth mindset, non-
cognitive skills, and "grit") will improve learning outcomes and persistence of
students in undergraduate STEM courses. The supplemental instruction activities
will complement classroom and laboratory activities in both gateway and upper-
level courses. The project goals are to increase students' awareness of their
learning experiences and to help them embrace the inherent challenge of
learning, which is expected to translate improved learning outcomes for students
and for supplemental instruction student leaders. Project objectives include:
(1) determining the effectiveness of a supplemental instruction model for STEM
courses that integrates Enhanced Mindset Instruction; (2) developing
metacognition, self-efficacy, and growth mindset of supplemental instruction
student leaders' so they can facilitate STEM students' persistence to STEM
degree completion; and (3) developing metacognition, self-efficacy, and growth
mindset of STEM students, to increase their persistence to STEM degree
completion. Results of project assessment and evaluation will add to the body of
knowledge about effective practices for student learning, especially in STEM
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.