* 1834264
* IRCN:  Coordinating research on bark beetle - fungal interactions in South Africa and the U.S.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jiri Hulcr, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 496,555.00

Forests and tree industries around the world are increasingly threatened by
invasive pests and diseases, such as wood boring bark beetles and their
associated fungi. A better understanding of the mutually beneficial -- or
symbiotic -- relationship between bark beetles and fungi is critical for the
long-term health and sustainability of global forests. Currently, however, bark
beetle-fungal symbioses are poorly understood resulting in a limited number of
strategies to control both the spread and impact of bark beetles in forests
worldwide. This International Research Coordination Network (IRCN) project, co-
funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) and South African National
Research Foundation (NRF), will coordinate the research activities of forest
pathologists, entomologists and mycologists throughout South Africa and the U.S.
-- two of the world's most productive forest health research communities. The
IRCN will connect 14 institutions, represented by 22 individual researchers, to
critically assess how bark beetles and their fungal associates are currently
studied and how this research could be improved. U.S. and South African
undergraduates and graduate students will be trained broadly as part of a
laboratory exchange program to enhance research coordination between the two
countries. More than half of the project participants are under-represented in
science, including females, minorities, and early-career scientists. Natural
resource managers and the public will be engaged to help formulate better
management strategies based on newly synthesized data among the network members,
and information on bark beetle - fungal symbioses will be disseminated broadly
via online videos and other media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S. - South
African IRCN project aims to re-evaluate, invigorate and coordinate research on
bark beetle - fungus symbioses. Specific aims of the Network include adoption of
new data standards to improve mobility of vector-fungus association data, and
enhanced sharing of databases among established repositories to facilitate
synthesis of diverse bark beetle and fungal data. Exchanges among participating
laboratories will facilitate the introduction of new technologies across the
Research Network and help reconcile conflicting bark beetle - fungal symbiosis
paradigms. The Network will also maintain a publicly available social media
portal discussing research on bark beetle/fungal symbioses and publish a
synthesis for the global community of researchers studying
symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.