* 1834186
* Weaving Professional Skill Development and Workplace Psychology Training into Undergraduate STEM Curricula to Increase Success in College and the Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Steve Alas, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2024
* USD 998,205.00

This project focuses on increasing retention, graduation, and career success of
high achieving, low income STEM undergraduates with demonstrated financial need.
Throughout its five years, the project will fund 125 fellowships in five groups
of 25 students to support attainment of bachelor's degrees in Biological
Sciences, Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry, Computer Science, Geological Sciences,
Mathematics &amp; Statistics, or Physics &amp; Astronomy. The curricula of these
STEM majors are designed to provide a strong background in the principles of
discovery and analytical thinking, as well as extensive knowledge of a STEM
field. Although this knowledge and skills are essential to success in the STEM
workforce, they are not enough. To address this issue, the project plans to
develop strong STEM leaders by weaving professional skills development, with
workplace psychology and equity training, into the STEM curriculum. The region
is experiencing rapid high-tech industrial growth. In addition, individuals from
groups that have been historically under-represented in the STEM fields will
soon represent most of the population. Consequently, this project has the
potential to serve as a pipeline of workforce-ready graduates into the region's
STEM workforce, including biotechnology, computer science, and engineering
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three objectives: (1) promote
the engagement and retention of low socio-economic scholars in the sciences
through the award of scholarships; (2) integrate sector-specific career skills
into the training of scholars with an eye toward exceeding workplace
expectations in industry and academia on completion of their BS degrees; and (3)
minimize attrition of students within the STEM workforce by incorporating
workplace psychology workshops that teach individuals how to navigate less
hospitable work environments and establish an equitable workplace. Qualified
students of all backgrounds will be eligible for scholarship support, with
expanded efforts to recruit and support under-represented minorities, women in
science, and first-generation scholars. The activities and resources created by
the training program will be available to all STEM undergraduate and graduate
students across the university. This Design and Development project is funded by
the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented
students with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It
also aims to improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and
technicians, and to generate knowledge about academic success, retention,
transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.