* 1834465
* Leveraging Virtual Reality to Connect Learning and Integrate Course Knowledge in the Industrial Engineering Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Omar Ashour, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,788.00

Integrated engineering curricula are intended to help students build stronger
links across different courses in an engineering program, thereby improving
student ability to transfer knowledge between courses. Motivations for offering
integrated engineering curricula include improving the ability of first year
students to make connections between mathematics and science courses and future
courses in engineering, as well as improving student retention in the first and
second years. Virtual Reality (VR) is a powerful, immersive interactive
computer-generated experience that is fast gaining popularity. The goal of this
project is to leverage VR technology to connect concepts taught in different
courses across the Industrial Engineering curriculum. Expected outcomes include
improving knowledge transfer and retention in Industrial Engineering, furthering
the national goal of training more scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant curriculum integration will be achieved by
using holistic VR-based learning modules to facilitate the transfer of
knowledge. Modules will be designed to help students understand the inter-
relationships between core engineering concepts within the curriculum and the
relationships between what they learn in the classroom and real-life
applications. The impact of VR-based integrative learning experiences on
engineering student learning, motivation, and engineering identity will be
examined. The curricular materials that are developed will be freely available
and will be disseminated to the engineering education community through
workshops and publications. Based on emerging educational research results, the
use of VR systems may be particularly effective for women and could contribute
to diversifying the engineering field by reducing the gender gap in engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.