* 1834772
* Support for a Symposium Honoring Isaac Held's Contributions to Atmospheric and Climate Dynamics; Princeton, New Jersey; October 29-31, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Stephan Fueglistaler, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 09/30/2019
* USD 35,000.00

Dr. Issac Held has been a leader in the field of climate dynamics for over three
decades, and has made fundamental and original contributions to the study of the
dynamics of Earth's climate, ranging from theory of the atmospheric circulation,
planetary wave dynamics, climate sensitivities, and geophysical turbulence to
leadership in the developing the current generation of climate models. His
advocacy and practice of hierarchical modeling, spanning the gap between
theories and computationally intensive simulations, and using insights from
theoretical atmospheric dynamics to understand the forces maintaining the
current climate and at work under climate change have inspired many across the
fields of atmospheric dynamics and climate dynamics. The three-day symposium, to
be held at Princeton University on Monday, October 29 through Wednesday, October
31, 2018, aims to foster cross-disciplinary scientific exchange at the interface
of the fields of atmospheric dynamics and climate dynamics and provide forward-
looking perspectives and new directions in the areas to which Dr. Held has
contributed greatly. The science-focused symposium consists of a series of
invited presentations focusing on 5 research topics that bring in mind the
approaches championed by Isaac Held: Theory of the atmospheric circulation,
Teleconnections, Dynamical insights on climate change, Geophysical turbulence,
and Tropical dynamics. The symposium will provide an opportunity to bring
undergraduate/graduate students, early career scientists, and established
researchers/educators from across these areas together in
dialogue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds provided through this grant will
be used to cover the travel costs of students, postdocs, and early-career
researchers. Travel funds will be advertised to the community and made available
through a competitive process. The invited presentation will be made available
to the community through the meeting website, which helps make the material
rapidly accessible to the research community worldwide. The contribution to the
science and to education will come through personal exchanges at the meeting and
through the educational emphasis on involvement of students. Using the role
model of an influential researcher, such as Dr. Held, provides inspiring
insights into themes and approaches that help the new generation tackle complex
challenges of hierarchical and earth system modelling for advancing weather and
climate dynamics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.