* 1834851
* Research Data: Activities of the U.S. National Committee for CODATA
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 99,725.00

The mission of the United States National Committee on Data for Science and
Technology (U.S. CODATA) is to improve the stewardship, policy, and use of
digital data and information for science and the broader society. U.S. CODATA
engages in planning, program development, and administrative oversight of
projects launched under its auspices, and is responsible for a program of
activities at the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
related to research data and information. This proposal supports U.S. CODATA
activities and one major CODATA meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The digital
revolution has created new opportunities in the management and use of all types
of research and other data and information. Most areas of scientific research
are currently data-driven and this has produced a broad range of quantitative
and qualitative improvements in the research enterprise and in the communication
of research results. While the technical systems in the digitally networked
environment are progressing rapidly, they have also been a disruptive force in
traditional way of scientific communication and impact evaluation. New models of
scholarly exchange and knowledge production are quickly emerging, but they
sufficiently established or understood, and their adoption depends on many
social and scientific factors. Old endemic problems such as quality assurance,
metadata and citation protocols, long-term digital preservation, reputation and
reward systems, scientific integrity, and assessment methodologies for research
data and information activities need to be addressed, especially in light of new
digital knowledge technologies and applications. U.S. CODATA acts through the
National Academy of Sciences, the adhering body to the International Council for
Science and its CODATA commission, representing the U.S. data community and
coordinating with CODATA's international activities. It will enable US
participation in the international CODATA and conduct a meeting of U.S. CODATA
to identify an agenda of activities within its mission to advance data
management challenges in the United States; serve as a neutral convener to
encourage and facilitate collaboration across disciplines and sectors on common
interests in research data and information activities; and monitor and
contribute to the development of U.S. government and research community
positions on these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.