* 1834305
* Travel Support:  XI Iberoamerican Conference on Phase Equilibria and Fluid Properties for Process Design, Equifase 2018
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Walter Chapman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2019
* USD 30,000.00

New thermodynamic data and models are essential for optimizing the performance
of conventional chemical processes and for developing new energy efficient and
environmentally sustainable ones. Furthermore, thermodynamic data and models are
central to scientific advances in designing and manufacturing advanced
materials. This grant will provide partial support for US-based junior faculty
and young researchers from diverse backgrounds to attend the XI Iberoamerican
Conference on Phase Equilibria for Process Design (EQUIFASE 2018). The
conference will be held from October 22 - 25, 2018 in the city of Carlos Paz, in
the province of Cordoba, Argentina. The goal of this international conference is
to identify new opportunities in research and education and to promote
international collaboration related to basic data for chemical process design
and optimization. The conference is unique in the wide participation of
researchers and students from South American countries, providing the only
meeting that brings much of this community together with researchers from the
international community.

EQUIFASE 2018 will focus on improved thermodynamic data and advanced
computational models to enable optimal design of processes related to energy
conversion and storage, chemical processing, materials fabrication, to maximize
energy efficiency and environmental sustainability. Intellectual merits of the
conference include: (1) Identification of key challenges in conventional process
industries and in new areas of process intensification related to processing of
energy, chemicals, pharmaceuticals, and bio-chemicals. (2) Development of a
roadmap to address these challenges by promoting collaboration that integrates
methods of experimental design, molecular modeling and computation, and modern
approaches of machine learning. Education will be a key topic of the conference
with focus on international collaborations in distance learning and open
courses. The young conference participants, many from underrepresented groups in
STEM, will benefit from state-of-the-art reviews and presentations by leading
experts, by exchanging the latest advances on frontier research subjects
relating to molecular thermodynamics and chemical processes, and by debating
controversial points with their peers. The conference will also provide an
excellent opportunity for interaction and cooperation among academic and
industrial researchers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.