* 1834083
* CIS Cyber Scholars Program
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Frederick Kohun, Robert Morris University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 01/31/2024
* USD 998,060.00

This five-year project will support the success of thirty low-income, high-
achieving community college transfer students with demonstrated financial need
at Robert Morris University (RMU), a private, suburban university. Achieving
this goal will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. The project will provide
scholarships to transfer students from rural community colleges who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in Computer and Information Systems, Cyber-Forensics and
Information Security, and Data Analytics. Low-income transfer students who are
underrepresented in the computing fields such as females, residents of rural
southwestern Pennsylvania, minorities, and first-generation college students
will receive two-year scholarships for their third and fourth year of study. The
project aims to recruit, retain, graduate, and place these students in STEM
careers in the Pittsburgh region or graduate schools nationwide by implementing
and studying directed support strategies. These strategies include a new
orientation course for STEM transfer students, a project-based faculty-student
mentorship program, service learning opportunities, active learning education,
and career development and placement activities. These recruitment and retention
strategies developed through the program will yield a demonstrated pathway for
other four-year institutions to engage community college students and will
increase RMU's institutional capacity to help all students enter the local STEM
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to increase
the success rates of low-income, academically-talented students with
demonstrated financial need in STEM majors as well as placement of such students
in STEM graduate-school programs and the STEM workforce. Strategies to
strengthen community college transfer students' pathways to undergraduate
success have been rigorously investigated in both STEM and non-STEM fields but
have yielded mixed results about how to deploy four-year colleges' resources
most effectively to support these undergraduates. This project will contribute
to the knowledge base of effective practices for community college transfer
students' STEM success by 1) studying the effectiveness of the IntegrateRMU
transfer experience course on the transition experience of transfer students
into a four-year university, and 2) investigating the barriers to transfer
student retention, undergraduate educational goals, and STEM career aspirations.
This project has the potential to advance understanding of the role that engaged
learning and directed support efforts play in retaining and placing
underrepresented students in the STEM workforce. It will also contribute to the
literature on the success of transfer students from rural community colleges in
the STEM fields. This project is funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income academically talented students with demonstrated financial
need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of
future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.