* 1834159
* Computers in Science and Math Undergraduate Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Margaret Stevenson, University of Evansville
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,074,838.00

The ability to extract knowledge and insights from large datasets is
increasingly important in science and the workforce. This project intends to
address this need by educating scientists and mathematicians with computational
skills needed to use large datasets to solve complex problems. Over five years,
this project will provide four-year scholarships to fifteen low-income, high-
achieving STEM undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need. The
selected Scholars will be majors in biochemistry, biology, chemistry,
environmental science, mathematics, physics, or statistics and data science. The
project will develop four new courses to help students develop strong
computational thinking and data visualization skills. Three new courses will
introduce students early in their college career to interesting scientific
problems that require analysis of complex data. A fourth new course will pair
local businesses or non-profit clients with teams of third-year students and
their faculty mentors. The teams will work to solve a client problem that
requires computational approaches. Although only some students will receive
scholarships, all math and science majors will have access to the new courses
and support activities, including a career colloquium, undergraduate research,
and a new Math and Science Problem Solving Lab. This access broadens the
potential impact of this work to all STEM undergraduates at the University of
Evansville. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research goal is to assess the
impact of an interdisciplinary, computation-focused learning community on low-
income students. Data will be collected from formative and summative assessments
of Scholars' academic performance, retention in STEM, and progression to STEM
careers. This assessment will use an embedded, mixed-methods study design to
understand participant views throughout their college years. The summative data
from Scholars will be compared to that of non-participating STEM majors. This
analysis will contribute to understanding how participation in a combination of
activities including career events, undergraduate research, and computational
problem-solving affect students' career goals and self-efficacy. This project is
funded by NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the number of low-income,
academically high-achieving students with demonstrated financial need who earn
degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the education of future
scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate knowledge about academic
success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways of low-
income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.