* 1834523
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Defending against Compromise and Manipulation of Mobile Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2017,09/30/2020
* Ben Zhao, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 731,503.00

Many of today's mobile services build mobile communities of users who share
their valuable experiences and data. Examples include traffic incidents (Waze),
restaurant reviews (Yelp, FourSquare), anonymous social networks (Whisper, Yik
Yak), and even dating (Tinder, Bumble). Unfortunately, new threats can
compromise and manipulate these communities, using lightweight software to mimic
mobile devices. The resesarchers have shown how attackers can eavesdrop on
mobile network traffic, learn their patterns, and write software to emulate
mobile devices running the application. This amplifies existing attacks by
multiple orders of magnitude, and allows attackers with limited resources to
overwhelm mobile communities using millions of emulated devices under their
control. These devices are difficult to detect, and completely cripple entire
mobile systems, or manipulate them for the attacker's personal gain. Preliminary
work showed that such an attack on Waze, Google's crowdsourced traffic
navigation application, enabled fine grained GPS-level tracking of large user
populations. Similar vulnerabilities apply to Yelp, Tinder, Uber, and others,
with consequences ranging from manipulating/censoring content, theft of monetary
incentives, to completely crippling the service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
described in this proposal seeks a better understanding of the threat of
software-emulated devices to mobile communities, and explores systematic
defenses against them. The researchers will develop defenses that detect large-
scale attacks and limit their impact to that of single misbehaving devices,
using three orthogonal approaches: a) a centralized infrastructure-based
solution, that uses hidden patterns in aggregate user data to authenticate
mobile devices; b) hardware solutions that extracts device-specific sensor data
using platform APIs, and compares them to known models of hardware data models;
and c) application-level solutions that use unsupervised learning to
automatically detect similarity clusters in devices, based on analysis of user
behavior (clickstreams) and physical mobility trace.