* 1834797
* EAGER: Early Career Training Cruise Opportunity - East Pacific Rise 9 50'N
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Patricia Gregg, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rose Dufour
* 06/30/2020
* USD 106,334.00

Part I The primary Early Career Training Cruise objective will involve hands-on
instruction in conducting deep-submergence vehicle-based field research,
fostering integrative, multidisciplinary science, and optimizing the use of ship
and vehicle technologies to maximize the scientific data collection and
potential for significant results from this type of research, and training in
communicating science via various social media outlets. All for early career
scientists including post-docs. The project is supporting the following two
broad objectives: (1) training and career development for the health and
vitality of marine research; and (2)increasing inclusion and diversity in marine
field science. The proposed program will provide many opportunities for
participants to learn not only the logistics of developing and conducting a sea-
going field expedition, but also have the opportunity to actively participate in
conducting research at sea with a diversity of collaborators that cover the
spectrum of volcanic, hydrothermal and biological phenomena at active mid-ocean
ridge eruption sites.

Part II A cruise involving R/V Atlantis, along with deep- sea exploration
vehicles Alvin and Sentry, has been funded and is planned for Dec. 3-20, 2018.
The objectives of the cruise are to conduct four Alvin and three Sentry AUV
dives at the 8? 20?N seamounts, west of the East Pacific Rise (EPR) axis near 8?
20?N (a continuation of the Gregg/Fornari/Perfit/Wanless NSF-OCE-MGG funded
research), and then to conduct four Alvin and four Sentry dives at the 9? 50?N
eruption area, which will be the focus of Early Chief Scientist (ECS) Training
that will involve 9-10 early career scientists (NSF-OCE-Facilities funded
EAGER). The ECS Training includes: (1) Pre-cruise training via teleconference
and webinars; (2) At-sea training which will include a synergic telepresence
into the Fall 2018 American Geophysical Union (AGU); (3) A Post-cruise Forum and
Outreach event in San Diego, CA on Dec. 22 that will invite local community
colleges and high schools; and (4) Follow-up and Assessment of the ECS program
and tracking of participant research in deep submergence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.