* 1834494
* RoL: FELS Conference: A Fading Cryosphere Shifting Temperature and Stoichiometry in Mountain Lakes and Streams: A US-China Cooperative Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Joel Harper, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 73,855.00

This project supports a workshop in April 2019 at the Flathead Lake Biological
Station (Montana) involving researchers from the United States of America and
China. The cryosphere is the frozen part of the Earth and involves glacier ice,
snowpack, and permafrost. Around the world, cryosphere melt is accelerating,
including in mountain regions. These changes are important because mountain
regions supply water to 40% of the world's population. However, in many
situations it is not well-understood how the changing cryosphere impacts aquatic
ecosystems such as lakes and rivers and the organisms that live in them.
Furthermore, research conducted in different countries is often not well-
integrated and data platforms for sharing of similar data are not well-
developed. This workshop will support a 5-day meeting of researchers from the
USA and China who are studying how the changing cryosphere affects aquatic
ecosystems in mountain regions. An emphasis will be on how underlying biological
similarities (Rules of Life) can help draw connections between regions and how
data platforms can be developed to maximize efficiency and effectiveness in
scientific investigations of these changes. This workshop will involve about 20
USA researchers at a broad range of career stages (graduate students to
professors) and a similar cohort of Chinese counterparts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mountain regions are experiencing rapid transitions in the
cryosphere, losing permanent snow and ice that buffer discharge, shape regional
environmental and habitat conditions, and provide diverse ecosystem services for
humanity. The ongoing changes in the cryosphere are widespread, complex, and
affect a variety of key parameters of alpine lakes and streams such as
temperature, transparency, discharge, and nutrient supply. Documenting,
understanding, and forecasting these impacts is challenging and requires broad
interdisciplinary collaborations. Building off of the success of a first
workshop held at Qinghai Lake in China in August 2017, a second workshop to be
held in the USA has two goals: 1. assessing how fundamental similarities in
biota (such as the temperature dependence of metabolism or the stoichiometric
signature of biomass) can help understand the impacts of cryosphere loss on
aquatic ecosystems and 2. establishing a framework for US/China joint data
centers, producing a database across multiple sites in both countries. This
workshop will foster international cooperation via collaboration across US and
Chinese researchers working on a common, pressing environmental issue in both
regions, establishing conceptual frameworks and building precedents for data
sharing and collaboration. The highly interdisciplinary nature of the
collaboration workshop will also provide important professional development
opportunities and training for participants of all career stages including
graduate students and postdocs. More information about the workshop can be found
at https://renzedyk.wixsite.com/us-china-workshop2&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.