* 1834041
* Providing Scholarship, Curricular, and Cocurricular Support to Increase Retention and Graduation of Residential and Commuter STEM Students
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ann Auman, Pacific Lutheran University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 07/31/2024
* USD 649,981.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project at
Pacific Lutheran University will support the success of 28 high-achieving
students with demonstrated financial need and academic promise. The project will
provide four-year scholarships to fourteen STEM students who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in biology, chemistry, computer science, geoscience,
mathematics, or physics. An additional fourteen students will participate in all
project activities and serve as alternates for scholarships should space become
available. This project will establish an evidence-based approach to support
lower income students inside and outside of the classroom. This support is
expected to increase the students' sense of belonging, as well as their
retention and graduation, whether they live on or commute to campus. In addition
to providing academic support structures and community-building opportunities,
this project will also provide participating students with individual and small
group mentoring by trained STEM faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to identify barriers to student success and to develop effective
interventions that will increase retention rates of students pursuing STEM
degrees, thus diversifying the STEM student population. To achieve these
objectives, the project will support students through: (1) curricular engagement
via linked courses that use evidence-based pedagogies; (2) community building
through collaboration in common spaces and social activities; and (3) meaningful
mentorship experiences. The project will systematically assess potential
barriers to student success to determine what barriers exist for individual
students with unique intersecting identities. It will measure the impact of
these barriers on students' sense of belonging and academic success, as measured
by retention and graduation rates. The project will use a mixed-methods approach
including both qualitative and quantitative approaches to measure the project's
impact on academic achievement and affective domains such as student motivation,
self-confidence, and sense of belonging, as well as the effectiveness of
mentoring and pedagogical practices. The results of this study should contribute
to understanding effective student support programs at small liberal arts
colleges, which may be relevant to other institutions of higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.