* 1834798
* Increasing Underrepresented Minorities in STEM: The 45th Annual National Organization of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE) Conference
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Emanuel Waddell, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 03/31/2019
* USD 70,847.00

This award is funded by the Special Projects Program of the Chemistry Division
of the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. The Principle
Investigator is Emanuel Waddell of the University of Alabama in Huntsville. This
activity supports the participation of 135 undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral students at the 45th Annual National Organization for
the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE)
conference, held Sept. 17 - 20, 2018 in Orlando, FL. Selected participants are
from underrepresented minority groups in the Science, Technology, Engineering
and Mathematics (STEM) fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
opportunities for participants to engage in four major areas of focus: 1)
technical and professional development; 2) networking and mentorship
opportunities with professionals working in STEM fields; 3) exposure to high-
profile minority role models in STEM; and 4) academic and professional STEM
career advancement opportunities. Student participants interact with peers and
professionals from industry, government, and academia to develop collaborations
and to explore opportunities to pursue graduate degrees in the chemistry or
chemical engineering disciplines. These opportunities may not only impact these
specific participating individuals, but also benefit the larger community of
STEM field practitioners as these activities are useful in recruiting and
retaining individuals from underrepresented talent pools. NOBCChE seeks to
increase the number of minorities in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.