* 1834701
* CAREER: SOlSTICe: Software Synthesis with Timing Contracts for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Qi Zhu, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 12/31/2023
* USD 490,065.00

This project aims to develop innovative design automation methodologies and
algorithms for software synthesis of cyber-physical systems (CPS), which have
applications in key sectors such as automotive, aerospace, healthcare, and
industrial automation. Software has become critical and drives future
innovations for many such systems, but faces significant challenges in its
development, in particular regarding the formulation, exploration and validation
of timing constraints. The results from this project will address critical
timing challenges in CPS software development, and lead to correct, predictable
and efficient software implementations. In addition to disseminating the results
through publications and workshops, the PI will collaborate with industry
partners on transitioning the research findings into practice. Leveraging the
research activities, the PI will develop an integrated education program that
focuses on the interdisciplinary education of K-12, undergraduate and graduate
students, through Lego Mindstorms labs development and contest organization, new
CPS course development, and textbook writing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop, a software synthesis framework that addresses the timing
challenges in CPS by quantitatively exploring timing constraints for multiple
conflicting design metrics and across multiple abstraction layers, and using
these timing constraints to drive the design space exploration. Developing the
framework includes three closely-related research themes: (1) formulating and
exploring timing contracts to co-design functionality and software architecture
with respect to various design metrics (e.g., performance, security,
schedulability) and to carry out hierarchical refinement across abstraction
layers, (2) exploring the generation of software tasks from functional models
and the mapping of those tasks onto hardware platforms with holistic timing
consideration throughout the synthesis process, and (3) co-simulating functional
and architectural models with explicit representation and evaluation of timing
contracts to complement the proposed analytical synthesis algorithms.