* 1834638
* Formation of Environmentally Persistent Free Radicals on Engineered Nanomaterials During Thermal Treatmen
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Jamie Lead, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 11/30/2023
* USD 380,611.00

Environmentally persistent free radicals, a new class of environmental
pollutants, are formed during the thermal treatment of wastes and hazardous
materials. Environmentally persistent free radicals are present at sufficiently
high levels in diverse environments such as atmospheric particulate matter.
Unlike previously identified atmospheric free radicals that exhibit lifetimes of
less than a second, environmentally persistent free radicals exist for hours to
months, lifetimes which are long enough for them to be transported over long
distances from their source. Despite pioneering studies on environmentally
persistent free radicals that have significantly improved our understanding of
their environmental and human health effects, fundamental questions remain
unanswered. This project will assess the impact of engineered nanomaterials on
the formation of environmentally persistent free radicals during thermal
treatment of wastes. Results will: 1) improve understanding of the interaction
of engineered nanomaterial in forming environmentally persistent free radicals
during thermal treatment of wastes; 2) improve understanding of the behavior,
fate, transformation of and human and environmental exposures to engineered
nanomaterials and environmentally persistent free radicals; and 3) support the
nanotechnology revolution by informing the development of disposal strategies
suitable for engineered nanomaterials. Results will assist in mitigating adverse
impacts of engineered nanomaterials and environmentally persistent free radicals
and will facilitate the development of potentially safer applications of
engineered nanomaterials that can lead to enhanced economic opportunities. In
addition, underrepresented students will be trained in science and engineering
topics through their participation in the research project. The project will
also involve the promotion of teaching and learning by integrating project
concepts, methods, and results in the development of new
curriculum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have simulated
experimentally the formation of environmentally persistent free radicals on
nano-sized transition metal oxides that are supported on surfaces of large
micron-sized particles. The prevailing thought on the formation of
environmentally persistent free radical assumes that the transition metal is a
key component, serving as the electron donor to an organic molecule. This view
explains environmentally persistent free radicals that are formed over some
transition metal oxides, but it is inconsistent with those formed over a zinc
oxide surface in which an electron transfers to the organic molecule instead.
Hence, the current mechanism cannot be generalized, and environmentally
persistent free radicals may form via other pathways. Answers to these questions
hinge on the hypothesis that since band gap energy for engineered nanomaterials
exhibits size-dependence and thermally excited electrons may cross this band gap
easily, some engineered nanomaterials, depending on size and electronic and
chemical properties, may form and stabilize aromatic organic species forming
environmentally persistent free radicals. Extending this hypothesis, engineered
nanomaterials, other than those composed of transition metals that survive
incineration, may form environmentally persistent free radicals. Experimental
studies will determine if: (1) engineered nanomaterials and engineered
nanomaterials, other than transition metals, can form and stabilize
environmentally persistent free radicals; (2) changes in the physicochemical
properties of engineered nanomaterials during thermal treatment impact
environmentally persistent free radicals formation; or (3) environmentally
persistent free radicals can form on engineered nanomaterials at temperatures
lower than those that occur during combustion. Experimental methods will use
these analytical techniques: electron paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy to
measure and characterize environmentally persistent free radicals; mass
spectroscopy to determine the nature of chemical species formed when persistent
free radicals recombine, and electron microscopy and other surface-sensitive
techniques to characterize changes in the nanomaterials. The results of this
study are expected to transform the current understanding on environmentally
persistent free radicals. First, if environmentally persistent free radicals can
form on non-metallic engineered nanomaterials, it will challenge the existing
thought that environmentally persistent free radicals form exclusively on
transition metal oxide nanoparticles. Second, if environmentally persistent free
radicals can form at a lower temperature on engineered nanomaterials, it
suggests that environmentally persistent free radicals can form easily and are
thus more prevalent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.