* 1834699
* Collaborative Research: Ecohydrological controls on evapotranspiration across a semiarid elevation gradient
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kiona Ogle, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 546,646.00

Limited access to water in dry regions poses unique challenges to managing water
resources. These challenges increase as human populations grow and climate
changes. Understanding the water cycle in these regions is important for
managing water resources and predicting how they will change as temperatures
continue to rise. In the western U.S., the climate is generally dry. The loss of
water from the land surface to the atmosphere is part of the water cycle
everywhere, but water losses are particularly important in dry ecosystems. There
are two major ways that the land loses water to the atmosphere: (1) direct
evaporation from soil and (2) through transpiration, the biological process by
which living plants move water through their tissues into the air. This affects
the amount of water left in the soil, which impacts drought severity. This can
also affect the amount of rain and/or snow that falls in the region. This team
aims to better understand the environmental drivers of evaporation and
transpiration to improve our ability to predict changes to the water cycle in
dry regions. Broader impacts of this research include two workshops that
introduce scientists and natural resource managers to modern methods for
analyzing the types of data collected in this project. Researchers will also
work with a local middle-school teacher to develop lesson plans related to the
water cycle in dry regions. They will create hands-on research experiences for
graduate and undergraduate students at both Northern Arizona University and
University of New Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will focus on water
losses in semiarid ecosystems on the Southwestern U.S. The work centers on the
partitioning of evapotranspiration (ET) into its components (evaporation and
transpiration). It will test three main hypotheses across six semiarid
ecosystems common to the region: (1) evaporation and transpiration dominate
evapotranspiration (ET) at different times of the growing season, and provide
insights into which processes are important at different times, (2) evaporation
and transpiration are sensitive to different combinations of environmental
drivers, and the temporal relationships between these components of ET and their
environmental drivers vary within and between ecosystems, and (3) past
environmental conditions are important for governing ET, especially the
transpiration component, and the importance of past conditions is amplified at
more arid sites. Partitioning ET into its evaporation and transpiration
components can be accomplished using various methods, but the different methods
can lead to conflicting results. Therefore, in each ecosystem, researchers will
take the innovative approach of using two to five methods to partition
evaporation and transpiration and then reconcile contradictory results using a
Bayesian statistical approach. They will rely on a combination of existing ET
and sap flow (a proxy for transpiration) measurements, new measurements of
isotopes in water in soil, stems, and the atmosphere, and modeling techniques to
partition ET, to identify important drivers, and to evaluate the timescales over
which these drivers control ET. These results will be incorporated into an
existing process-based model (SOILWAT) to evaluate their implications for
ecosystem level water budgets across the sites and to simulate the impact of
varying the environmental conditions on local water budgets. Graduate and
undergraduate students will take an active role in conducting field, lab, and
analytical work for this project. Further, the team will integrate the tools
developed through this project into workshops for scientists and natural-
resource managers. Finally, they will incorporate our improved understanding of
drivers of evapotranspiration into lesson plans for local middle school students
in Flagstaff, AZ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.