* 1834723
* Collaborative research: Taking the pulse of the Northwest Hawaiian Ridge: Implications for Flux Variations and mid-Cenozoic Pacific Plate Motions
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Brian Jicha, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2020
* USD 64,014.00

The evolution of the Hawaiian Islands and how and why magmatism on the Big
Island changes over time is important to understand both from a scientific and
practical point of view. The island of Hawaii is the most recent expression of a
chain of islands (the Hawaiian-Emperor Chain) related to a single upwelling in
the mantle (i.e. a mantle plume) that periodically punches up through the ocean
crust and erupts massive amounts of lava onto the seafloor and builds islands.
The Hawaiian-Emperor Chain is not only the classic example of a mantle plume, it
is also the hottest known. This plume has been active for 80 million years and
has formed a trail of volcanoes extending ~6000 km in length from Hawaii to the
northwestern reaches of the Pacific Ocean. Despite the importance of this chain,
not only to our understanding of the origin and evolution of mantle plumes but
also to how tectonic plates move across the face of the Earth over time, there
are still major gaps in our knowledge of the age progression of the eruptions
and chemical variations of the erupted lavas along the chain. This research
analyzes twenty newly-collected rock samples from eleven volcanoes along the
northwestern part of the Hawaiian-Emperor Chain. This work provides new age
dates using state-of-the-art argon-argon dating techniques and collects whole-
rock geochemistry on the lavas, as well as data on a suite of radiogenic
isotopes to determine mantle temperatures associated with the eruptions. These
data will be used to better understand the magmatic evolution of the Hawaiian
mantle plume and how its age progression better constrains Pacific Ocean basin
plate tectonics. Broader impacts of the work include student training and
providing biologists with better information about the biogeography and
radiation of native Hawaiian species across the ocean. Results of the research
work will be used to create a new interactive exhibit on the Hawaiian Islands
and the Hawaiian-Emperor Chain for the Bishop Museum in Honoloulu, in
collaboration with museum staff. This provides a major public outreach vehicle
for science as the Bishop Museum attracts hundreds of thousands of visitors a
year from the US and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Hawaiian-Emperor Chain is
the most well-defined mantle plume on the planet and is optimal for evaluating
mantle plume related processes and assessing their relationship to plate
tectonics and tectonic plate motion. This research uses 20 newly collected
samples from eleven volcanoes that were collected on an oceanographic expedition
characterizing the northwest region of the Hawaiian-Emperor Chain using remotely
operated vehicles in the new US Hawaiian Marine Monument. Information on the
geochemistry and mineralogical relationships of these samples will be generated
using a wide variety of observational and analytical techniques. In addition to
petrographic and mineralogical examination of the samples, whole rock
geochemical data will be collected, as will mass spectrometric data on the
composition and ratios of the radiogenic isotopes: lead, strontium, neodymium,
and hafnium. Olivine compositions will also be determined. The research will
compile and correct, to common standards, all published data from the northwest
part of this island chain and combine it with the new data to create a
comprehensive geochemical and age date database that can be used to test models
for this part of the chain's formation and evolution during the Cenozoic.
Results will be modeled using geochemical and geophysical approaches to provide
fundamental new insights into mantle plumes and plate kinematics. New
geochemical data will be used to determine the long-term evolution of the
Hawaiian mantle plume source components and to evaluate whether there have been
systematic variations in mantle temperature, melting pressure, and/or source
lithology over time. The new ages will be utilized to revise Cenozoic Pacific
plate motions and to compute differential motions as proxies for stress changes
along the island chain with time to evaluate the effects of plate motion on
magma flux rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.