* 1834300
* Toward Quantitative Understanding of Tropical Cyclone Intensification: A physically Based Dynamical System Model Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Yuqing Wang, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2024
* USD 400,750.00

Over the last few decades forecasts of the tracks of hurricanes, also referred
to as tropical cyclones (TCs), have improved steadily due to increased computer
power and better forecast models. And yet, there has been little advancement in
our ability to predict TC intensity. This is a particular concern for coastal
communities, as preparations for a landfalling hurricane depend as much on its
predicted intensity as they do on the track forecast. A key reason for the
limited advancement is that we lack a basic understanding of the processes that
control TC intensity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the intensity
question by developing a dynamical system model which captures essential
ingredients of intensity evolution. A novel feature of the model is a dynamical
efficiency parameter which governs energy conversion rates in the TC core, and
is determined by both internal TC processes and TC interactions with the large-
scale environment. Results from the research will help quantify contributions of
various factors to TC intensity change, and also provide a physically based
model for intensity prediction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader
impacts due to the societal value of work leading to improvements in intensity
predictions for landfalling TCs. The project also provides support and training
to a graduate student, and research results will be incorporated into the the
PI's classroom teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.