* 1834401
* Proposal in Support of the International Conference on Strength of Materials (ICSMA18)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Michael Mills, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Yang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 International Conference
on Strength of Materials (ICSMA18) is one in a series of the most highly
acclaimed topical conferences in the field of strength-of-materials. The focus
areas for ICSMA18 are promoting topics at the very forefront of the field of
mechanical behavior of materials. Held every three years, it provides a unique
forum for in-depth discussion of cutting-edge advances in the field and pathways
to the future. This is the third time in its 50-year history that it will be
held in the USA. There will also be two special symposia associated with the
conference on dislocation theory and plasticity. The organizers are emphasizing
the interaction between junior and senior researchers in order to take advantage
of the unique cross-section of attendees. A particular emphasis will be placed
on encouraging and supporting the attendance and participation of students,
post-doctoral associates and early career researchers. The ICSMA18 will be held
on July 14-18, 2018 at the Ohio State University campus in Columbus,
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technological development is paced by the creation and
putting into service of materials that are ever-more capable of withstanding
extreme conditions, such as high stress, temperature, radiation and long-term
service. The International Conference on the Strength of Materials (ICSMA) has a
50 year tradition as the pre-eminent, independent, international venue for
presentation of the latest advances in our understanding of the strength of
materials. Scientific topics provide comprehensive coverage of the field, from
basic concepts of deformation to advanced engineering materials, and across
composites, alloys, biomedical and bio-inspired materials, and emerging
materials. The meeting will advance fundamental understanding of the processes
that govern the strength of materials at different length and time scales, and
it will forge links between basic studies and investigations of technologically
important engineering materials. Presentations will concern developments in
state-of-the-art experimental techniques for evaluating material behavior and
microstructure, and complementary computational and modeling efforts aimed at
fundamental understanding of materials under these extreme conditions. The
program has been designed to highlight the gaps in our knowledge, some of the
more controversial recent developments, and unique new opportunities for
exploiting developments in synthesis, characterization, property measurement and
modeling for the creation of materials with enhanced performance and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.