* 1834818
* I-Corps: Development of synthetic speciation platform in mosquitoes for population replacement and genetic biocontrol
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Michael Smanski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the use of
precision genome editing, in conjunction with compute simulation techniques, to
impact local eradication of invasive species, agricultural pests, or disease-
transmitting organisms. These organisms pose serious challenges to human and
environmental health and cause billions of dollars in economic damages to the US
every year. Numerous approaches to control populations of pest organisms
currently rely on physical (trapping, deterrence), chemical (pesticides, baited
traps), or biological (viruses, predators) mechanisms. These currently available
methods have been unable to "stem the tide" in invasive pests and their
application has resulted in unintended environmental impacts. There is an urgent
need for control technologies that are broadly applicable, highly scalable, and
cost-effective. Recent advances in precision genome editing have enabled a next
generation of engineered biocontrol agents that promise to be effective while
minimizing unwanted impacts on the environment. The technology on which this
project is based will provide a means to prevent the reproduction of pest
organisms without the introduction of toxins or pesticides. This I-Corps project
will focus on mosquito control since they transmit numerous serious diseases
(Zika, Dengue, etc.) that are predicted to become increasingly prevalent in the
US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the concept of
engineering barriers to sexual reproduction to control pest populations. Some of
the most effective pest eradication campaigns in recent history have used
radiation to sterilize male pests that are then released to compete with wild
males. When the sterile males mate with females, no offspring are produced and
the population numbers crash. However, many species cannot be sterilized using
irradiation and remain competitive when released. The solution provided in this
project is to hard-wire male-sterility into the genome of the target organism
using modern tools in precision genome editing. The approach has been validated
in laboratory organisms, and that the required components are functional in
insects, fish, plants, and mammals. Additionally, computer simulation modeling
has been encouraging and suggest this approach is more robust than other
technologies that rely on genome editing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.