* 1834893
* I-Corps: Context-Aware Interactive (CAI) Robotic Platform
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Amy LaViers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to bring more
usable technology to elderly populations to help them age with greater
independence. Specifically, existing in-home robots could assist a broader
cohort of elderly users if the robots were easier to understand and use. This is
an especially timely opportunity as the elderly population is quickly growing in
the United States. Elderly users need a robot that can express many internal
states through external features, especially in an intuitive and interactive
way. Choreographers and theater artists recognize how to convey narrative
through context (set), movement (choreography), and commands (dialogue),
therefore bringing a special expertise beyond typical product design processes.
Marrying this expertise with robotic hardware development has the potential to
produce a significant transformation in how aging adults relate to and take
advantage of technology in their homes.

This I-Corps project aims to explore the commercial potential of a three-part
design methodology that has been developed to layer robotic systems with greater
expressiveness and understandable features. This method 1) creates systems with
appropriate expressive bandwidth to communicate internal state to human viewers
through motion profiles, 2) helps users understand how to interact with robotic
systems through character-driven narrative, and 3) predicts affective responses
to these systems, across multiple contexts. Initial results indicate that trust
and acceptance of in-home technology can be facilitated with low-cost, simple
hardware like LEDs, off-the-shelf servo motors, improved how-to literature, and
context-based behavior, with existing, low-cost robot hardware. For example,
something as simple as a heart rate monitor has opaque, hard to interpret
monitors, confusing multiple-step procedures, and an ominous beeping. This novel
approach adds a customizable expressive layer to an existing device like this,
creates a character-driven narrative about how the device works, and uses
theatrical context which may improve user adoption via priming.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.