* 1834154
* Collaborative Research - Enabling Transfer Students Access to Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Dominic Dal Bello, Allan Hancock College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,224,182.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This project, at Allan Hancock
College, Cuesta College, and California Polytechnic State University (Cal Poly)
will fund fifty 2-year scholarships at Allan Hancock and fifty 2-year
scholarships at Cuesta College. The Scholars will be in cohorts of 25 students
who are pursuing transfer to a BS-granting institution to study engineering.
This project will also fund sixty-two scholarships at Cal Poly for transfer
students from Allan Hancock and Cuesta, thus supporting the Scholars until their
graduation with a BS degree in engineering. Allan Hancock and Cuesta are highly-
ranked Hispanic-Serving Institutions. Cal Poly is one of only five comprehensive
polytechnic universities in the nation, and is ranked as a one of the nation's
top public masters-level institutions. This project will build on and strengthen
collaborations to increase the number of low-income students who begin their
engineering education at Allan Hancock or Cuesta, transfer to Cal Poly, are
retained in and graduate with a BS degree, and enter a STEM graduate program or
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific program activities seek to
remove or minimize economic barriers and support student development in five
areas: 1) academic; 2) engineering transfer/career path; 3) personal, via
Strengths and Growth Mindset training from a Social Justice perspective; 4)
connection; and 5) professional. The project will also adopt essential evidence-
based transfer practices, continuously assessing progress achieved in this area
within and across each participating campus to institutionalize more robust
transfer pathways and support the success of all future STEM transfer students
at Allan Hancock, Cuesta, and Cal Poly. The project will include two research
strands designed to advance understanding of strategies that enhance transfer
student success in a career in engineering. The first research project will use
social network analysis, survey methods, and qualitative interviews to advance
understanding of how project activities contribute to a) growth of student
social networks; b) increase in student resilience, confidence, sense of
community, and sense of belonging; and c) whether growth in these areas is
related to increased student retention, pre-transfer success, transfer, and
post-transfer success. The second research project will integrate pre- and post-
transfer Scholars into existing research to advance understanding of student
motivations and perceptions when choosing to participate in (or leave) co-
curricular team projects in engineering. The integration of Scholars allows for
investigation of whether decision-making factors regarding participation in co-
curricular team projects are consistent for student groups at community colleges
and four-year institutions, and for students who are directly admitted or
transfer to a 4-year institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.