* 1834913
* Collaborative Research: Opening the Pathway to Technician Careers: A Conference for Biology Teachers of Deaf Students
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Kristin Jenkins, BioQUEST Curriculum Consortium, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 02/29/2020
* USD 81,683.00

This professional development conference, "Opening the Pathway to Technician
Careers: A Conference for Biology Teachers of Deaf Students" will address the
compelling need for a diverse workforce in the United States by specifically
targeting the educational needs of a group of students with unique learning and
communication characteristics. The conference will bring together high school
teachers, community college biology faculty, and American Sign Language (ASL)
interpreters to improve biology education for deaf and hard-of-hearing (deaf/hh)
students. Through a focus on Universal Design for Learning (UDL) principles and
literacy-building case-based learning pedagogy, the conference will improve
learning not only for deaf/hh students but for all students in the biology
classroom. Biology courses impact large numbers of students because high school
or introductory college biology courses are often the only exposure of non-
science majors to science. In technician education, biology serves as a gateway
course for students interested in technical fields such as agricultural
technology, biotechnology, and environmental sciences, where the deaf/hh
population is underrepresented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will
provide participants with: 1)Education in the use of case-based pedagogies and
their potential for enhancing literacy and world knowledge for students within
the context of learning biology; 2) Multiple ways to implement principles of UDL
in biology classrooms; 3) Best practices for teaching biology to deaf/hh
students; 4)Information about technician careers requiring a biology foundation;
5) A community of biology instructors of students who are deaf/hh; and 6) A
stronger biology content knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;The projected outcomes of this
conference include the collection and dissemination of best practices for
teaching biology to deaf/hh students using UDL principles, case-based
pedagogies, and literacy improvement practices. The conference design will
support sharing effective educational resources within and beyond the conference
community, continued collaboration of participants, and promoting connections to
the broader community of biology educators. Findings from the conference will be
presented in a white paper so that best practices and the needs of the deaf/hh
community with regards to biology education will be more broadly
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.