* 1834076
* Scholarships and Enhanced Mentoring to Support Graduation of Students in Science and Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Timothy Hagen, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students pursuing STEM degrees. This S-STEM project at Northern Illinois
University will provide scholarships and enhanced mentoring to support
graduation of students in biological sciences, chemistry and biochemistry,
computer sciences, geosciences, mathematics, or physics. Over a period of five
years, the project will select forty-six Scholars from the population of rising
juniors and transfer students from Illinois' community college system. This
community college system is the third-largest in the country, serving more than
one million students each year. Student support will feature a mentoring
structure centered around student cohorts and student-faculty pairs, augmented
by research opportunities. Student cohorts will meet regularly and will be
guided by experienced faculty, near-peer, industrial, and government laboratory
mentors. This project has the potential to increase understanding of the
personal and institutional circumstances that affect students' participation in
academic activities and persistence to degrees in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance understanding of the role
that multiple evidence-based, high impact practices play in improving
persistence and graduation of upper-division STEM students. The project
leverages existing infrastructure (including NSF STEP and REU programs) and
offers students a mentoring program that includes faculty-student pairs, access
to research experiences, and weekly cohort meetings to help students achieve
their goals and reach their highest academic potential. The program is
structured to support students' self-efficacy and science identity, as well as
to build essential skills for technical and professional development (i.e., time
management, task prioritization, scientific literacy, critical thinking,
scientific writing and speaking, leadership, and resume writing). Students will
also network with alumni and leaders from industrial, government, and academic
laboratories to support the next steps in their professional development.
Qualitative research guided by Social Cognitive Career Theory will generate
knowledge about the personal and contextual factors, both internal and external
to the university, that lead to persistence of economically disadvantaged
students in science and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.