* 1834045
* An Accelerated Pathway from Associates to Master's Degree in Biotechnology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jared Auclair, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,443,775.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program will support the retention and graduation of high-achieving,
low-income students with demonstrated financial need at Middlesex Community
College and Northeastern University. Over a five-year period, this project will
fund annual scholarships to 165 students pursuing biotechnology degrees through
the entire pathway from associate's to master's degrees. Responding to national
concerns about the high cost of postsecondary education and the demand for
biotechnology professionals, this project will offer a low-cost, accelerated
alternative to earn degrees and enter careers in biotechnology. Specifically, in
addition to providing scholarships, the program will embed students in a
supportive, accelerated pathway that prepares them for academic success and for
biotechnology careers in the greater Boston metro area. With strong industry
support, together with existing infrastructure and articulation agreements
between Northeastern University and Middlesex Community College, this program
aims to encourage, enhance, and accelerate student engagement in academic
preparation, career development, and entry into the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to provide appropriately
tailored pathways to STEM credentials tied to entry-level biotechnology jobs
that are in demand in the Boston area. The project will facilitate participation
in undergraduate research and paid internships (an academic program requirement
at both institutions), industry and peer mentorship, specialized advising, and
other tailored academic, career, and social supports that are recognized by
researchers as high impact practices in broadening participation and increasing
retention. A robust faculty professional development effort focused on inclusion
will also be implemented, in collaboration with an ongoing Howard Hughes Medical
Institute Inclusive Excellence project within the College of Science at
Northeastern University. Industry partnerships have been established to ensure
that the programs are aligned with industry demands and the changing
biotechnology field. Drawing on social capital theory, the quantitative mixed
methods research study will test three hypotheses focused on student
performance, financial stress, career self-efficacy, professional connections,
and expanded social capital. Utilizing a comparison group design, the project
will generate evidence about the efficacy of strategies and interventions for
increasing student success in STEM degree pathways by testing four categories of
student academic and student support services (a) academic supports, (b) social
inclusion and connectedness, (c) financial stress reduction, and (d) career-
related activities. Over the life of the project, the project will award 530
annual scholarships to academically talented low income students. Results of
this project will contribute to the STEM workforce and understanding of
strategies to support the success of lower income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.