* 1834066
* Scholarships for a Future Generation of Geoscience Professionals
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Rene Price, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. This S-STEM project at Florida
International University aims to increase the number of students with financial
need who earn an undergraduate geoscience degree in four years and successfully
enter the&lt;br/&gt;geoscience workforce or graduate school. Over a five-year
period, this project will fund 24 scholarships to undergraduate students who are
pursuing bachelor's degrees in the geosciences, including atmospheric sciences.
Scholars will enter the University as two cohorts of 12 students who will take
similar classes. The Scholars will be mentored, receive math tutoring, have
internship opportunities, and go on a week-long geosciences field trip to the
Appalachian Mountains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project are
to provide students with scholarships, as well as academic and social supports
to help them graduate in four years. The project aims to reduce student debt and
provide the training needed to pursue a career or graduate studies in
geosciences. The project will measure student success in both time-to-degree and
future career path. Education research will investigate how student experiences
as part of a cohort contribute to retention in the geosciences and on-time
graduation. Specifically, the research will focus on students' perceptions of
their developing identity as geoscientists, their sense of belonging in the
geoscience discipline, and their access to social capital within Florida
International University's Geosciences Department. This information will provide
the researchers with insights into how the cohort provides the students with a
community of support. The results of the research will be used to refine ongoing
cohort activities, as well as departmental teaching practices and activities,
and will be communicated to other geosciences
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.