* 1834034
* Developing Engineering Academic Pathways for Low Income Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Sejal Foxx, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,077,984.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need. Throughout the five-year
award, this project at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte (UNCC) will
fund sixty scholarships in four groups of fifteen students who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in engineering fields. This program will focus on increasing
applications from three Title I schools in Charlotte, NC, by delivering programs
that prepare students for college entry exams. It will also provide professional
development to guidance counselors so that they can best advise and encourage
students who may be interested in engineering majors. A suite of student success
programs will be provided to all students who matriculate to engineering
programs at UNCC. The program will also include annual retreats to build a
scientific identity among the future engineering professionals. It will provide
travel funds to help scholars attend professional networking events, where they
can build social capital through interactions with industry professionals.
Through the student support aspects and research components, the program will
implement four of the strategies for improving economic mobility in Charlotte
that were recommended by the Charlotte-Mecklenburg Opportunity Task Force in
2017. These strategies include: 1) broadening the range of and access to high
quality college and career pathways offered by our K-12 and postsecondary
institutions while ensuring all students have access to and support of the full
range of opportunities; 2) equipping all students and their parents with the
information and guidance they need to understand and navigate multiple college
and career pathways, preparation, and processes; 3) expanding and strengthening
support for First Generation and other low-socioeconomic students who need help
transitioning to and completing secondary education; and, 4) elevating and
actively promoting the critical importance of acquiring a postsecondary degree
and/or industry certification for young people to successfully compete in a
rapidly changing, technologically advanced labor market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
mixed methods research design will be used to investigate the success and
effectiveness of the program and strategies. The qualitative research design
will examine the effectiveness of student support services, academic advising,
and mentorship among low-income students enrolled in engineering majors. The
research team will also explore how low-income students create scientific
identities, navigate curricula, form relationships, and traverse academic
culture. The research will be framed by three theoretical frameworks:
Chickering's theory of student development, Bourdieu's social capital theory,
and Holland, Lachiotte, Skinner, and Cain's theory of identity. A grounded
theory approach will be used to analyze the data. Additionally, the team will
undertake research specifically related to high school counselors who are
serving urban students in Charlotte Mecklenburg Schools that will research
several characteristics of these professionals including (1) professional
development, (2) belief in a just world, (3) multicultural competency self-
efficacy and (4) school counselor STEM career advocacy for high achieving, low-
income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.