* 1834976
* A Proposal for Travel Support for Students 20th International Sedimentological Congress Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, 13-17 August 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Howard Harper, Society of Sedimentary Geology SEPM
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award is to support and enable students to attend the International
Sedimentological Congress (ISC), a global meeting devoted to sedimentary
geology. The meeting convenes every four years and will be held this year in
Quebec City, Canada. This is first time since 1982 that this international
meeting is being held in North America. It is expected that more than 2000
professional sedimentary geologists from throughout the world will be in
attendance. During the five-day meeting, participants will have the opportunity
to interact with one another through both formal and informal oral and poster
presentations. The program also features a series of workshops that include
presentations and opportunities for dialog that will allow for synthesis and
collaboration between researchers across disciplines and across broad geographic
regions. There are a series of midweek, pre-meeting, and post-meeting field
trips and short courses offered that are designed to provide training in
cutting-edge approaches to data analyses and to foster communication. Students
funded will include both undergraduate and graduate students from across the
various sedimentary geology disciplines. Underrepresented minorities, women and
persons with disabilities will be especially encouraged to submit applications
to receive this travel support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studying aspects of the
sedimentary crust of the earth is a vibrant discipline that includes such
currently relevant topics as the tempo and mode of life on earth, the physical
processes that control erosion and deposition of sediments; the stratigraphic
record of environmental perturbations, and the preservation of the stratigraphic
record. It is a completely interdisciplinary field of study that includes
researchers from biology, physics, stratigraphy, geochronology, geochemistry,
and modeling. The 20th ISC meeting will uniquely contribute to the geological
sciences because it will bring together the global community of sedimentary
geologists, of all career stages, to share their research methods, findings and
experiences in the field. Unlike other meetings attended by sedimentary
geologists (e.g. Geological Society of America, International Association of
Sedimentologists, SEPM Society for Sedimentary Geology), ISC attracts a large,
diverse, global cross section of sedimentary geologists (e.g. European, North
American, Asia- Pacific, Eastern Europe, African, etc.), but is still a small
enough venue for critical networking to occur across subfields. This will lead
to new opportunities for collaboration and the creation of novel approaches to
studying our world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.