* 1834666
* Math Skills and Affective Domain Interventions to Improve Success for Female Students in Geoscience Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Julie Sexton, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2019
* USD 287,226.00

Women continue to be underrepresented in the geosciences at the undergraduate
level and in the workforce. Yet, there has been limited research to identify
barriers that decrease persistence of women in geoscience fields. This project
will examine whether or not math is a barrier to female student persistence and
success in geosciences. Results of this project may provide information that can
be used to increase student performance in geoscience courses and improve
persistence in the geoscience majors. In this way, the project aims to support
the overarching goal of broadening participation of women in geoscience fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A lack of math skills and/or negative affective domain
factors may affect female students' performance in introductory geoscience
classes and reduce their persistence in a geoscience major. This project will
identify successful instructional interventions that best improve female
students' performance in geoscience classes and persistence in a geoscience
major. The project proposes two specific objectives to accomplish this goal. The
first objective is to develop and implement math skills and affective domain
interventions in geoscience classes. The project plans three interventions.
Intervention A will focus on improving affective characteristics (e.g., increase
self-efficacy; reduce anxiety). Intervention B will provide academic support in
math via "The Math You Need, When You Need It" modules. These modules were
developed by one of the project investigators and are publicly available through
the Science Education Resource Center. Intervention C will combine both
affective and math support interventions. The second objective is to examine the
impact of these interventions on student performance in geoscience classes and
persistence in geoscience. Results of this study will identify the impact of the
three interventions on student performance, including which intervention is most
successful in improving the performance of female undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.