* 1834752
* I-Corps:  ENERGY ABSORBING DEVICE MADE FROM LIQUID CRYSTAL ELASTOMER / NICKEL-TITANIUM SHAPE-MEMORY ALLOY (LCE/NITI) COMPOSITE MATERIAL
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Carl Frick, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the use of
innovative approaches to create real-world energy-absorbing, customizable
materials that may be tailored to a range of markets and applications that
provide tangible societal benefits. For example, this new technology could help
patients suffering degenerative spinal disc disease by adding material to
replacement intervertebral discs. This application leads to reduced complication
rates, improved shock absorption and biocompatibility, and overall increased
patient satisfaction. The technology also provides a major public health benefit
to athletes, the military, and others by providing superior energy dissipation
in protective apparel. One such promising application is an additional lining
material in football helmets to reduce the occurrence of concussions. Other
potential fields include energy absorbing and vibration damping applications for
the automotive or aerospace industries ranging from passenger safety and comfort
to isolating critical electronic components in the event of impact, damage, and
instability. Each of these applications aims to improve human health and safety,
and represents billion dollars a year markets and hundreds of thousands of
potential users. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will combine the
complementary properties of liquid crystalline elastomers (LCEs) and nickel-
titanium (NiTi) to create a unique composite material that has exceptional
mechanical properties, and a high degree of tailorable behavior. Research into
LCEs has proven they have excellent energy absorbing behavior and toughness,
with performance exceeding that of most other rubber-like materials. However,
typical polyurethane rubbers or silicones are inherently soft and/or have a slow
recovery from large deformations; this limits its usefulness in many important
situations. NiTi is the ideal material to compliment these shortcomings due to
its own set of unique characteristics. Similar to metals, it is orders of
magnitude stronger and stiffer than LCEs, but NiTi also undergoes shape-memory
behavior that leads large recoverable deformation. Additionally, it also
provides biasing stress to the LCEs that should greatly reduce the recovery time
of the composite material. The combination of these unique and varied properties
will give the composite material a level of customization and tailored behavior
that is simply not achievable with any of the constituents independently and
will be of interest from both a research perspective and attractive as a
marketable product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.