* 1834972
* Characterization of Reactor-Assisted Burner Flames using Ultrafast Infrared Spectroscopy
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Robert Lucht, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John Daily
* 07/31/2022
* USD 247,878.00

Many practical transportation fuels often undergo a two-stage ignition process
under the so-called low-temperature combustion conditions. This feature can
accelerate flame propagation which could be exploited to develop smaller, more
efficient, and cleaner burning engines for automobiles and aircrafts. However,
the low-temperature combustion physics governing flame propagation in these
systems is poorly understood. Thus, a primary goal of this project is to improve
our understanding of low-temperature combustion. New laser diagnostics will be
developed to quantify the specific molecules that are formed during low-
temperature combustion of transportation fuels and to determine how these
molecules accelerate flame propagation at conditions relevant to modern engines.
This project will provide new laser diagnostics, capable of characterizing
combustion chemistry, and fundamental data, describing how the extent of low-
temperature combustion alters the propagation of flames. The resulting knowledge
can help engineers design clean and efficient combustion systems for propulsion
and power generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is not well understood how the
extent of low-temperature combustion alters the turbulent burning velocity and
structure of turbulent flames fueled by heavy hydrocarbons (e.g., Jet-A,
diesel). This issue is complicated by the large number of hydrocarbon species
found in practical fuels and the fact that low-temperature ignition reforms the
initial reactant stream into a complex mixture with a time-varying composition.
Further, understanding the physicochemical processes governing the behavior of
these flames is impeded by the lack of non-intrusive diagnostics. This research
program will fill these gaps through: 1) the development of novel ultrafast mid-
to far-infrared laser diagnostics with sub-picosecond resolution and 2) their
application to characterizing reactor-assisted burner flames fueled by
n-dodecane and Jet-A. The use of ultrafast pulses will enable large portions of
the mid- to far-infrared spectrum to be interrogated on sub-picosecond
timescales, while also enabling collision-free measurements of molecular spectra
to be acquired. These attributes will be exploited to provide simplified multi-
parameter characterization of the reactant stream and turbulent flames produced
by a novel reactor-assisted burner. This approach will provide new fundamental
data and insight regarding how the temperature and composition of the reactant
stream alters turbulent flame propagation at conditions relevant to modern
propulsion engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.