* 1834137
* Educating Engineering Undergraduates to be Industry Innovators and Managers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Kellilynn Frias, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

With funding from the National Science Foundation's Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will
support the success of 24 high-achieving students with demonstrated financial
need at Texas Tech University. Throughout its five years, this project will fund
three-year scholarships to two groups of twelve students who are pursuing
bachelor's degrees in electrical and computer engineering. In response to the
needs of engineering-focused companies for a diverse, innovative workforce, this
project aims to produce graduates with "intrapreneurship" competencies.
Intrapreneurship and entrepreneurship require similar competencies and enable
development of a new venture, product, or service. However, intrapreneurship
focuses on developing innovations within an existing organization.
Intrapreneurial skills have been shown to support career progression, as well as
improve managerial skills and opportunities. This project aims to help students
develop intrapreneurship skills by providing them with resources including
scholarships, faculty and industry mentors, workforce development seminars,
industrial internships, and entrepreneurship training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes industry partnerships that will provide additional scholarship
support, mentorship, and internship opportunities. The project will leverage
NSF's current investment in Texas Tech University's I-Corps Site and Node
programs, which provide training and resources that help innovators
commercialize their ideas. The project's research questions focus on determining
the efficacy of intrapreneurial education for engineering students. The research
team will obtain and analyze data from Intrapreneurial Competencies Measurement
Scale pre-test and post-tests, mentor interviews, and student self-assessment
surveys. These results will be correlated with measures of student achievement
such as GPA, retention, and time to graduation. The knowledge generated through
this research will provide insight into the relationship between intrapreneurial
education and engineering student achievement. Interactions with industry and
faculty mentors should improve student retention and lead to internship and
full-time employment opportunities. Scholars educated through this approach are
expected to benefit society through their strong job skills and
intrapreneurship/entrepreneurship competencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.