* 1834899
* Student Travel Grants for the Second International Workshop on The Bright and Dark Side of Computer Vision: Challenges and Opportunities for Privacy and Security
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* David Crandall, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Wei-Shinn Ku
* 05/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This award funds student and speaker travel to a workshop that brings together
researchers from the computer vision and the privacy and security communities:
The Second International Workshop on Bright and Dark Sides of Computer Vision:
Challenges and Opportunities for Privacy and Security. Computer vision is
increasingly practical and useful in computational systems and has both strong
potential benefits and risks for individuals' privacy and security. The workshop
brings together privacy, security, and computer vision experts to discuss how to
better understand the potential threats of computer vision to people's security
and privacy, as well as the potential opportunities and applications for
enhancing them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Providing these travel awards will support
a high quality workshop in emerging research areas of computer security and
computer vision by increasing and broadening the pool of participants who will
be able to attend. In particular, the workshop organizers will work to include
students from historically underrepresented groups in computing. The impact will
not only be on the students who are supported directly by the grants, but also
on other participants, who will benefit from the increased diversity of voices
that the award will enable. Increased attendance also helps improve networking,
idea exchange, and partnerships for all attendees of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.