* 1834575
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: Expanding the First2 STEM Success Network
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Erica Harvey, Fairmont State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Luis Cubano
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,486,937.00

Developing and maintaining a diverse, innovative workforce in the fields of
science, technology, engineering and math (known as STEM) is critical to
American competitiveness in the world, but national surveys report a current and
future shortage of highly qualified STEM professionals in the US. One problem
creating this shortage is that more than half of all college students who
declare a major in STEM fields drop out or change their majors in the first two
years of their post-secondary education. This problem is particularly acute for
first generation college students. If we could increase the STEM degree
completion rate by just 25%, we would make up 75% of the additional workforce
needed over the next decade. This project assembles undergraduate students, K-12
educators, college faculty and policy makers in West Virginia to form the First2
STEM Success Alliance. The Alliance aims to improve the college enrollment rate
and success of undergraduate STEM students, with emphasis on rural first
generation (FG)students through their first 2 years of college. At the core of
our shared vision to improve student STEM success is the assumption that the
students themselves should be co-creators of the solutions. The First2 Alliance
will engage over 350 undergraduate FG students in the Networked Improvement
Communities (NICs), research internships, peer-mentoring activities, and the
FIRST Ambassador Program. As FIRST Ambassadors, students are guided to explore
the disconnect between home life and STEM study, and conduct outreach to
hometown students and K-12 stakeholders, their collegiate institutions, and
their state legislators to illuminate the disconnect and suggest policy/practice
changes to better support rural first generation STEM student success.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our change strategy is to implement the proven
methodologies of Networked Improvement Communities (NICs) to study, improve and
replicate promising programs that impact STEM persistence. Specifically, First2
Improvement teams will: 1) improve preparation for and transition to college; 2)
replace ingrained institutional practices that stifle the development of STEM
self-efficacy with 3) connect rural home culture and college STEM culture. As a
rural state, West Virginia lags behind in the development of networks, alliances
and long-term collaborations. The First2 Student Success Alliance will execute a
comprehensive plan to build organizational capacity for a long-term Alliance,
which includes a permanent hub organization and in so doing we will learn how to
collaborate effectively and will document what we learn. The First2 Alliance
model can be disseminated to assist other rural states in developing their own
STEM-capable workforce. Finally, the First2 Alliance will advance our knowledge
of barriers to and solutions that increase the success of first generation
students in STEM. There are many studies that inquire into the factors that
correlate with post-secondary retention in general, and with STEM attrition
specifically but few that focus on rural students. The First2 Alliance will
conduct a rigorous educational research study aimed at advancing understanding
of the factors affecting rural students' entry into and persistence in STEM
career pathways. From an improvement science and research perspective, we
hypothesize that our work will apply to improving the persistence of all first
generation STEM students, not just rural students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
INCLUDES Alliance is co-funded by the NSF Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). EPSCoR enhances research competitiveness of
targeted jurisdictions (states, territories, commonwealth) by strengthening STEM
capacity and capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.