* 1834339
* Collaborative Research: Deformation of poroelastic nanoporous materials of hierarchical structure upon adsorption of gas mixtures: theory, molecular modeling and experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alexander Neimark, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 443,259.00

The increased use of hydraulic fracturing to recover oil and gas from shale
deposits has become one of the most rapidly growing components of the US
economy. Located deep underground, shales are complex geological media comprised
of both organic (e.g. kerogen) and inorganic fractions (e.g. clays, silicates).
Up to 85% of the shale fuel is encapsulated in nanometer sized pores in the form
of adsorbed hydrocarbon mixtures. Adsorbed hydrocarbons exert a stress on the
shale, and in the process of recovery, this stress is released, which may
decompress the shale and induce its deformation. This compression/decompression
has been observed to be over 20% in the kerogen fraction of the shale.
Deformation of the pores influences both their adsorption capacity and
subsequent permeation of the fuel through the shale reservoir as it is
recovered. Capacity and recovery rate influence the energy efficiency of the
recovery process, as well as the amount of fuel recovered. These effects can be
exacerbated at the high temperatures and pressures typical of deep geological
formations. An increased understanding of the interplay between fluid
confinement in nanoporous media, the stresses this induces, and how these
factors influence permeation and capacity will help optimize hydrocarbon
recovery from shales. This project will combine statistical mechanics theory of
poroelastic solids with novel high-pressure geophysical experimental
measurements to develop a validated theory on adsorption-induced deformation of
nanoporous media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to
couple the Gibbs theory of excess adsorption with the macroscopic Biot theory of
poroelasticity. The Biot theory describes how a porous body saturated with a
fluid deforms under the action of fluid pressure and external stresses, whereas
the Gibbs theory of excess adsorption describes how fluids concentrate near a
surface, particularly in nanoporous adsorbents. Molecular lever models and Monte
Carlo simulation will be used to explore phase behavior and separation of
typical mixtures of light hydrocarbons and carbon dioxide in nanopores of
compliant adsorbents and predict the adsorption capacity and selectivity, as
well as the adsorbent stress and strain at given external conditions of
pressure, temperature, and adsorbate mixture composition. The combined theory
will be validated with experimental demonstration of adsorption stress of model
materials interacting with high pressure gas mixtures. The project will
establish new techniques for measuring the adsorbent stresses and strains in the
process of adsorption of hydrocarbon mixtures. If successful, the project will
converge theories from adsorption science with geophysics, and have further
implications for the design of flexible adsorbents and separation membranes,
actuators, nanobumpers, and energy storage devices. Two PhD and three
undergraduate students will be trained within this project. Educational and
community outreach program facilitates student recruitment from underrepresented
minority groups, summer opportunities for high school students and teachers,
participation is special events such as Girl to Engineering Day and STEM
Festival. Novel simulation methods and case-study topics will be incorporated
into PIs graduate courses on Nanoscale Thermodynamics and Transport and Advanced
Geomechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.