* 1834261
* Testing the Observation of Annual Seismic Velocity Variations at Axial Volcano
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Maria Tolstoy, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2022
* USD 74,076.00

The Ocean Observatory Initiative cabled array at Axial Volcano in the northeast
Pacific provides an unprecedented opportunity to conduct long time-series
seismic measurements in the deep seafloor environment, previously limited by the
duration of autonomous ocean bottom seismograph deployment capabilities. On
land, annual variations in crustal seismic velocities have been tied to seasonal
changes in temperature, ground-water, or snow/ice pack. In the deep sea, no such
seasonal variations should exist and yet recent observations at Axial Volcano
using the cabled ocean bottom seismograph network find annual seismic velocity
variations. This project will investigate the robustness of the deep sea
observations by looking at seafloor cabled data from other nearby settings (e.g.
Hydrate Ridge). It is hypothesized that either there is a seasonal change in the
characteristics of the noise source large enough to generate the observed
velocity difference, or there is some geophysical process, such as crack
opening, that is responding to annual forcings. The results are likely to either
demonstrate that current assumptions about seasonal variability in terrestrial
observations need to be revisited, or that the crust may be deforming due to
some external forcing such as annual solid earth tidal forces. Both have
significant broader impacts for the field, and how ambient noise results might
be interpreted. The project will also support one chapter of a graduate
student's thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ambient noise can be used to measure
annual changes in geophysical properties through changes in seismic velocity.
The correlation function of continuous ambient noise recorded at two
seismometers is proportional to the Green's function of the medium between the
two sensors. This can then be utilized to image the velocity structure of
Earth's subsurface. Evidence for annual changes in velocity at Axial, which are
consistent over 3 years of recording suggest that either there is a seasonal
change in the characteristics of the noise source large enough to generate the
observed velocity difference, or there is some geophysical process, such as
crack opening, that is responding to annual forcings. This project will
investigate both these options by looking at seafloor cabled data in other
settings (e.g. Hydrate Ridge) to test the robustness of the observation, and by
constraining the depth extent of the velocity changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.