* 1834733
* Life STEM EAGER:  Exploring the Relationship between High School Mathematics and Bioscience, Standardized Testing and College Performance in Biotechnology-related Fields
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jill Nelson, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,951.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. This project will focus on an
early stage exploratory study of an idea that will reveal ways to develop more
effective interventions to address student retention in bioscience and
bioengineering pipelines. As such, this study will help meet future workforce
needs by taking a radical approach and looking beyond mathematics as the key
major factor that determines student participation in STEM fields. To better
understand what these factors might be, this study will examine high school
transcripts from two local high schools. It will also review records of 350
undergraduate students who have been enrolled, are currently enrolled, have
graduated, switched to another non-STEM field at the same institution, or left
undergraduate programs in biotechnology-related fields. Data sources will
include information on all mathematics, bioscience, biotechnology-related
courses taken in high school and in college; college entrance test scores, and
students' performance in bioengineering at the undergraduate level. This study
will attempt to initiate a new line of research in search of factors associated
with bioscience and bioengineering education as a novel approach for uncovering
factors that may negatively influence student participation in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary approach will be used to mine
and analyze student data at the intersection of mathematics, biosciences,
engineering, and technology. Although it is unclear if this approach will
generate any new insights potentially beneficial to society, knowing whether the
idea works or not will be a valuable contribution to the field. Additionally,
this approach will not only be relevant to biosciences and bioengineering, but
also important to national efforts, and will contribute to NSF's Big Idea on
Harnessing the Data Revolution. However, attempting to merge data sets from
multiple sources is risky since it may not reveal any meaningful information
useful to addressing student retention. Such risks may be further compounded by
the limited focus of the study on mostly content driven factors, a wide
variation of pathways and classes, availability of courses, personal variation
of student development, and motivation and interest in particular STEM subjects.
Due to the complexity of this undertaking and the focus largely on student
performance and success in these fields, the risk is high. These risks
notwithstanding, outcomes from this study could potentially identify factors,
other than mathematics, that might contribute to current attrition rates. Thus,
this study will inform the development of more effective models of intervention,
help prioritize broadening participation efforts, and promote further research.
These items alone make this project a priority for funding and a contribution to
foundational knowledge in STEM education in the ECR program
portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.