* 1834732
* 16th Annual Northeastern Granular Materials Workshop; New Haven, Connecticut; June 8, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2019
* USD 5,250.00

This award will support the 16th Annual Northeastern Granular Materials Workshop
(NEGMW) to be held at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut on June 8, 2018.
The goal of the NEGW series is to bring together the granular research groups in
the Northeast to encourage collaboration and sharing of ideas on projects
involving the mechanics of dense granular media and other disordered particulate
materials. The topics of the workshop will span a wide range of soft matter and
mechanics research including emulsions, active matter, and glasses. Based on
prior attendance at NEGMW, at least 75 participants including undergraduates,
graduate students, postdocs, and faculty members will attend the workshop from
more than 15 colleges and universities throughout the Northeast. The NEGMW will
feature four invited 45-minute talks, six 15-minute contributed talks by junior
researchers, and poster sessions. Two of the four invited speakers are female
faculty members, and two are from liberal arts colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NEGMW will address several important questions
concerning the mechanics of granular media and active materials. Workshop
participants will discuss the key physical differences between driven,
dissipative systems (e.g., driven granular media) and active biological systems,
such as crawling cells and swimming bacteria. In addition, NEGMW presentations
will explore whether the flow defects and rearrangements that occur in
deformable soft materials such as foams and emulsions are similar to those in
granular media and metallic glasses. Invited and contributed talks, and poster
sessions as well as breakfast, lunch, and two coffee breaks will provide
interludes for follow-up discussions. At the close of the workshop, there will
be a final session in which the participants will discuss future research
directions, possible multi-institutional collaborations and funding mechanisms,
and the organization for the next NEGMW in June 2019.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.