* 1834367
* Near-fractional Melting of Pyroxenite: Experimental Investigations and Applications to Basalt Petrogenesis
* GEO,EAR
* 03/19/2018,05/31/2019
* Sarah Lambart, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2019
* USD 77,537.00

The rocks that make up Earth's crust are subject to a cycle of life - new crust
is formed at divergent plate boundaries (spreading centers) via the melting of
the mantle (material beneath the crust) and transport of magma to the surface,
while old crust sinks back into the mantle at convergent plate boundaries.
Specifically, the return of oceanic crust to the mantle creates chemical and
mineralogical heterogeneities (mixtures of olivine-rich and pyroxene-rich
lithologies) that can lead to complex melting behavior when this material rises
again beneath spreading centers and in mantle plumes. The abundance and time
scales of crustal recycling are important aspects of the plate tectonic cycle,
but difficult to constrain based solely on the petrology and geochemistry of
crustal rocks. Quantitative modeling requires knowledge of melting behavior of
different rock types. The goal of this research is to obtain new high quality
experimental data on the melting of pyroxenite, which represents one the most
important rock types that are recycled into the mantle. Experiments will be
performed at conditions found in the mantle where temperatures are thousands of
degrees hotter and pressures tens of thousands of times greater than found at
the Earth's surface. The results obtained will be integrated into forward models
of melting of heterogeneous mantle that simulate the dynamic processes operating
beneath the world's spreading centers and in mantle plumes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to understand the
effect of near-fractional melting of pyroxenites, to better quantify the role of
pyroxenite in basalt genesis. The experimental approach will consist of
performing incremental melting experiments, with increments of melt fraction
less than 5 wt. % at each stage, on three different compositions previously
investigated by batch melting experiments. The selected compositions span the
likely compositional range of pyroxenite lithologies in the mantle. Melt
composition at each temperature increment will be determined with the microdike
technique and used to define new melting parameterizations that can be used to
model near-fractional melting and integrate them into forward models of melting
of heterogeneous mantle. NiO and MnO proxies used to determine the pyroxenite
contribution in typical basaltic magmas and their source regions will be
recalibrated based on the experimental results. Because melt extraction during
generation of MORB and ocean island basalts is likely to occur via near
fractional melting rather than batch melting, these new calibrations will allow
us to better quantify the proportion of pyroxenite in the mantle source of the
most abundant magmas on Earth.