* 1834046
* Academic Opportunities through Recruitment, Retention &amp; Mentoring for Undergraduate Biotechnology Students with Financial Need
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Sarwan Dhir, Fort Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 03/31/2024
* USD 986,869.00

This project responds to the national need for highly-qualified scientists by
supporting the retention and graduation of high-achieving STEM undergraduates
with financial need. Over its five-year duration, the project plans to provide
one- to four-year scholarships to 30 students who are pursuing undergraduate
degrees in Plant Science-Biotechnology. To increase the persistence of the
Scholars in the biotechnology major, scholarships will be linked with effective
student support activities, including common course scheduling, peer mentoring,
and opportunities for research and/or internships. Scholars will gain workforce
experience through field trips, workshops, and career placement services. Fort
Valley State University is a historically Black university with a high
population of rural, first-generation, and underrepresented students.
Consequently, this project has the potential to broaden participation in STEM,
particularly in biological sciences and biotechnology. It will also promote
workforce development by developing synergistic partnerships between the
University and regional biotechnology industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to increase
degree completion of low-income, academically high-achieving undergraduates in
STEM fields. To meet this goal, the project will recruit students from eight
regional high schools and regional community colleges. These Scholars will join
a structured cohort that will engage in targeted academic and career programs
that are intended to increase retention and student success. The project will
address the following research questions: 1) What motivates academically-
talented STEM students from low-income backgrounds, including underrepresented
and rural students, to pursue careers in biotechnology, and how do the findings
fit into existing literature regarding the motivations of students in STEM
fields? 2) Do commonly-accepted findings regarding associations between student
engagement with high impact educational practices and improved academic outcomes
remain valid within the context of a rural HBCU serving a predominantly low-
income, first-generation population of students? 3) Do discernable patterns of
behavior exist regarding the utilization of available student support services
by low-income, academically-talented students at a rural HBCU? Data will be
gathered about student engagement, performance, retention, and characteristics
such as changes in science identity and self-efficacy. Analysis of these data
will help to determine which interventions were most effective for motivating
and retaining students in STEM programs and promoting their entry into the STEM
workforce or STEM graduate programs. The project has the potential to advance
knowledge about how undergraduate research projects can support retention of
students in STEM majors. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to
generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.