* 1834667
* Cosmogenic surface exposure dating of Arctic NW Laurentide ice-sheet deglaciation: implications for abrupt climate change
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2019,07/31/2019
* Anders Carlson, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 349,641.00

The objective of this project is to date the retreat of the Keewatin Dome of the
Arctic NW Laurentide ice sheet (LIS) during the last deglaciation and test the
relationship among the timing and rate of ice retreat, discharge of meltwater to
the Arctic Ocean, and abrupt climate change. The study will also document how
meltwater associated with Arctic NW LIS retreat may have contributed to
deglacial sea level rise. The investigator will measure the cosmogenic nuclide
beryllium-10 from 80 boulders at 11 sites along a 1000 km east-west transect.
The project will support two undergraduate students who will be trained in
glacial geology, geochronology, paleoclimatology, and Arctic fieldwork. Public
outreach is planned for Da Vinci Days and a farmers' market in Corvallis,
Oregon, as well as to northern communities and local geoscientists through the
annual Yellowknife Geoscience Forum.

This project will provide new understanding of the relationship among Arctic
ice-sheet retreat, Atlantic meridional overturning circulation, and climate
change. Retreat of the Arctic NW Laurentide ice sheet (LIS) will be dated using
beryllium-10 surface exposure ages for more than 80 boulders at 11 sites along a
1000 km long transect perpendicular to LIS retreat at 65 degrees North. Sampling
density will be 100 km, resolvable by ice sheet models. The investigator will
address two primary questions: 1) What are the spatiotemporal patterns of Arctic
NW LIS deglaciation and was retreat monotonic or were their periods of
accelerated retreat? And 2) Do Arctic NW LIS retreat-rate changes correspond
with deglacial periods of Northern Hemisphere abrupt climate change, such as the
Younger Dryas? The first question will be answered using beryllium ages, with
the sampling approach able to resolve century-scale changes in ice-margin
retreat. The second question will be addressed by comparing the timing of Arctic
NW LIS retreat at the 11 sampling locations to abrupt climate events of the last
deglaciation. To convert the ice-margin retreat record into changes in ice
volume and meltwater discharge, the investigator will use the chronology to
filter Bayesian deglacial LIS-model simulations, which will force sea-
level/earth models and be compared to deglacial climate simulations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.