* 1834994
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Optoelectronic Tools for Closed-Loop Neuron Ensemble Recording and Control during Complex Behaviors
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Ethan Meyers, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 46,700.00

Brain science will benefit from the capabilities in tracing complex animal
behaviors down to ensembles of individual neurons, and moreover establishing a
real-time closed-loop brain-interface, ideally with deep brain access in a free-
moving animal. This research project aims to address the focus areas in this
National Science Foundation program by merging novel neurotechnology, evaluation
of neural circuits during performance of complex cognitive behaviors, and large-
scale neuron ensemble analysis and closed-loop behavioral control. The outcome
of this research will result in new technologies and computational tools that
can be used across the field of neuroscience and behavior, strengthening
research efforts of multiple research groups. The educational objectives of this
proposal are aimed at training and inspiring young engineers and scientists who
are equipped with the multidisciplinary background required to help define the
future trajectory of brain interfaces and data sciences. The broader impacts of
this project include: 1) advancing transformative device technologies for next-
generation neurotechnology and providing new and more powerful tools for
neuroscience studies, 2) educating underrepresented undergraduate and graduate
researchers to contribute to the nation's workforce needs in biotechnology, 3)
contributing to the K-12 science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
education through weekend seminars and mentoring student-teacher pairs from
local middle/high schools; and 4) promoting neuroscience and neurotechnology
among local senior citizens and support groups for neurological diseases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal is to combine high
precision optoelectronic neural probes with real-time neural decoding to
feedback optogenetic control over animal behavior. Such closed-loop neural
interface will establish a generalizable technology platform to study complex
animal behaviors using optogenetic tools and real-time learning. The proposed
work will open ample research opportunities and form connections among hardware
engineering, cognitive neuroscience, and data science. The intellectual merit of
the proposed work will be evidenced by three major contributions: 1)
demonstration of high-precision optogenetic brain interface that combines
multiplexed recording from and bi-directional control over neuron ensembles, 2)
demonstration of closed-loop brain interface that employs real-time neural
decoding and adaptive learning to control animal behavior, and 3)
characterization of complex decision-making using high-precision, multiplexed
data linking multiple brain areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.