* 1834874
* CAREER: Engineering Bimetallic Nanostructures as Peroxidase Mimics for Diagnostic Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 05/05/2018,12/31/2022
* Xiaohu Xia, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 12/31/2022
* USD 426,706.00

A strategy chemists often employ in sensor design is to use a chemical called a
"catalyst", a substance that can bring about a chemical change. In the present
project the desired change is the formation of colored products from uncolored
chemicals for detection purposes. The presence of the targeted chemical can then
be detected by colorimetric assay which quantifies the intensity of the colored
product. While colorimetric technology is easy to use without lengthy training
and with inexpensive equipment, the detection sensitivity of colorimetric assays
can be less than optimum. In this project funded by the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Xiaohu Xia of Michigan Technological University is studying bimetallic
nanostructures as the active component of chemical sensors for properties that
result from their very small particle size and their chemical composition. Their
behavior mimics that of naturally-occurring peroxidases, a type of enzyme that
is good at transforming biological disease markers into colored products but
which suffers from low reactivity. Investigation of the synthesis and
fundamental catalytic behavior of the bimetallic nanoparticles are evaluated by
their use in sensitive and reliable colorimetric assays for disease biomarkers.
Broader impacts of the research result from the creation of simple and
affordable sensor technologies which can greatly improve our standard of living
through better disease biomarker detection. Broader impacts are also made in
education and outreach activities, which engage graduate and undergraduate
students, especially women and minorities, in fundamental research. The research
is integrated into outreach activities for K-12 students from the Upper
Peninsula of Michigan. The well-defined nanocrystals, with striking shapes and
uniform sizes, serve as vivid examples that are particularly appropriate for the
K-12 level students to foster their interests and curiosities in modern
nanoscience and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project
funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Xiaohu Xia of Michigan Technological University is
studying bimetallic nanostructures as the active component of chemical sensors
for their ability to act as peroxidase mimics toward targeted disease marker
molecules. The research engineers the bimetallic nanoparticles in a unique
Pd@M_nL core@shell structure, where M is composed of Pt, Ir, Rh, Ru, or Au and
with the number of nanolayers (nL) equal to 1-10 atomic layers. By carefully
controlling the crystallographic plane and elemental composition of the surface,
Dr. Xia is able to maximize the efficiency of the bimetallic particles for
improved detection limits in colorimetric assays. By coupling atomic-level
electron microscopy imaging with theoretical simulations, this research
addresses scientific questions of the structure-property relationships of
bimetallic nanoparticle peroxidase mimics that are presently only poorly
understood. Broader impacts of the research result from improved sensor
technology, since as alternatives to natural peroxidase, these highly efficient
mimics are straightforwardly to use for in-vitro diagnostics of disease
biomarkers. Broader impacts are also made in education and outreach activities,
which benefit in the engagement of graduate and undergraduate students,
especially women and minorities, in fundamental research. The research is
integrated into outreach activities for K-12 students from the Upper Peninsula
of Michigan. The well-defined nanocrystals, with striking shapes and uniform
sizes, serve as vivid examples that are particularly appropriate for the K-12
level students to foster their interests and curiosities in modern nanoscience
and nanotechnology.