* 1834597
* EAGER: SaTC: Tracking Semantic Change in Medical Information
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Ritwik Banerjee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 03/31/2022
* USD 298,823.00

Changes in the meaning of information as it passes through cyberspace can
mislead those who access the information. This project will develop a new
dataset and algorithms to identify and categorize medical information that
remains true to the original meaning or undergoes distortion. Instead of
imposing an external true/false label on this information, this project looks
into a series of changes within the news coverage itself that gradually lead to
a deviation from the original medical claims. Identifying important differences
between original medical articles and news stories is a challenging, high risk-
high reward venture. Broader impacts of this work include benefits to the
research community by making novel contributions to understanding temporal
changes in natural language information, as well as social benefits in the form
of improved informational tools like question-answering. For the medical domain
in particular, understanding temporal distortions and deviations from actual
medical findings can reduce occurrences of harmful health choices, for instance,
by embedding the research outcomes in news, social media, or search engines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a large dataset of medical
scientific publications, and record their characteristics as they change over
time across news by designing and developing discrete time-series
representations of entities and their attributes and relations. This task will
provide the basis for designing and implementing machine learning tasks that
exploit stylometric features in natural language in conjunction with temporal
distributions to identify and categorize such changes. This research will go
beyond current approaches limited to true/false classification of individual
articles, and hence be able to identify and analyze information change in
narratives, including semantic changes and nuances, or selective emphasis of
related information. The research entails an unsupervised and a semi-supervised
machine learning approach with bootstrapping, and exploring a binary labeling
task to distinguish distorted pieces of information from those that are faithful
to the scientific finding, and a multi-label categorization to learn the type of
semantic change occurring through time. The dataset will be disseminated via an
archival location for natural language processing resources such as the
Linguistic Data Consortium (https://www.ldc.upenn.edu/) to facilitate long-term
availability to other researchers, and BitBucket or GitHub will be used to
ensure the development, maintenance, sharing, and archiving of
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.