* 1834978
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES EAGER: A Study of Online Scientific and Scholarly Communities for Broadening Participation in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Lisa Elliot, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,347.00

This project is conducting exploratory research about two currently existing
online scientific and scholarly communities (OSSCs), each of which was
established to broaden participation in STEM in identified target communities:
(a) the NSF INCLUDES Open Forum (NSF-1748345); and (b) the Deaf STEM Community
Alliance's Deaf and Hard of Hearing Virtual Academic Community (NSF-1127955).
The goals of the proposed study are: 1) to apply the information systems theory
of the life cycle of online communities and the theory of social capital to
understand the dynamics of two NSF-sponsored OSSCs that are focused on
broadening participation in STEM; and 2) to strengthen NSF INCLUDES Network
activities with best practices and lessons learned from the project. The project
is conducting comparative analyses of the OSSCs: 1) to determine life-cycle
stages of the OSSCs; 2) to examine leadership and engagement activities of
community engagement managers in each community and how they evolve over time;
and 3) to explore the perceptions of community members.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory research project was proposed in response
to the NSF INCLUDES Dear Colleague Letter: Announcement of an Effort to Expand
the NSF INCLUDES National Network (NSF 17-111). The DCL states that Early-
concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) proposals should produce
findings and results that will generate new insights for the NSF INCLUDES
National Network, suggest potential strategies for engaging NSF's existing
broadening participation activities in the Network, and/or highlight lessons
learned that could inform the NSF INCLUDES Launch Pilots and Alliances as they
develop. The NSF INCLUDES program focuses on catalyzing the STEM enterprise to
collaboratively work for inclusive change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
anticipated that the research findings from this project will inform
collaborative broadening participation efforts of online STEM communities to
advance inclusive STEM education, research and workforce development. Together
with other NSF INCLUDES Network activities, this research is contributing to
positive, transformative change within the U.S. STEM workforce and research
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.