* 1834061
* Mentored Access to Success in Undergraduate Science and Engineering Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Carlissa Jackson, Saint Mary's College of California
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 02/29/2024
* USD 999,514.00

This project aims to contribute to the national need for well-educated
scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. The project will provide
four-year scholarships to twenty-four low-income, high-achieving STEM
undergraduate students with demonstrated financial need at Saint Mary's College
of California, a Hispanic-Serving Institution. The Scholars will pursue
bachelor's degrees in biochemistry, chemistry, biology, mathematics, or physics.
In the summer prior to their first semester in college, the Scholars will
participate in a summer research program. In addition, the Scholars will live in
the Science Living Learning Community, participate in a first-year advising
cohort, and have access to a peer mentor. Tutoring services will be available in
the STEM Center, which is located in the same building as the Science Living
Learning Community. As they progress through their collegiate careers, the
Scholars will have opportunities to take part in additional summer research
programs and to receive funding to present their research at scientific
conferences. As seniors, the Scholars will participate in the science career-
readiness program developed through a previous NSF award. Because the College
has a high population of underrepresented students, this project has the
potential to broaden participation in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project's specific goals include: a) providing supports that will enable the
Scholar's to graduate with STEM degrees within four years of matriculation and
enter the workforce in skilled STEM positions or enroll in graduate/professional
school in STEM fields; b) creating a three-week pre-enrollment summer immersion
research program and examine its efficacy; and c) evaluating the project and
disseminating the results to the scientific community. The project's research
component emphasizes analysis of the impact of the pre-matriculation summer
research experiences on the Scholar's math placement and subsequent retention,
the effects of a holistic support program in the context of a liberal arts and
sciences-based curriculum, and the effectiveness of the project's curricular and
co-curricular activities in the context of a Hispanic-Serving Institution that
is also a private college. Because of the status of the College as a Hispanic-
Serving Institution and the demographics of California, this project has the
potential to further expand and diversify the STEM workforce, particularly in
the technology-centered San Francisco Bay Area. This project is funded by the
NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims
to improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and
to generate knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation,
and academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.