* 1834139
* Becoming Engaged Engineering Scholars: Success Programs for Recruitment and Retention in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2024
* Joseph Brobst, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 11/30/2024
* USD 957,532.00

The NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(S-STEM) program supports the retention and graduation of high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need in STEM fields. This S-STEM
project at Western Washington University aims to recruit and retain
undergraduates in engineering. Over its five years of funding, this project will
fund 48 scholarships to first-year undergraduate students, providing them with
an average of $6,250 of financial support in their first and second years. The
Scholars will be recruited in four groups, in the first four years of the
project. Students in the new Western Washington University engineering program
have not been retained at high levels. This project will provide a systematic
sequence of academic, social, and career support services specifically designed
to enhance the success of engineering students during these first two years of
undergraduate study. The primary project goal is to ensure the engineering
programs offer an equitable pathway into engineering careers, particularly for
low-income students in the State of Washington. In addition to providing
financial support for participants, the project will adapt existing support
structures to offer a one-week bridge program prior to the start of their first
year, implement a multi-level mentoring system that includes internal and
external mentors, engage Scholars in multiple curricular and co-curricular
activities including an engaged engineering project experience, create a first-
year seminar focused on engineering and society, and employ an education
researcher and an external evaluator throughout the project to study its
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this project are to: (1)
Provide S-STEM Scholars with inclusive, evidence-based structured support that
is responsive to their academic, social, and career development needs as they
progress through the first and second years in the engineering programs; and (2)
Generate empirical knowledge about the impact of the sequence of evidence-based
interventions, and how they alter the self-efficacy, identity, and retention of
S-STEM Scholars within the engineering programs. The project will use evidence-
based approaches that have been shown to improve recruitment and retention of
traditionally underrepresented groups in engineering. To assess the impact, the
project will include a mixed methods quasi-experimental study design with a
matched comparison group. The project has the potential to contribute to the
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce by preparing
students for careers in engineering. Moreover, the findings and knowledge
generated from this project can benefit other institutions looking to implement
similar programs, and will be especially useful for engineering technology
departments contemplating a transition to engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.