* 1834740
* Elements: NSCI-Software -- A General and Effective B-Spline R-Matrix Package for Charged-Particle and Photon Collisions with Atoms, Ions, and Molecules
* CSE,OAC
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Klaus Bartschat, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 02/29/2024
* USD 476,284.00

This project concerns the development and subsequent distribution of a suite of
computer codes that can accurately describe the interaction of charged particles
(mostly electrons) and light (mostly lasers and synchrotrons) with atoms and
ions. The results are of importance for the understanding of fundamental
collision dynamics, and they also fulfill the urgent practical need for accurate
atomic data to model the physics of stars, plasmas, lasers, and planetary
atmospheres. With the rapid advances currently seen in computational resources,
such studies can now be conducted for realistic systems, as opposed to idealized
models. In particular, it has become possible to describe very complex targets,
such as transition metals and other open-shell systems. Examples include the
excited states of the inert gases beyond helium, as well as neutral and lowly-
ionized iron. These systems are of significant importance for plasma diagnostics
and astrophysics, respectively. The source code will be made publicly available.
The project will support a post-doctoral researcher. A website devoted to user-
developer interaction will be developed and maintained together with the
neccessary code documentation and training materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
numerical calculations will be based upon the non-perturbative R-matrix (close-
coupling) method. A particular strength of the implementation pursued in this
project is the use of a highly flexible B-spline basis with non-orthogonal
orbital sets. The major advantage of the approach compared to traditional
methods is the fact that an accurate target description can be achieved with a
much-reduced configuration-interaction (CI) expansion if the orthogonality
requirements on the individual orbitals are relaxed. This is critical for
complex targets, where the valence orbitals in particular are known to be
strongly term-dependent. Using a sufficiently small but still accurate enough CI
expansion for the target states is essential for the feasibility and quality of
the subsequent collision calculation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.