* 1834516
* NSF INCLUDES Alliance: Inclusive Graduate Education Network
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Casey Miller, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Cooperative Agreement
* Kathleen McCloud
* 08/31/2024
* USD 847,579.00

The Inclusive Graduate Education Network (IGEN) Alliance is an NSF INCLUDES
Alliance involving a partnership of over 30 societies, institutions,
organizations, corporations, and national laboratories poised to lead a paradigm
shift in the participation of underrepresented racial and ethnic minority (UREM)
students attaining a PhD in the physical sciences. Participation by UREM
students in the physical sciences has never matched their representation in the
population and the fraction of doctoral degrees earned by UREM students is
dramatically less than the fraction of bachelor degrees earned by the same
groups. This disparity is specifically salient because these students constitute
a significant, growing, and essentially untapped source of domestic scientific
talent. To erase this gap, the IGEN Alliance proposes an innovative strategy to
institutionalize inclusive, evidence-based practices for selecting and training
a diverse, innovative, and globally competitive scientific workforce. The
primary partners in the IGEN Alliance are the American Physical Society,
American Chemical Society, American Geophysical Union, American Astronomical
Society, and Materials Research Society. These societies are uniquely positioned
to lead efforts in the physical sciences that empower faculty members to reform
and improve their graduate education practices. Together, our partners represent
a constellation of organizations and individuals from disciplinary societies
representing UREM students, major national laboratories, prominent industries,
and leading social science researchers, who can address systemic issues that
inhibit success of underrepresented students in attaining doctoral degrees -
degrees that enable them to advance science and provide technological
innovations for the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve our
participation and completion goals, our Alliance is 1) catalyzing UREM graduate
enrollment through new application and holistic review processes championed by
the professional societies in each discipline, 2) sustaining such growth by
propagating programs that create more inclusive graduate education environments,
and 3) improving student mentoring through critical transitions from
undergraduate experiences, graduate school, and finally into the workforce.
Collectively defined metrics are being used to ensure program components are
supporting progress towards the Alliance's goals. The IGEN backbone organization
is building infrastructure, processes, communications, and networks that support
the widespread adoption of effective inclusive practices in graduate STEM
education. The Alliance's Research and Inclusive Practices Hubs support
leadership development, both in graduate education research and inclusive
graduate education practice and professional development. Each IGEN Alliance
component is designed with two principles in mind: national-scale impact and
long-term sustainability. While IGEN is beginning its work in the physical
sciences, expansion is being actively pursued through dialog with other
disciplines including engineering, computer science, biological sciences, and
mathematics. Professional societies have the unique opportunity to lead as
advocates for commonly held values, as centralized sources for effective
practice, and as organizations that can sustain long-term initiatives. The
leadership of each society is committed to this challenge and is strategically
aligning to this NSF INCLUDES Alliance's vision of achieving equity for
underrepresented groups in doctoral degree attainment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance is co-funded by the Division of
Physics in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. This NSF INCLUDES
Alliance is also funded by the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the
Professoriate (AGEP) program, which targets increasing the number of
historically underrepresented minority faculty in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.