* 1834551
* Collaborative Research: Using Networked Improvement Communities to Design and Implement Program Transformation Tools for Secondary Mathematics Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Wendy Smith, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2021
* USD 150,000.00

The Mathematics Teacher Education Partnership (MTE-P) is a collaborative of over
90 universities organized by the Association of Public and Land-grant
Universities. It has worked to create solutions to significant problems in
secondary mathematics teacher preparation. However, as noted in the Standards
for the Preparation of Teachers of Mathematics prepared by the Association of
Mathematics Teacher Educators (AMTE), creating programs that achieve the vision
of well-prepared beginning mathematics teachers will be challenging. Such
efforts will require a continuing focus that acknowledges the ongoing and cyclic
nature of improving mathematics teacher preparation program. This project aims
to address the challenges of transforming secondary mathematics teacher
preparation programs to meet the recommendations outlined in the AMTE Standards.
The project will address this challenge by weaving together two mutually-
reinforcing areas of work using a networked improvement communities approach. A
group of institutions involved in the MTE-P will develop approaches to
effectively enact program transformation, drawn from research on institutional
change and enacting the networked improvement communities design at an
institutional level. The design of this project will thus be a network of
networks, incorporating work across the institutions. Simultaneously, work will
begin on developing a system to manage knowledge generated by the project and by
the MTE-P more broadly. Through this project, a comprehensive approach will be
developed to meet the national need of transforming secondary mathematics
teacher preparation programs to meet the national vision of secondary
mathematics teacher preparation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a period of two
years, the project will build a basic infrastructure that has potential to be
scaled up to support transformation efforts across the MTE-P and create a model
that can be used throughout the nation. The project will engage secondary
mathematics teacher preparation programs at five institutions (Auburn
University, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, University of Kentucky, Mississippi
State University, and California State University-Fullerton). Transformation of
these five, diverse secondary mathematics teacher preparation programs has the
potential to positively affect over 350 preservice teachers and over 25,000 K-12
students. The initial infrastructure created by this project will be the basis
for future scale up to a larger number of sites. This project will also generate
a knowledge management system to capture validated products and approaches
useful in transforming secondary mathematics teacher preparation. Project
leaders aim to extend access to the lessons learned and materials developed
through this project to other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.