* 1834714
* Outreach, Mentoring and Training in Climate Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This award at the Cooperative Programs for the Advancement of Earth System
Science (CPAESS) of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR)
has the goal to support travel for early-career scientists seeking to
participate in meetings and field campaigns related to the NSF Climate and
Large-scale Dynamics (CLD) program. Travel support is also be provided for
senior scientists to engage in teaching and mentoring activities intended to
further the careers of junior scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is
motivated by the fact that educational, mentoring, and outreach opportunities
can arise quickly, and the financial resources needed to enable these activities
are often not readily available. With funding of this proposal, CPAESS can react
quickly to provide subsidies for travel and related costs to participate in a
field project or scientific gathering in any part of the world. Requests for
travel support are evaluated on the basis of the quality of scientific
opportunities at the workshop, meeting, or project; the academic merit of the
junior scientists, including demonstrated independence, projected achievement
and probability of success; and a credible plan for the solicitation and
selection of applicants, including appropriate emphasis on diversity and
geographical distribution. Requests typically come from the organizers of
workshops or field campaigns, who contact CLD staff to discuss their needs and
eligibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impact of the activity lies in the
benefit to the climate dynamics and related scientific communities in providing
opportunities for students and junior scientists to gain 1) exposure to cutting
edge research; 2) a broader view of the connections between their work and the
larger scientific issues of the day; 3) access to senior scientists with
valuable insights on scientific and professional issues; and 4) a chance to
network with their peers at different institutions. In addition to these
benefits to the scientific community, the work has societal benefit due to the
increasing demand for expertise in climate science from stakeholders and policy
makers concerned about the human consequences of climate variability and
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.