* 1834687
* Collaborative Research: Prices, Peers, and Perceptions: Field Experiments on Technology Adoption in the Context of Improved Cookstoves
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Katherine Dickinson, University of Colorado at Denver
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 280,075.00

Adoption of potentially welfare-improving technologies remains frustratingly low
in many contexts. Improved cookstoves are a prime example: while cleaner-burning
stove technologies have potential health, environmental, and social benefits,
efforts to disseminate these technologies have fallen short and the practice of
cooking with biomass over open fires remains dominant throughout much of the
developing world. The central aim of this proposal is to study how economic
incentives ("prices"), social learning ("peers"), and subjective beliefs
("perceptions") interact to influence technology adoption dynamics. We do so
through a field experiment that offers new stoves at different price levels to
groups of households with and without social ties to households that have
already received stoves. Our results will inform and future efforts to
disseminate welfare-enhancing technologies to larger population groups.

Our conceptual model of households' technology adoption and use decisions
highlights multiple potential interactions among prices, peers, and perceptions.
Key research questions that will be addressed through our experiments include
how price affects perceived quality of a new technology, how these perceptions
are modified by exposure to peers that have experience with the technology, and
how perceptions change over time based on one's own experience and (objective
and subjective) technology performance. We implement a novel identification
strategy for identifying these effects, using the preexisting and exogenously
controlled distribution of free stoves in combination with uncorrelated,
cluster-randomized assignment to different stove subsidy levels. By explicitly
measuring perceptions in conjunction with other outcome variables in the
experiment (including both surveys and physical indicators of stove use and
impacts on personal exposure to pollutants), the researchers will be able to
test specific models about how prices and peers (prior adoption interact in
belief formation) a key issue in the technology adoption literature.