* 1834204
* Project Kaihuwaa: Advancing Low-Income Students in STEM through a Culturally-Appropriate Academic Journey
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Elisabeth Dubuit, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This five-year project will contribute to the national need for well-educated
scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by supporting the success
of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at the
University of Hawaii Maui College (UHMC), a two-year, commuter institution. This
project will fund 75 annual scholarships to four cohorts of six students (24
total students) who are pursuing associate's degrees and plan to complete
bachelor's degrees in Engineering Technology, Electronic &amp; Computer
Engineering Technology, and Natural Science. Scholars will receive a series of
evidence-based interventions, including STEM faculty mentoring, advising using a
guided pathway tool to align two- and four-year degrees, semester cohort
activities as well as opportunities to participate in leadership development
activities, research, or internships. The project will also work to increase the
UHMC STEM department's capacity to retain, transfer, and graduate low-income and
talented STEM students. This will be accomplished through faculty professional
development and enhancing existing evidence-based student success initiatives
with a culturally-competent framework, the Ka'ao Framework, across STEM courses.
Because UHMC has a high population of Native Hawaiian students, this project has
the potential to broaden participation in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of the project are to build institutional capacity to better serve low-
income (including Native Hawaiian) students by increasing 1) STEM faculty
capacity to serve low-income students, and 2) academic success, retention,
graduation and transfer rates of low-income scholars. The project seeks to
design and implement an innovative, culturally-appropriate academic program for
UHMC low-income students to improve overall graduation and transfer rates to
four-year institutions. In addition, the project seeks to understand how the
integration of the indigenous Ka'ao Framework, based on Tinto's model of
institutional departure, impacts scholar success indicators, especially for low-
income and Native Hawaiian STEM students. Results will be used to advance
knowledge of the impact of integrating culturally-appropriate models on the
success of STEM students in places with distinctive cultural traits, such as
Hawaii. The knowledge generation component will test the hypothesis that the
Ka'ao Framework's preventative classroom intervention will be a protective
factor for fall-to-fall retention for low-income UHMC students. Comparisons will
be made to evaluate the effect the Ka'ao Framework has on student outcomes. This
will include a comparison of participating students to like-students that do not
receive the intervention. Using data analytics to build a predictive statistical
model of significant factors in retention, graduation, and transfer, the project
will explore what works for whom among STEM majors, low-income STEM majors, and
Native Hawaiian STEM majors at a two-year institution. This project is funded by
NSF's Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program,
which seeks to increase the number of low-income, academically talented students
with demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. This timely
research extends emerging evidence-based practices when the nation is critically
examining ways to improve low national graduation and retention rates to meet
future STEM workforce demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.