* 1834853
* I-Corps: Nanomembranes for Cancer Detection and Surveillance
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* James Roussie, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project concerns a novel
technology for the detection and the surveillance of cancer. Assays known as
?liquid biopsies? seek to diagnose or monitor cancer by surveying small amounts
of body fluids for cancer biomarkers can be confounded by contaminants. This
project will examine the potential of a novel ?silicon nanomembrane? device to
serve the liquid biopsy market by purifying cancer biomarkers quickly and with
high purity. By enabling cancer to be discovered early, the technology could
dramatically impact the cost of cancer care. In bladder cancer surveillance for
example, a liquid biopsy assay could replace invasive and expensive cystoscopy
exams with simple urinalysis. In addition to its potential to lower US health
care costs, the project is expected to have regional impact through the addition
of a new commercial enterprise or the growth of an existing nanomembrane
manufacturer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will investigate the
commercial potential of a novel device for the capture of naturally occurring
vesicles, called exosomes, from raw body fluids. These vesicles are released by
tumor cells into body fluids and thus have tremendous potential in cancer
diagnostics. Current exosome purification techniques are labor intensive and co-
purify exosomes with protein. We have discovered that our ultrathin nanoporous
silicon nitride (NPN) membranes can capture and purify large quantities of
exosomes from biofluids when used in simple microfluidic devices. We have also
developed sophisticated nanomembranes featuring photonic structures that could
be used to determine the molecular composition of exosomes. Through interviews
with potential customers, we will attempt to identify a minimum viable product
that could gain early traction in the market. We will also seek to define the
features of a more sophisticated product concept that could be transformative to
cancer diagnosis. We hope to emerge from the experience with a clear value
proposition and an understanding of the infrastructure and partnerships we will
need to make a new commercial enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.