* 1834441
* Support for 2018 International Union of Crystallography High Pressure Workshop: Honolulu, HI, July 29 - August 2, 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Przemyslaw Dera, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This award provides financial support for participation of 10 early career
(graduate student, postdoc or tenure-track faculty) at the 2018 Workshop of the
International Union of Crystallography (IUCr) Commission on High Pressure, which
will be held in Honolulu Hawaii, from July 29, until August 2, 2018 at the Ala
Moana Hotel. 3.5 days of regular conference program will be preceded with a one
full-day student/postdoc training event on analysis of single crystal X-ray
diffraction data at high pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme-conditions
science is a vibrant, multidisciplinary field that characterizes unique states
of matter, simulates processes that take place in inaccessible environments such
as planetary interiors, and synthesizes new materials with properties that have
compelling technological applications. Understanding of the effect of pressure
on minerals and earth forming materials is central to geophysics, mineral
physics and planetary science. The interiors of all planetary bodies are built
of minerals that exist under high pressure and temperature conditions. Meteorite
ejection and impact phenomena involve generation of dynamic shock pressure.
Understanding how pressure affects the structure, properties and behavior of
minerals enables understanding of global phenomena such as earthquakes,
volcanism, plate tectonics, etc. Proper education of the new generation of earth
scientists who will study and model properties and processes of planetary
interiors is an issue of great importance for the future of geosciences, and
represents a significant challenge. The workshop will emphasize training of
young scientists in basic principles of single crystal sample preparation, data
collecting and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.