* 1834193
* A Fast Track Scholars Program to Support STEM Student Persistence
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Donna Gibson, Chabot-Las Positas Community College District
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 649,893.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, the Chabot MESA Fast Track Scholars Program will
support high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated financial need at
Chabot College. Throughout its 5 years, this project will fund 80 scholarships
for students who are pursuing associate degrees or intend to transfer to a
baccalaureate degree in the STEM disciplines of biological sciences, computer
science, engineering, mathematics and/or physical sciences. Each Scholar will
receive: an individualized education plan with follow-up and academic monitoring
services; priority enrollment for Fast Track accelerated transfer math courses
(a compressed course of gatekeeper transfer-level math courses); STEM
supplemental instruction (SI) and tutoring; one-on-one faculty mentoring;
enrichment activities including college and industry tours, social events and
STEM student clubs; and priority consideration for internship opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chabot MESA Fast Track Scholars Program supports
students through challenging attrition points on their STEM pathway, including
the gateway transfer-level mathematics course sequence. Community colleges have
a critical role to play in increasing STEM degree attainment by students
traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. Long course sequences in
mathematics can be a barrier to timely completion of the degree. Thus, the
reform of such course sequences in mathematics, to improve both time to
completion and rate of completion, is of great significance both statewide and
nationally. Project goals focus on improving student success by: 1) increasing
Fast Track math course success; 2) increasing persistence in students' STEM
major; 3) increasing the percentage of STEM students who earn an AA/AS degree
and/or transfer; and 4) decreasing the amount of time to earn a degree and/or
transfer to a baccalaureate STEM degree program. A comparative research study
will examine the effect of Fast Track courses on math course success, retention,
and timely STEM degree/transfer attainment over the 5-year project period when
compared to students enrolled in the traditional mathematics sequence. This
project will investigate factors that decrease attrition rates of STEM majors
including challenging transfer-level math courses. The study will also advance
the understanding of whether accelerated math sequences contribute to decreasing
time to degree/transfer completion with the potential to inform the scaling up
of these accelerated courses at other community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.