* 1834685
* Subsistence and Outmigration: Connecting Intergenerational Dialogues between Alaska Native Elders and Youth
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2023
* Charlene Stern, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,152.00

Over the past century, Indigenous populations of Alaska and the circumpolar
North have experienced major socioeconomic, environmental, and cultural changes.
Various developments in recent decades, including environmental shifts and
demographic flux, have accelerated the ongoing transformation of the
circumstances of rural Indigenous people's lives. While these changes have
undoubtedly impacted the lives and livelihoods of all Native peoples, they are
experienced differently by geography and culture, and influenced by generational
and economic factors. Some of the more visible impacts of these developments are
changes in subsistence participation and production and the out-migration of
Indigenous youth and young adults from their home communities. To compound
matters, such phenomena are occurring within a broader context of environmental
change that is impacting the sustainability of rural Native communities in the
Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project seeks to better understand the
consequences of these complex processes from the perspective of Alaska Native
people across generations in two different regions of Alaska, the Yup'ik of the
Yukon-Kuskowkim Delta and the Gwich'in of the Yukon Flats. The two distinct
geographical areas and cultural groups allow the research team to capture some
of the historical and contemporary complexity of Alaska, given that Alaska
Natives are a diverse community with each cultural group possessing its own
unique culture, language, history, and economic resource base. Specifically, the
investigators will study the range of experiences that both elders and youth
face and how they make sense of their past as well as the contemporary shifts in
rural lives and livelihoods. Issues of language, tradition, and kinship ties are
crucial facets for exploring such dynamics. The researchers will incorporate
methods of participant observation, community-based focus groups and individual
interviews to capture the central issues and comparative understandings relating
to subsistence and out-migration in each of the four communities that are the
focus of the study. The research will result in a broad in-depth understanding
of issues facing rural Alaska Natives today from their own perspectives. The
collaboration between elders and youth will contribute to community discussions
on the social, cultural, political and economic issues that each ethnic and
ecological area faces, highlighting both the convergences and divergences of
policies and practices at the local level. A substantial component of the grant
work involves including Native students in cutting-edge research, including
training in anthropological and audio-visual methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.