* 1834166
* Engineering Future Scholars: Increasing Engineering Success through a Self-Efficacy Network and Identity Development
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Roberta Anslow-Hammond, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (S-STEM) program, this project will support high-achieving, low-
income students with demonstrated financial need at Arizona State University's
Ira A. Fulton Schools of Engineering. Throughout its five years, this project
will fund 40 scholarships for students who are pursuing bachelor's degrees in
engineering. Scholars will be mentored by their peers, faculty, and industry
professionals; conduct undergraduate research; participate in design-build-
implement innovation challenges; participate in career development; and complete
engineering workforce preparation experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will follow 40 Engineering Futures Scholars for four years allowing for a
longitudinal study of engineering identity development. A cohort of 20 students
will be added in project year one and year two. Each cohort will be supported
for four years. The scholars' future potential selves will be nurtured to
facilitate engineering identity development, which is expected to support
sustained motivation and persistence in their goals towards engineering degree
completion. Participants will enroll in a required Build Your Engineering Future
course each semester of their degree program. This course will be used to anchor
identity development activities. Scholars' engineering self-efficacy and their
engineering identity will be studied longitudinally using qualitative and
quantitative methods, to understand the degree to which students have explored
and committed to becoming an engineer while also valuing the personal and social
relevance of their aspirations. A comparison group will be used to study the
impact of project activities. Results of this project may strengthen the
understanding of existing strategies or reveal new ones to increase
undergraduate student retention in engineering and four-year graduation rates in
Arizona and across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.