* 1834802
* Travel Proposal: Providing IRIS undergraduate interns with a 2018 AGU Fall Meeting experience
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* John Taber, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 27,040.00

This travel proposal requests support for 16 students who will have completed
their summer research to take part in this capstone experience at the 2018 Fall
AGU in Washington, DC. The requested funds will support roundtrip travel to the
meeting, lodging, food, and meeting registration and abstract fees for the
students. These students were selected to take part in the IRIS REU program
through a rigorous application process, from a pool of over 70 applicants who
met the minimum criteria for the internship. The fundamental elements of the
internship model include: a) an orientation where interns learn seismological
basics and build the cohort through shared experiences, b) cyberinfrastructure
to nourish group cohesion while enabling peer-learning and collaboration, c) a
transition to independent research through a carefully structured research
experience, d) expert faculty mentoring, e) presentation of research results,
reconnecting face-to-face, and integration into the alumni network (this travel
proposal), f) an Alumni Mentor to provide experienced, consistent support
throughout the entire process, and g) a common scientific focus emphasizing the
acquisition and analysis of seismic data to help address broader Earth science
questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Now in its twentieth year, the Incorporated
Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS) Undergraduate Internship Program has
had a significant impact on students' career development and increasing
diversity in the geosciences. This program has pioneered a distributed REU
(Research Experiences for Undergraduates) model that bonds students into a
cohort, and uses virtual interactions via the Internet and an alumni mentor to
maintain cohesion despite students conducting research at geographically
distributed sites. The capstone of the experience is to bring the students
together again at the Fall American Geophysical Union (AGU) meeting to meet
intern alumni and other seismologists, and to present their research. Not only
will this travel proposal develop seismological knowledge by supporting interns
to disseminate their research, this unique REU model has the opportunity to
contribute to the growing body of knowledge regarding the application of virtual
interactions for distance learning, community building, and the implementation
of the skills associated with metacognition (awareness and understanding of
one's own thought processes). The success, documentation and dissemination of
this model, will also enable other organizations to apply geographically
distributed resources to the development of their human capital. Additionally,
this proposal presents an opportunity to broaden the participation of
underrepresented groups in the study of seismology. IRIS continues to work
closely with minority serving institutions and professional organizations to
raise awareness of the study of seismology as a potential career
path.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.