* 1834218
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Chi-Ren Shyu, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This award will enable up to 12 students from educational institutions in the US
to attend the 12th Annual Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) International Conference on Bioinformatics and Bio-medicine (BIBM 2018).
The conference is one of the premier research conferences in bioinformatics and
bio-medicine. The BIBM community strives to build an international platform to
foster experience sharing of multi-disciplinary research, education, and
outreach activities through scientific presentations, keynote speeches, and
workshop and panel discussions. Cutting-edge research shared at the conference
will impact the science and technology of many fields, from agricultural and
environmental to pharmaceutical and medical sciences. Due to the high cost of
international travel, which often precludes student authors from participation
due to insufficient support from their mentors and institutions, the travel
grants will greatly encourage students, especially under-represented and
disabled participants, from US institutions to attend the meeting.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The student awardees will have the opportunity to present
their research, listen to talks, both keynotes and regular paper presenters,
from the scientific program, which will highlight the following seven themes: 1.
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology of Molecular Structure, Function and
Evolution, 2. Computational Systems Biology, 3. Next Generation Sequencing and
High-throughput Methods, 4. Cheminformatics and pharmacogenomics, 5. Cross-
Cutting Computational Methods and Bioinformatics Infrastructure, 6. Medical
Informatics and Bioinformatics of Disease, and 7. Healthcare Informatics. These
themes are designed to provide breadth, depth and synergy for research
collaboration. In addition, to foster open discussions about research,
education, and outreach opportunities and barriers, the students will join
special panels in topics related to Big Data, Actionable AI, and Consumerable
Discoveries. The panels will cover opportunities for young investigators and
provide tips to early career researchers and encourage the sharing of
informatics tools dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.