* 1834081
* Collaborative Research: Student Pathways in Engineering and Computing for Transfer Success
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Anand Gramopadhye, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2024
* USD 4,277,149.00

A national challenge in STEM education is the low graduation rate of engineering
students who transfer from community colleges to four-year institutions. One
driver of this low success rate is the insufficient preparation of community
college students for the differences they will face at the four-year
institution. In addition, the four-year institution often lacks social and
academic support to help bridge this gap. This project aims to increase the
success of engineering and computer science students who transfer to Clemson
University from Spartanburg Community College or Trident Community College, or
from any of the 16 technical colleges in South Carolina. Over a five-year
period, 316 students will receive scholarships of up to four years, to support
their successful transfer and attainment of a bachelor's degrees in engineering
or computing from Clemson University. In addition to the scholarship support,
the project includes evidence-based mentorship and cohort building activities
that support transfer student success. The project features an innovative Ph.D.
student traineeship that links Clemson graduate students with community college
faculty and students. The graduate students will receive training in teaching,
mentoring, and education research, and work closely with the scholarship
students both at the community colleges, and after the students transfer to
Clemson. It is expected that the project will contribute to the quality and
diversity of the national STEM workforce and increase understanding of what
works to support success of transfer students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition
to providing scholarships to low-income, academically high-achieving transfer
students, this project addresses well-known hurdles for transfer students by
implementing and assessing a cohort mentoring model based on evidence-based
strategies including communities of practice and cognitive mentorship. The
program elements are designed to support transfer student enculturation in the
university, as well as degree completion and placement in the industrial
workforce. The program will recruit and train ten Clemson STEM PhD students for
careers in academia by engaging them in immersive experiences in teaching,
mentoring, and applied educational research. This training will include a
residency at the community college sites where they will: 1) co-teach
engineering courses with community college faculty; 2) develop and lead a cohort
of low-income community college students in a project-based Creative Inquiry
course that will be a focus of applied educational research; and 3) return to
Clemson with the developed cohort, thus helping to bridge the institutional gap.
The program will conduct rigorous internal and external educational assessment
and program evaluation to identify key indicators of student success and to
provide information that can be used to improve STEM education at other
institutions. Results from this work will be broadly disseminated through
digital outlets (e.g., e-newsletters; listservs), presentations at national
conferences, and publications in peer-reviewed and trade journals to reach
audiences ranging from higher education to low-income students with aspirations
of excellence. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to increase the
number of low-income, academically high-achieving students with demonstrated
financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to improve the
education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to generate
knowledge about academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.