* 1834290
* Dynamic Response of Watershed Subsurface System to Extreme Rainfall Events
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Shemin Ge, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 331,812.00

The episodes of torrential rainfall in September 2013 in the Colorado Front
Range caused widespread flooding in the area. While floodwater receded within
days, data from subsurface suggested substantial changes in groundwater storage
long after the flood. This study seeks to understand the changes in groundwater
storage in response to extreme rainfall events. Understanding the effects of
extreme rainfall events can provide the basis for predicting aggregated effects
over longer temporal and larger spatial scales. By assessing the potential for
shallow soils and deeper aquifers to serve as natural storages for floodwaters,
this study could provide a scientific basis for water managers to assess the
excess water stored during extreme rainfall events and timely utilize the
resource when it is released back to streams. The project will have a
substantial educational element. Graduate students will be directly involved in
research. A two-week undergraduate field course will incorporate some in-situ
aquifer tests proposed for this study. A groundwater flow computer model will be
created for an undergraduate modeling class project. These field and modeling
plans will benefit approximately 90 undergraduate students and offer them the
opportunity to learn practical skill sets and a real research experience in
water sciences. The project plan also includes recruiting and working with
students from underrepresented groups through the RESESS program, an NSF
supported summer internship program dedicated to increasing the diversity of
students entering geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this
research is to better understand the dynamic response of watershed-scale
subsurface hydrologic systems to extreme rainfall events. The specific research
questions are: (1) How much could precipitation infiltrate into the vadose zone
during extreme rainfalls? (2) How much does the subsurface water storage change
in the event of extreme rainfall? (3) To what temporal and spatial extent could
extreme rainfalls impact subsurface systems? The research plan consists of three
components. The first is to collect and analyze hydrologic data that will
provide information for conceptualizing the system and the parameters for model
calibration. The second is to conduct in-situ and laboratory measurements to
characterize the hydrologic properties of the vadose zone and the saturated
zone. The third is to develop an integrated vadose-zone and saturated-zone flow
model to synthesize data, test hypotheses, and address research questions. The
Upper Boulder Creek west of Boulder, Colorado, will be utilized as a test bed
because of the availability of existing hydrologic data spanning over the pre-
and post-extreme precipitation periods. Using a physics-based mass-balance
approach, this study offers a quantitative modeling framework that links
precipitation, subsurface flow, and stream baseflow at watershed scales, with an
emphasis on rigorous modeling of infiltration processes in the vadose zone. This
study will shed new light on infiltration into the vadose zone, dynamic changes
in subsurface water storage, and the temporal and spatial extent that a
watershed subsurface system could be affected under extreme rainfall events. The
study site includes varying geology and geography, making the results
transferrable to other regions. This study will advance modeling integrated
vadose zone and saturated zone flow through utilizing latest modeling capability
and taking advantage of data availability. On the basis of its contribution to
rigorous modeling infiltration and site transferability, this study is
potentially transformative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.