* 1834807
* Elements:  Software - Harnessing the InSAR Data Revolution: GMTSAR
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* David Sandwell, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2022
* USD 281,747.00

The award supports the development of a software tool aimed at lowering the
barriers for the use of Interferometric Synthetics Aperture Radar (InSAR) data.
Natural processes such as earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides, and glaciers cause
deformation of the surface of the earth that can now be monitored to 10 mm
precision globally. These surface measurements provide a new tool for
investigating processes in the interior of the Earth. InSAR is a powerful and
low-cost way to monitor subsurface magma movement and is especially useful when
combined with other tools such as GPS and seismic data. InSAR is also used to
understand subsurface fluid movement, such as caused by groundwater withdrawal,
geothermal production, or in oil and gas fields. A wide variety of new SAR
satellites are currently operating and the US will have an even more capable
mission in the near future. These massive data sets need to be transformed into
information to promote the progress of science, mitigate natural hazards, and
enhance use of underground resources. The software, named GMTSAR will develop
robust and sustainable software to take full advantage of the satellite
generated data for both science and applications. The main innovation of this
project is to develop open and robust software to simplify the InSAR data
processing and enable routine processing of thousands of SAR images on state-of-
the-art computer facilities. Open distribution of software, and the GMTSAR
theoretical basis document provide a foundation for education in the field of
space geodesy and ensures availability to a diverse
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed investigation will use standard
software engineering practices to harden the GMTSAR code, improve the geodesy,
and make it more accessible to novice and advanced users on a wide array of UNIX
platforms. This will be achieved through improved and automated testing, partial
redesign and simplification of the work flows, UNAVCO short courses, user
feedback, and eventual migration of the code distribution and maintenance to a
national facility. Work will be performed by a postdoctoral researcher in
collaboration with the GMTSAR and GMT development teams and with assistance from
the XSEDE program. The expected outcome is to provide sustainable, open,
geodetically-accurate software to move InSAR time series analysis from the
intermediate-scale methods published today to large spatial and time scale
analyses that are becoming possible using the new data
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Cross-Cutting Activities Program
of the Division of Earth Sciences within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences,
and the EarthCube Program jointly sponsored by the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.