* 1834000
* Collaborative Research: Student Pathways in Engineering and Computing for Transfer Success
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Timothy Fulford, Trident Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 447,712.00

With funding from the NSF Scholarships in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics program, this project will support high-achieving, low-income
students with demonstrated financial need at Spartanburg Community College,
Trident Community College, and Clemson University. This project aims to increase
the recruitment, retention, academic success, and graduation rates of these
students who begin their academic path at community colleges and transfer into
engineering and computing degree programs at four-year institutions.Over a five-
year period, this project will provide scholarships to 316 transfer students to
pursue bachelor's degrees in engineering or computing. A national challenge in
STEM education is the low graduation rate of engineering students who transfer
from community colleges to four-year institutions. One driver of this low
success rate is the insufficient preparation of community college students for
the cultural differences they will face at the four-year institution. In
addition, the four-year institution often lacks social and academic support to
help bridge this gap. The project components include: 1) a scholarship program
to financially support low-income, high-achieving transfer students; 2) an
evidence-based mentorship and cohort building program that supports transfer
success; and 3) a Ph.D. student traineeship program that includes training in
teaching, mentoring, and education research. It is expected that the program
will contribute to the quality and diversity of the national STEM workforce and
increase understanding of what works to support success of transfer
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing scholarships to low-
income, academically high-achieving transfer students, this project addresses
the well-known hurdles for transfer students by implementing and assessing a
cohort mentoring model based on evidence-based strategies including communities
of practice and cognitive mentorship. The program elements are designed to
support transfer student enculturation in the university, as well as degree
completion and placement in the industrial workforce. The program will recruit
and train ten Clemson STEM PhD students for careers in academia by engaging them
in immersive experiences in teaching, mentoring, and applied educational
research. This training will include a residency at the community college sites
where they will: 1) co-teach engineering courses with community college faculty;
2) develop and lead a cohort of low-income community college students in a
project-based Creative Inquiry course that will be a focus of applied
educational research; and 3) return to Clemson with the developed cohort, thus
helping to bridge the institutional gap. The program will conduct rigorous
internal and external educational assessment and program evaluation to identify
key indicators of student success and to provide information that can be used to
improve STEM education at other institutions. Results from this work will be
broadly disseminated through digital outlets (e.g., e-newsletters; listservs),
presentations at national conferences, and publications in peer-reviewed and
trade journals to reach audiences ranging from higher education to low-income
students with aspirations of excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.