* 1834491
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Reflection Of Social Structure In Community Organization
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Bryan Hanks, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 24,822.00

Under the supervision of Dr. Bryan Hanks of the University of Pittsburgh, and in
collaboration with local institutions in the Republic of Serbia, Mr. Gilgor
Dakovic will conduct a program of research examining long-term transitions in
settlement patterning, regional demography, and centralized control of
resources. Previous scholarship emphasized rich burial evidence as the primary
means for understanding broader scale social processes. In contrast, this
program of research will identify how populations were organized across the
landscape at regional and local community scales and how these trends changed
through time. This will be one of the first major studies to use regional scale
survey and data analysis of spatial patterning and demographic dynamics in the
Republic of Serbia. This research, therefore, provides a crucial opportunity for
important academic exchange in methods and theory with Serbian academic
institutions and in training students who will have the opportunity to
participate in new developments in archaeological research design, field methods
and data analysis. At completion, the study will provide an important new
comparative case study, available as an open source dataset, on late prehistoric
European societies that indexes the emergence of new forms of social, economic
and political organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will contribute
to anthropological studies of social, economic and political processes in a way
seldom utilized for this region and produce and interpret datasets at multiple
scales (household, settlement and regional) allowing for a more robust and
empirically supported model of diachronic social change. This will contribute to
regional scholarship but also to broader studies on trajectories of developing
social complexity in early human societies. Archaeological field research will
be undertaken in the Banat region of Northern Serbia, located in the Carpathian
Basin of Europe, where it appears that egalitarian communities gave way to
completely new forms of hierarchical social organization by the early second
millennium BCE. Research questions include: (1) What is the spatial and
demographic scale of late prehistoric communities and how does this change over
time? (2) Can settlements be identified with evidence of centralization of
resources, craft production, and supra local exchange? (3) Do such settlements
exhibit substantial demographic growth or are populations still dispersed in
smaller farmsteads at the local and regional scales? (4) Is there evidence of
settlement enclosure and fortification and how does this co-vary with more
centralized sites? (5) Does regional scale settlement patterning indicate
settlement proximity to important natural resources and regional river waterways
associated with long-distance exchange? Planned fieldwork activities include:
(i) a regional scale pedestrian survey of 80 sq. km, (ii) surface collection of
artifacts and statistical analysis, (iii) targeted near surface geophysical
surveys (soil magnetic susceptibility and fluxgate gradiometry), (iv) targeted
test pit excavations and, (v) spatial analysis of topographic, environmental and
survey data using ArcGIS software. This field research will fill current
critical gaps in knowledge and generate a new multi-scalar dataset to better
model late prehistoric communities and examine the organization of populations
across the landscape in relation to increased economic and political
centralization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.