* 1834937
* I-Corps: COMMERCIALIZATION OF WIRELESS CHARGER
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Patanjali Parimi, SUNY College at Oswego
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project, based on
wireless charging technology, is wide ranging. The expansion of drone
applications, use of industrial and multifunctional robots, mobile electronics
and sensors and gadgets associated with the internet of things, call for new
charging mechanisms for these battery operated devices. The initial market entry
point for this project, drone service providers, will not only progress the
drone industry but also the industries that drone applications serve. For
agriculture, more effective drone monitoring will increase percent yield of
crops as farmers are able to monitor crop growth more effectively. For search
and rescue, remote drone charging stations could help save lives as drones are
able to travel further distances. For oil and gas, drones are already seen as a
safer and more cost effective way to monitor fields. As drone autonomy
applications expand, wireless charging technology enabled by this I-Corps
project will become essential in package delivery and disaster relief operations
as well as a broad range of other industries. Wireless charging technology will
also lower production costs for automated manufacturing and factories adopting
industrial internet-of-things sensors and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project leverages wireless charger technology which is capable of
powering devices at distances of a few centimeters to one meter, with an option
for charging capability from a few Watts up to a few Kilowatts. Commercially
available Qi chargers and near-field non-radiative magnetic induction based
wireless chargers result in a rapid degradation of the power transfer efficiency
(PTE) with as distance increases. Compared to other magnetic resonance based
chargers, the patented technology of this I-Corps project offers less
degradation in power efficiency with distance, the ability to charge multiple
devices on both sides of the transmitter, and allows for developing thin
flexible receivers that can be mounted on planar, singly and doubly curved
surfaces. Further, the charger can be tuned in real time for optimum efficiency
when the distance between the transmitter and receiver changes. In addition, the
possibility of integrating the charger with the drone fuselage eliminates the
problems associated with aerodynamic drag which results if a stand-alone charger
is mounted on the drone, saves drone "real estate", and reduces the weight of
the overall system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.