* 1834099
* Implementation of a Comprehensive High-School-College Partnership and Equity-Based Curriculum in Engineering and Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Huanying Gu, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 02/29/2024
* USD 779,027.00

This project aims to contribute to the national need for well-educated
scientists, mathematicians, engineers, and technicians. To do so, it will
support the success of sixteen undergraduate students pursuing bachelor's
degrees in Computer Science or Electrical and Computer Engineering. The project
will provide up to four-year scholarships to the students. In addition, it will
embed high-impact practices, such as collaborative learning, in required courses
in the majors, thus enhancing the quality of computer science and engineering
education for the both the Scholars and other undergraduates. Scholars will
receive mentoring and have access to leadership development opportunities, as
well as entrepreneurial and industry internships. It is anticipated that the
Scholars will achieve increased academic success, thus increasing their
retention and graduation rates. Thus, the project has the potential to broaden
the STEM career possibilities of a diverse group of high-achieving students from
low-income backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is
to recruit, support, retain and graduate a diverse cadre of academically
talented, low-income STEM students. In addition to developing expertise in
computer science and engineering, students will also have opportunities to
develop professional competencies through interactions with faculty, peers,
collegial networks, and industry. The project seeks to advance knowledge about
the effectiveness of academic support strategies, including faculty development
and curriculum/classroom enhancements. Results of these studies could increase
understanding of effective strategies for improving undergraduate computer
science and engineering education. Faculty, peers, the New York City Department
of Education, and industry partners will benefit from the Scholars' successful
learning experiences and their preparedness to contribute to STEM fields. As the
proposed project activities are both scalable and adaptable, this project can
help other universities to nurture a new generation of aspiring engineers and
computer science professionals. This project is funded by the NSF Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future scientists, engineers, and technicians, and to
generate knowledge about academic success, retention, graduation, and
academic/career pathways of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.