* 1834986
* Does Nest Density Matter? Using Novel Technology to Collect Whole-colony Data on Adelie Penguins
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Grant Ballard, Point Reyes Bird Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 05/31/2022
* USD 607,242.00

New methodologies for the deployment of coordinated unmanned aerial vehicles
will be developed with the aim of attaining whole-colony imagery that can be
used to characterize nesting habitats of Adelie penguins at Cape Crozier, on
Ross Island, Antarctica. This information will be used to test hypotheses
regarding relationships between terrain characteristics, nesting density, and
breeding success. This population, potentially the largest in the world and at
the southern limit of the species' range, has doubled in size over the past 20
years while most other colonies in the region have remained stable or declined.
New information gained from this project will be useful in understanding the
potential ofclimate-driven changes in terrestrial nesting habitats for impacting
Adelie penguins in the future. The project will produce, and document, open-
source software tools to help automate image processing for automated counting
of Adelie penguins. The project will train graduate and undergraduate students
and contribute materials to ongoing educational outreach programs based on
related penguin science projects. Information gained from this project will
contribute towards building robust, cost-effective protocols for monitoring
Adelie penguin populations, a key ecosystem indicator identified in the draft
Ross Sea Marine Protected Area Research and Monitoring Plan.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adelie penguins are important indicators of
ecosystem function and change in the Southern Ocean. In addition to facing rapid
changes in sea ice and other factors in their pelagic environment, their
terrestrial nesting habitat is also changing. Understanding the species'
response to such changes is critical for assessing its ability to adapt to the
changing climate. The objective of this project is to test several hypotheses
about the influence of fine-scale nesting habitat, nest density, and breeding
success of Adelie penguins in the Ross Sea region. To accomplish this, the
project will develop algorithms to improve efficiency and safety of surveys by
unmanned aerial systems and develop and disseminate an automated image
processing workflow. Images collected during several UAV surveys will be used to
estimate the number of nesting adults and chicks produced, as well as estimate
nesting density in different parts of two colonies on Ross Island, Antarctica,
that differ in size by two orders of magnitude. Imagery will be used to generate
high resolution digital surface/elevation models that will allow terrain
variables like flood risk and terrain complexity to be derived. Combining the
surface model with the nest and chick counts at the two colonies will provide
relationships between habitat covariates, nest density, and breeding success.
The approaches developed will enable Adelie penguin population sizes and
potentially several other indicators in the Ross Sea Marine Protected Area
Research and Monitoring Plan to be determined and evaluated. The flight control
algorithms developed have the potential to be used for many types of surveys,
especially when large areas need to be covered in a short period with extreme
weather potential and difficult landing options. Aerial images and video will be
used to create useable materials to be included in outreach and educational
programs. The automated image processing workflow and classification models will
be developed as open source software and will be made freely available for
others addressing similar wildlife monitoring
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.