* 1834628
* Collaborative Research: NSF INCLUDES Alliance: STEM Core Expansion
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jim Zoval, Saddleback College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 8,943,623.00

The STEM Core Alliance is an expansion of the basic STEM Core Initiative Design
and Development Launch Pilot (NSF Award 1649381), which was implemented in 15
community colleges in three states to broaden participation in STEM disciplines
through promoting remedial student advancement to calculus readiness, followed
by continuing STEM internship and education. The STEM Core Alliance expands the
basic STEM Core model to 17 additional colleges in 5 states through a hub and
spoke network, supported by four regional hubs, designed to support continuous
improvement, expansion, and replicability. The underlying STEM Core vision is to
broaden participation among underprepared community college students through
evidence-based practices that address barriers to accessing STEM Pathways. The
STEM Core Alliance will seek to contribute to the knowledge base on broadening
participation through four levels of action: student, institutional, regional,
and national. Under the leadership of Saddleback College and with the expertise
of the backbone organization, Growth Sector, 15 community colleges in three
states have already implemented and 15 more and two additional states have
committed to implement the STEM Core as part of a networked improvement
community. They will share best practices, benefit from alliance-wide
professional development, analyze data and evaluate the model's effectiveness,
and identify additional funding streams to support the model beyond the current
project. The regional hub institutions will provide the necessary infrastructure
to monitor and assist STEM Core implementation at regional colleges on a
continual basis. Multi-stakeholder partnerships with employers will provide STEM
Core colleges with internship and work-based learning opportunities with
employers and provide employers with a steady stream of qualified STEM students.
This model enables the network to be expanded rapidly, as hubs can support 6-12
colleges with moderate investment and technical assistance from the backbone.
The nation's thousands of community colleges, with similar missions, structures,
and curricula, present a ready-made network for expansion. As the STEM Core
expands, the alliance will contribute to the body of knowledge about networked
improvement community effectiveness and identify opportunities for collaboration
among other NSF INCLUDES alliances. In the short and especially the long term
this project will produce, through increasing the participation of
underrepresented groups in STEM fields, the benefits of enhancing progress in
science and advancing national prosperity and welfare. This NSF INCLUDES
Alliance is co-funded by the NSF Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI) program,
which seeks to increase the retention and graduation rates of students pursuing
associate or baccalaureate degrees in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address
barriers to STEM pathways, the STEM Core vision is to use the evidence-based
practices of acceleration, cohort-based learning communities, contextualized
learning, intensive support, and integrated internships. Contributions to the
knowledge base on broadening participation will be made as follows. At the
student level, the Alliance will evaluate the success in calculus readiness and
advancement into STEM educational and career pathways for remedial students. At
the institutional level, the goal will be for colleges to expand STEM pipelines
for remedial students and to address underlying institutional low expectations
for remedial students. The regional level goal is for regional hubs to sustain
and expand STEM Core implementation in regional and statewide networks,
ultimately increasing the number of colleges that implement the STEM Core model.
Nationally, the alliance will expand the STEM Core network and impacts by adding
colleges that adopt the STEM Core model and by sharing best practices and
solutions to scale the STEM Core model nationwide. The regional hub
institutions, as well as assisting STEM Core implementation at regional
colleges, will coordinate professional development, conduct regular regional
meetings and annual national alliance convenings, and coordinate the collection
of regional student outcome data. STEM research and work opportunities that are
not normally available to community college students will be provided by NASA
JPL, Lawrence Livermore National Lab and other national laboratories that will
provide internships for STEM Core students, giving them valuable contextualized
experiences in STEM fields that may lead to STEM careers. As the backbone
organization for the STEM Core Alliance, Growth Sector coordinates alliance-wide
activities, communications, collaboration, and data collection and dissemination
between Saddleback College, the regional hub institutions, and the 30 partner
colleges, as well as the external evaluator and employer partners. The STEM Core
Alliance's network incorporates leadership from Saddleback College, Growth
Sector in the role of the backbone organization, and regional hubs to coordinate
activities among partner colleges. This hub and spoke model enables regional
leaders to implement the STEM Core reliably at scale, considering regional
differences, populations, and needs in order to adapt the model
appropriately.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Alliance is co-funded by
the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education:Hispanic-Serving Institutions
(HSI) program, which seeks to increase the retention and graduation rates of
students pursuing associate or baccalaureate degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.