* 1834631
* RESESS 2018 Conference Travel Proposal
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Aisha Morris, UNAVCO, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 04/30/2019
* USD 17,318.00

Research Experiences in Solid Earth Science for Students (RESESS) is an
internship program dedicated to increasing the diversity of students entering
the geosciences. The mission of the internship is to increase the diversity of
students entering the geosciences. The primary activity of RESESS is to provide
a summer research experience for undergraduates from groups historically
underrepresented in the geosciences. Following the summer internship, interns
have the opportunity to present their research at a professional scientific
conference. Conference attendance provides the opportunity for exposure to a
diversity of scientific ideas, people, and approaches. Conference attendance is
also a valuable opportunity for students to speak with experts in their current
research fields and/or their desired fields of study. Additionally, the value of
interactions with potential graduate school advisors or employers is critical
for the ongoing professional development of students. RESESS alumni connect
through the annual alumni networking dinner at both GSA and AGU. These events
facilitate the ongoing connections of the alumni network, and create an
inclusive environment within large, potentially intimidating meetings. Finally,
the attendance of geoscience-focused interns at broader science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) meetings raises the visibility of the
geosciences within communities that are historically underrepresented in the
discipline. This travel proposal seeks to support conference attendance for the
eight 2018 RESESS interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This travel proposal builds on
the support provided via the GAGE Facility award (EAR-1261833, ending 30
September 2018) and associated supplements, which outlines the support for geo-
workforce development at UNAVCO including summer internships. Since 2005, UNAVCO
has managed the Research Experiences in Solid Earth Science for Students
(RESESS) internship. The mission of the internship is to increase the diversity
of students entering the geosciences. UNAVCO has funding in the GAGE award to
provide staff support for the 2018 summer experience, and has received a
supplement to the GAGE award to support the summer program. This travel award
will support the post-GAGE fall conference travel for the 2018 RESESS student
cohort. Specifically, this request will support conference attendance for the
eight 2018 RESESS interns. Conference attendance for interns provides the
opportunity for intern exposure to a diversity of scientific ideas, people, and
approaches. Conference attendance is also a valuable opportunity for students to
speak with experts in their current research fields and/or their desired fields
of study. Additionally, the value of interactions with potential graduate school
advisors or employers is critical for the ongoing professional development of
students. RESESS alumni connect with past participants through the annual alumni
networking dinner at both GSA and AGU. RESESS alumni are invited to join the
most recent interns for networking, information sharing, and mentoring. These
events facilitate the ongoing connections of the alumni network, and facilitate
an inclusive environment within large, potentially intimidating meetings.
Finally, the attendance of geoscience-focused interns at broader STEM meetings
raises the visibility of the geosciences within communities that are
historically underrepresented in the discipline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.