* 1834409
* 18th US National Congress for Theoretical and Applied Mechanics; Chicago, Illinois; June 5-9, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* jianmin qu, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2019
* USD 41,300.00

This grant provides financial support for the 18th US National Congress for
Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (USNCTAM) to be held in Chicago, Illinois,
June 5-9, 2018. USNCTAM is a premier gathering event for the theoretical and
applied mechanics community that is held every four years under the auspices of
the U.S. National Committee on Theoretical and Applied Mechanics (USNC/TAM). It
fosters and promotes the exchange of ideas and information among the various
disciplines of the theoretical and applied mechanics community around the world,
and to chart future priorities in mechanics related research, applications, and
education. This award will provide travel support as well as event support for
students and young faculty, especially from underrepresented groups, such as
minorities and women. Over a thousand attendees are expected to attend the
congress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with the mission of the USNC/TAM, the
congress organizers will: (1) provide partial travel support for undergraduate
and graduate students and junior faculty to attend the meeting, and (2) organize
two special events--the Young Investigator Career Development Workshop and the
Women Researchers Networking Event, aimed at building communities. The
organizers will reach out to historically black colleges and universities around
the country as well as women and persons with disabilities in the field. The
results of the meeting will be disseminated through the webpage of the USNC/TAM
to its member societies and the engineering science community at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.