* 1835924
* Removal of Non-Hydrocarbon Natural Gas Impurities over Gas Hydrate Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Carolyn Koh, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 10/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Every year close to 100 trillion standard cubic feet of natural gas are used
worldwide, making natural gas processing the largest industrial gas separation
technology. Natural gas consists primarily of methane, carbon dioxide, nitrogen,
hydrogen sulfide, and other hydrocarbon fuels. It is highly desirable to remove
non-fuel impurities from natural gas to improve its heat content. These
impurities may be removed with selective membranes, which allow one component to
pass while retaining other components. Membranes can save energy relative to
separation techniques that require compression or liquefaction of the gas at
cryogenic temperatures. The main objective of this work is the rational design
of novel gas hydrate membranes for natural gas purification. This research may
result in a viable energy-saving approach to potentially reduce the costs
associated with natural gas purification. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
thrust of this proposal is the rational design of a novel family of membranes,
composed of gas hydrates which offer the possibility of demonstrating high
separation performance for natural gas purification. The specific objectives of
this work include: (i) Development of gas hydrate membranes for the separation
of CO2, N2, and mercaptans from methane; (ii) Understanding and tuning the
kinetics of hydrate formation and dissociation; (iii) Demonstration of gas
hydrate membrane performance for the separation of CO2, N2, and mercaptans from
methane, and (iv) Establish the basic structure/separation relationships of gas
hydrates membranes for the separation of CH4 from non-hydrocarbon natural gas
impurities. Specifically, we propose a separation process in which gas hydrate
membranes will be employed to capture natural gas impurities, such as CO2, N2,
and mercaptans as H2S substitutes. Fundamentally, it is expected that the
proposed separation may be promoted or favored by a dynamic replacement in which
there will be an exchange of natural gas impurity molecules from the feed gas
with the guest molecules in the initially formed natural gas hydrate. This
separation mechanism would be very distinctive from traditional mechanisms
observed in polymeric or inorganic membrane materials. Finally, this proposal
aims at understanding fundamental questions related to gas hydrate membrane,
kinetics of formation and dissociation, and stability, which are key aspects for
developing robust gas hydrate membranes. The ability to fabricate gas hydrate
membranes for industrially relevant gas separations constitutes a new and
distinctive direction in membrane science, with the ultimate goal of achieving
higher combinations of permeability and selectivity for natural gas
purification. The educational outreach of the proposed plan spans from summer
workshops and REU programs, inclusion of underrepresented groups in
undergraduate education, and recruitment of minorities for graduate
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.