* 1835981
* HBCU Computer Science Faculty Workshop 2018
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Eugene Anderson, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 48,096.00

This workshop will have three foci - pedagogy, student success and grant
writing. This workshop will assist Historically Black College and University
(HBCU) faculty in improving their research productivity by engaging in increased
grant writing while continuing their mission to be effective advisors and
educators. Increasing the number of underrepresented groups earning computer and
information science and engineering degrees is critical to the nation's economic
competitiveness. Minority-serving colleges and universities produce a
disproportionate share of bachelor's degree graduates in computer and
information science and engineering: HBCUs are only 3 percent of all 4-year
colleges and universities, but awarded 11.4 percent of bachelor's degrees in
computer and information science to African Americans. HBCU faculty are
extremely important to the success of HBCU students in computer and information
science. The investigators will leverage the UNCF (United Negro College Fund)
Innovation Summit to introduce workshop attendees to current and emerging topics
that can create more competitive proposal topics (and writing), impact pedagogy
to improve student retention and generate the interest of institutional leaders
who typically attend the annual event. A pre-and-post survey will be used to
assess the effectiveness of the proposed work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.