* 1835725
* Frameworks: Software NSCI-Open OnDemand 2.0: Advancing Accessibility and Scalability for Computational Science through Leveraged Software Cyberinfrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Thomas Furlani, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 10/31/2023
* USD 3,345,802.00

Reducing barriers that limit the adoption of high performance computing (HPC)
addresses an important problem that broadly affects the science, engineering,
and humanities communities. This effort builds on existing capabilities with
large and varied user communities, and on national scale cyberinfrastructure and
high-performance computing resources. The approach has several
benefits:&lt;br/&gt; - It increases the use of HPC resources among communities
that are not well represented on HPC yet, but have growing needs for HPC.
&lt;br/&gt; - It is also beneficial to HPC providers, by supporting advanced
features for monitoring and visualization of the states of systems.&lt;br/&gt; -
The resulting framework will be used for training and workforce development,
expanding the future ability to use advanced cyberinfrastructure for
science.&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on the strengths of existing efforts, and
has the potential to benefit a broad user community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project develops Open OnDemand 2.0, an open-source software that enables access
to high-performance computing, cloud, and remote computing resources via the
web, and lower the barriers to access HPC systems. The project combines two
widely used HPC resources: &lt;br/&gt; - Open OnDemand 1.0 - an existing open-
source, web-based project for accessing HPC services; and &lt;br/&gt; - Open
XDMoD - an open-source tool that facilitates the management of high performance
computing resources.&lt;br/&gt;Project activities include enhancing an existing
web portal-to-HPC system (OnDemand), integrating XDMoD, extending the portal to
provide other methods of access for other science domains, and improving the
scaling of the system. The software employs a unique per-user web server
architecture. This gives a user full system-level access to an HPC cluster
through a web browser. Job performance visibility is provided by XDMoD, which
enables users to make more efficient usage of HPC resources. Innovation and
discovery will be integrated through a study which investigates ways to leverage
the system-level access provided by Open OnDemand with science gateways. The
integrated platform will enhance resource utilization visibility, extend to more
resource types and institutions, and support a smooth and easy utilization of
HPC resources with intuitive web interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.