* 1835309
* NCS-FO: Leveraging Deep Probabilistic Models to Understand the Neural Bases of Subjective Experience
* EDU,DGE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Ajay Satpute, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2023
* USD 999,375.00

An interdisciplinary team of researchers at Northeastern University, including
experts in deep learning and probabilistic programming, the cognitive
neuroscience of emotion, computational methods in neuroimaging, probabilistic
modeling, and computer vision, will engage in an integrated computational and
neuroscientific research effort to understand the neural bases of subjective
experience. Different individuals experience the same events in vastly different
ways, owing to their unique histories and psychological dispositions. For
someone with social anxieties, the mere thought of leaving the home can induce a
feeling of panic. Conversely, an experienced mountaineer may feel quite
comfortable balancing on the edge of a cliff. This variation of perspectives is
captured by the term subjective experience. Despite its centrality and ubiquity
in human cognition, it remains unclear how to model the neural bases of
subjective experience. The proposed work will develop new techniques for
statistical modeling of individual variation and apply these techniques to a
neuroimaging study of the subjective experience of fear. Together, these two
lines of research will yield fundamental insights into the neural bases of fear
experience. More generally, the developed computational framework will provide a
means of comparing different mathematical hypotheses about the relationship
between neural activity and individual differences. This will enable
investigation of a broad range of phenomena in psychology and cognitive
neuroscience. The work has further implications for other fields in which there
are individual differences in subject experience, such behavioral medicine and
the study of stress in the workplace or STEM education and the study of math or
test anxiety. This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding
Neural and Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly
supported by the Directorates for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE), Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and
Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences (SBE). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will develop a new computational framework for modeling individual
variation in neuroimaging data and use this framework to investigate the neural
bases of one powerful and societally meaningful subjective experience, namely,
of fear. Fear is a particularly useful assay because it involves variation
across situational contexts (spiders, heights, and social situations), and
dispositions (arachnophobia, acrophobia, and agoraphobia) that combine to create
subjective experience. In the proposed neuroimaging study, participants will be
scanned while watching videos that induce varying levels of arousal. To
characterize individual variation in this neuroimaging data, the investigators
will leverage advances in deep probabilistic programming to develop
probabilistic variants of factor analysis models. These models infer a low-
dimensional feature vector, also known as an embedding, for each participant and
stimulus. A simple neural network models the relationship between embeddings and
the neural response. This network can be trained in a data-driven manner and can
be parameterized in a variety of ways, depending on the experimental design, or
the neurocognitive hypotheses that are to be incorporated into the model. This
provides the necessary infrastructure to test different neural models of fear.
Concretely, the investigators will compare a model in which fear has its own
unique circuit (i.e., neural signature or biomarker) to subject- or situation-
specific neural architectures. More generally, the developed framework can be
adapted to model individual variation in neuroimaging studies in other
experimental settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.