* 1835874
* Collaborative Research: NSCI Framework: Software for Building a Community-Based Molecular Modeling Capability Around the Molecular Simulation Design Framework (MoSDeF)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Peter Cummings, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,089,470.00

As molecular-based computer simulations of both naturally occurring and man-made
(synthetic) materials become increasingly used to predict their properties, the
reproducibility of these simulations becomes an increasingly important issue.
These simulations are complex, require large amounts of computer time, and are
usually performed manually - i.e., put together one at a time, from all the
components that go into such a simulation, including the models for how
molecules interact with each other (known as forcefields). In addition, there
has been much interest in being able to perform such computational simulations
on large sets of different but related systems in order to screen for desirable
properties, leading to the discovery of new materials and their incorporation
into applications twice as rapidly and at half the cost of existing, primarily
experimental, methods. This ambition is the basis for the national Materials
Genome Initiative (MGI), making reproducibility even more important. In this
project, nine research groups from eight universities are combining their
expertise to create a software environment, called the Molecular Simulation
Design Framework (MoSDeF) that will enable the automation of molecular-based
computer simulations of soft materials (such as fluids, polymers, and biological
systems) and will enable MGI-style screening of such systems. MoSDeF is open
source and the use of MoSDeF will enable reproducibility in molecular-based
computer simulations, because all simulation steps, all input data, and all
codes used will be publicly accessible to anyone to reproduce a published
simulation. MoSDeF will contribute to reproducibility through standardization
and maintaining the provenance of forcefields, one of the most common sources of
irreproducibility in molecular-based
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reproducibility in scientific research has
become a prominent issue. Computational scientists, along with the rest of the
scientific community, are grappling with the central question: How can a study
be performed and published in such a way that it can be replicated by others?
Answering this question is essential to the scientific enterprise and
increasingly urgent, as reproducibility issues faced in small-scale studies will
only be compounded as researchers look to harness the ever expanding
computational power to perform large-scale Materials Genome Initiative (MGI)
inspired screening studies, thus growing the number of simulations by orders of
magnitude. Addressing the issues of reproducibility in soft matter simulation is
particularly challenging, given the complexity of the simulation inputs and
workflows, and the all-to-common usage of closed-source software. In this
proposal, nine leading research groups (from Vanderbilt, U Michigan, Notre Dame
U, U Delaware, Boise State U, U Houston, Wayne State U, and U Minnesota),
representing a broad range of expertise, and an equally broad range of science
applications, simulation codes, algorithms and analysis tools, along with
computer scientists from Vanderbilt's Institute for Software Integrated Systems
(ISIS), are committing to invest their expertise and capabilities to transform
the mindset of molecular simulationists to perform and publish their simulations
in such a way as to be Transparent, Reproducible, Usable by others, and
Extensible (TRUE). Most of the investigators are recent or current holders of
grants from the software program (i.e., S2I2, SSI or SSE grants); thus, the
project builds upon, and brings synergy to, an existing large investment in
molecular simulation software by NSF. To drive the community towards performing
simulation that are TRUE, new software tools to facilitate best practices will
be developed. Specifically, this will be achieved by expanding the capabilities
of the open-source molecular simulation design framework (MoSDeF), which was
initiated at Vanderbilt with support from two NSF grants. MoSDeF is a modular,
scriptable Python framework that includes modules for programmatic system
construction, encoding and applying force field usage rules, and workflow
management, allowing the exact procedures used to setup and perform a simulation
to be capture, version-controlled, and preserved. Continued development of the
existing MoSDeF modules will be performed to support a wider range of force
fields, molecular models, and open-source simulation engines. The creation of a
plugin architecture for community extension, and the development of new modules
for force field optimization, free energy calculations, and screening, will
further allow MoSDeF can achieve these goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate
for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.