* 1835443
* Framework: Software: Next-Generation Cyberinfrastructure for Large-Scale Computer-Based Scientific Analysis and Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Alan Edelman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2023
* USD 3,498,560.00

Recent revolutions in data availability have radically altered activities across
many fields within science, industry, and government. For instance, contemporary
simulations medication properties can require the computational power of entire
data centers, and recent efforts in astronomy will soon generate the largest
image datasets in history. In such extreme environments, the only viable path
forward for scientific discovery hinges on the development and exploitation of
next-generation computational cyberinfrastructure of supercomputers and
software. The development of this new computational infrastructure demands
significant engineering resources, so it is paramount to maximize the
infrastructure's potential for high impact and wide adoption across as many
technical domains as possible. Unfortunately, despite this necessity, existing
development processes often produce software that is limited to specific
hardware, or requires additional expertise to use properly, or is overly
specialized to a specific problem domain. Such "single-use" software tools are
limited in scope, leading to underutilization by the wider scientific community.
In contrast, this project seeks to develop methods and software for computer-
based scientific analysis that are sufficiently powerful, flexible and
accessible to (i) enable domain experts to achieve significant advancements
within their domains, and (ii) enable innovative use of advanced computational
techniques in unexpected scientific, technological and industrial applications.
This project will apply these tools to a wide variety of specific scientific
challenges faced by various research teams in astronomy, medicine, and energy
management. These teams plan on using the proposed work to map out new star
systems, develop new life-saving medications, and design new power systems that
will deliver more energy to a greater number of homes and businesses at a lower
cost than existing systems. Finally, this project will seek to leave a legacy of
sustained societal benefit by educating students and practitioners in the
broader scientific and engineering communities via exposure to state-of-the-art
computational techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through close collaboration with
research teams in statistical astronomy, pharmacometrics, power systems
optimization, and high-performance computing, this project will deliver
cyberinfrastructure that will effectively and effortlessly enable the next
generation of computer-based scientific analysis and discovery. To ensure the
practical applicability of the developed cyberinfrastructure, the project will
focus on three target scientific applications: (i) economically viable
decarbonization of electrical power networks, (ii) real-time analysis of
extreme-scale astronomical image data, and (iii) pharmacometric modeling and
simulation for drug analysis and discovery. While tackling these specific
problems will constitute an initial stress test of the proposed
cyberinfrastructure, it is the ultimate goal of the project that the developed
tools be sufficiently performant, accessible, composable, flexible and adaptable
to be applied to the widest possible range of problem domains. To achieve this
vision, the project will build and improve various software tools for
computational optimization, machine learning, parallel computing, and model-
based simulation. Particular attention will be paid to the proposed
cyberinfrastructure's composability with new and existing tools for scientific
analysis and discovery. The pursuit of these goals will require the design and
implementation of new programming language abstractions to allow close
integration of high-level language features with low-level compiler
optimizations. Furthermore, maximally exploiting proposed cyberinfrastructure
will require research into new methods that combine state-of-the-art techniques
from optimization, machine learning, and high-performance
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.