* 1835957
* Student Design Essay Competition "Challenges in the Design of Complex Systems"; Travel Support to ASME IDETC 2018, ASME IDETC 2019, and ASME IDETC 2020 Conferences
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Janet Allen, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

This award supports the NSF goal to 'achieve excellence in U.S. Science,
mathematics, engineering, and technology education at all levels', and will
'provide opportunities for young people that will attract them to and prepare
them for careers in science, mathematics, and engineering'. Through a student
essay competition, undergraduate and graduate students will be selected to
attend a premier conference in engineering and systems design. The essay
assignment challenges students to consider the effect of global competitiveness
on engineering design practices, particularly in light of complex systems, and
articulate their vision for the future of engineering and systems design. This
exercise promotes the type of thinking skills necessary for innovators and
researchers in engineering. The conference experience promotes growth in
individual students and can also serve to strengthen the overall research
quality of the research at the student's home institution when this knowledge is
shared among their peers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is
to promote undergraduate and graduate student professional development in
engineering and systems design through an essay competition and support for
travel to a research conference. A secondary objective is to encourage students
to think deeply about what engineering design of complex systems will be like
20-30 years in the future. The competition will be publicized broadly, with
students from a variety of engineering disciplines encouraged to compete. They
will communicate their thoughts on the competition topic in an essay which will
be judged by a distinguished group of engineering design researchers and
educators. Travel funds will be provided for students who are selected through
the design essay competition. A poster session will be organized at the
conference to give the students an opportunity to interact with researchers and
discuss their ideas on the future of engineering design of complex systems.
Winning essays will be featured on a website so that they are accessible to a
broad audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.