* 1835209
* NCS-FO: Modeling Individual Differences in Cognitive Control as Variation in Neural Activation Trajectories
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Todd Braver, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 09/30/2022
* USD 610,560.00

NSF 1835209&lt;br/&gt;NCS-FO: Modeling Individual Differences in Cognitive
Control as Variation in Neural Activation
Trajectories&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This award supports fundamental
research to examine how activity within brain networks allows humans to adapt
their behavior in order to achieve goals and complete mental tasks. Such
processes within the brain, referred to as cognitive control, are thought to
differentiate individuals in terms of mental abilities that are critical for
successful navigation in activities of daily life, such as planning, problem
solving and reasoning. Current brain imaging methods enable examination of the
activity and interactions among brain networks as individuals perform various
tasks, thus providing a window into the mechanisms of cognitive control.
However, research efforts to date have mostly used imaging data to generate
snapshots of brain activity that are averaged across groups of individuals and
many different events while performing a task. In this research program, the
investigators develop a new form of analysis to characterize the moment-to-
moment fluctuations in brain activity, within each individual, as they
transition from rest to cognitively demanding task conditions. In particular,
efforts will be directed towards the development of a computational model that
can predict how brain networks coordinate activity over seconds-level timescales
in response to changing task conditions. A key aspect of the effort will be to
develop unique models for each individual, drawing from a large database of
previously obtained neuroimaging data. In these data, individuals perform a
range of tasks requiring different cognitive control strategies, some proactive
(sustained) versus others reactive (transient). Thus, application of the model
will reveal how the brains of these individuals differentially respond to
various types of cognitive demand. The development of this model also provides a
unique opportunity for education and outreach; specific efforts will be directed
toward the development of a software platform through which members of the
public can work with demonstration models to probe and learn about how different
patterns of brain activity relate to cognitive
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Functional neuroimaging has allowed for detailed
spatial and temporal characterizations of brain network activation in an effort
to elucidate the neural underpinnings of cognitive control. However, such
analyses usually rely on static snapshots of neural activation patterns in
individual brain regions and/or correlational indices of inter-regional co-
activation (i.e., functional connectivity). Further progress in understanding
distinctions between cognitive states and cognitive control strategies requires
more precise descriptions of the brain dynamics that govern how patterns of
neural activity (trajectories) evolve across time. Leveraging recent
advancements in optimization theory that allow for reliable high-dimensional
parameter estimation, this award will support the validation and
parameterization of single-subject dynamical models using high-resolution, long-
duration resting-state fMRI data from the Human Connectome Project, which
contains data from over 1000 individuals. Subsequent model analysis will
characterize individual differences in terms of brain network dynamics, focusing
on quantitative metrics of the ruggedness of the attractor landscape (which
indicates the diversity of achievable trajectories) and the consequent energetic
costs incurred by shifting between cognitive states and strategies. Hypothesis
testing will be conducted with a unique follow-up dataset, consisting of a
subset of HCP participants and monozygotic (identical) twins (over 100 in total)
tracked in multiple neuroimaging sessions, under conditions that systematically
manipulate cognitive control strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.