* 1835086
* RAPID:  Fire severity, topoclimates and resilience of oak woodlands: Responses to the 2017 Northern California wildfires
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2020
* David Ackerly, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 05/31/2020
* USD 158,348.00

Forests are important components of our natural world. They create habitats for
other plants and animals and provide important services, such as reducing soil
erosion and storing carbon in their trunks and roots. In recent years, large
wildfires have become increasingly common in California and the American West,
due in part to increasingly hot summers and droughts. This study will examine
how natural disturbances, such as wildfires, influence the way that forests
change over time. If some kinds of trees recover more quickly than others, for
example, the types of trees that make up these forests may change and this
change could affect the forest's ability to withstand future disturbances.
Results of this study will inform our ability to understand, conserve and manage
forest habitats. This project will train a postdoctoral student and junior
college students from diverse backgrounds. This project will also engage the
public and local land managers through public workshops, a website, and other
efforts by the Pepperwood Preserve.

The interaction between environmental disturbances and a warming climate will
play a critical role in the way that plant communities will respond and change
in the coming decades. In woodlands and forests the longevity and fecundity of
mature trees exert strong priority effects that limit the establishment of new
species. This priority effect may slow the rate of changes in the structure and
composition of the forest relative to what might be expected given rapid changes
in local climatic conditions. The 2017 Tubbs Fire in Sonoma County, one of the
most destructive complex of fires in California's history, provides an
opportunity to explore how fire, as a disturbance, influences the rate and
trajectory of community turnover. More specifically, this research will test the
hypothesis that community turnover in forests associated with cooler positions
(i.e. north-facing slopes) will be greatest following the fire, but that the
resulting changes in species composition may make them more resistant to future
fires or drought as the community shifts to species that are better able to
tolerant such disturbances. The research will take place at the Pepperwood
Preserve field station where long-term studies of forest ecology were initiated
prior to the fire, providing a unique opportunity to quantify the mortality,
top-kill and regrowth of trees of different species. About 8,000 individual
plants, from small saplings to large trees, will be assessed to determine fire
damage and recovery, and species turnover across different forest types and
positions on the landscape.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.