* 1835712
* Elements:Software:Open-Source Robust Geometry Toolkit for Black-Box Finite Element Analysis
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Daniele Panozzo, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2023
* USD 599,967.00

The numerical solution of partial differential equations (PDEs) is ubiquitous in
science and engineering applications, including simulation of elastoplastic
deformations, fluids, and light scattering. The finite element method (FEM) is
the most commonly used discretization of PDEs, especially in the context of
structural and thermal analysis, due to its generality and rich selection of
off-the-shelf commercial implementations. Ideally, a PDE solver should be a
``black box'': the user provides as input the domain boundary, boundary
conditions, and the governing equations, and the code computes the value of the
solution at a set of user-specified points of the input domain. This is
surprisingly far from being the case for all existing open-source or commercial
software, despite the research efforts in this direction and the large academic
and industrial interest. To a large extent, this is due to treating meshing and
FEM basis construction as two disjoint problems, often exposing the user to the
technical issues of interfacing the meshing software with FEM basis
construction, both of which, strictly speaking, are technical issues internal to
the solver. This state of matters presents a fundamental problem for
applications that require fully automatic, robust processing of large
collections of meshes of varying sizes, an increasingly common situation as
large collections of geometric data become available. This proposal introduces
an integrated pipeline, considering meshing and element design as a single
challenge, and developing a software platform to enable black box analysis on
complex geometric models represented as point clouds, triangle meshes, or CAD
(Computer Aided Design) models, opening the door to new shape design technique
to a wide range of new applications in sciences and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to develop a set of
software components based on a set of novel approaches the investigators have
developed combined with "filtered" use of rational or multi-precision numerical
representations to handle robustness problems while maintaining practical
performance. The proposed set of geometry processing techniques, while slower
than existing ones, are fully robust in a sense of always produce a valid result
with minimal assumptions on the input. The geometric toolkit will allow to
automatically convert geometrical data in the form of range scans, CAD models,
or voxel grids into a surface or volumetric representation, directly usable in
widely used open-source finite element method (FEM) packages. It will include
mesh generation, in addition to tetrahedral meshes, for other common types of
discretizations: hexahedral meshes, and hex-dominant hybrid meshes. The key
innovation is to achieve numerical robustness with minimal added algorithmic
complexity by carefully mixing higher precision representations for the critical
part, while relying on standard fixed-precision floating point representation
for the rest and designing algorithms amenable to this approach. As in
overwhelming majority of cases higher accuracy is needed for a vanishingly small
fraction of computation, this approach allows the users to achieve sensible
running time while ensuring output validity and algorithmic correctness on
imperfect, real world data. Secondly, the invetigators will integrate FEM basis
construction with meshing decoupling accuracy from mesh quality. The software
toolkit developed in this proposal has potential for a major impact in all
domains that require computational simulation of physical phenomena in complex
geometries, enabling the automation of data acquisition, reconstruction, and
simulation pipelines. The expectation of this project is that the outcome will
not only be a reduction in human time, but the opportunity to fully automate
this pipeline will open new research venues. The release of all the software
with a MPL2 license will facilitate integration of the results of the work into
commercial software, in addition to academic/non-profit research
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.