* 1835251
* NCS-FO: Integrating Non-Invasive Neuroimaging and Educational Data Mining to Improve Understanding of Robust Learning Processes
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Erin Walker, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2019
* USD 335,509.00

From elementary school math games to workplace training, computer-based learning
applications are becoming more widespread. With these programs, it becomes
increasingly possible to use the data generated, such as correct and incorrect
problem-solving responses, to develop ways to test for student knowledge and to
personalize instruction to student needs. The logs of student responses can
capture answers, but they fail to capture critical information about what is
happening during pauses between student interactions with the software. This
project, led by a team of researchers at Arizona State University and Worcester
Polytechnic Institute, will explore the use of measurements of brain activity
from lightweight brain sensors alongside student log data to understand
important mental activities during learning. The study will examine
developmental math learning in college and community college students using the
ASSISTments intelligent tutoring system. Using brain imaging, the project team
will examine whether students are thinking deeply about the problem or mind-
wandering during pauses in the learning tasks and use the combined log and brain
data to make predictions about learning outcomes. This work will build a
foundation for new methods of combining neuroimaging, machine learning, and
personalized learning environments. With a better understanding of when and how
learning occurs during pauses in tutoring system use, learning technology
researchers and developers will be able to create adaptive interventions within
tutoring systems that are better personalized to the needs of the individual.
This project is funded by Integrative Strategies for Understanding Neural and
Cognitive Systems (NSF-NCS), a multidisciplinary program jointly supported by
the Directorates for Computer and Information Science and Engineering (CISE),
Education and Human Resources (EHR), Engineering (ENG), and Social, Behavioral,
and Economic Sciences (SBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has of three
goals: 1) Integrating multiple data streams for the creation of an
interdisciplinary corpus; 2) Detecting real-time changes in cognitive states
during pauses in log data; and 3) Predicting learning outcomes from brain-based
and log-based inferences of cognitive states. In addressing these goals, the
team will collect brain data, using functional near-infrared spectroscopy
neuroimaging, and behavioral data from controlled, well-understood tasks related
to rule learning and mind wandering and from authentic learning tasks. Cognitive
neuroscience research involving recordings of brain activity traditionally
requires paradigms with highly constrained stimuli, timing, and task
requirements, whereas research in complex real-world environments such as
tutoring systems rarely align with these paradigms. Features of the brain
activity during the cognitive tasks will be used to make inferences about
student cognition during authentic learning tasks. In addition, brain features
will be combined with log data features to create machine learning models that
make accurate predictions of student robust learning outcomes, to be assessed
using a posttest given after students use the interactive learning environment.
Contributions of this project to STEM learning will include improved
understanding of how students build knowledge in response to instructional
events within digital learning environments, the construction of better
predictive models of when students learn from the use of personalized learning
environments, and a mapping between learning processes and the length and
context of pauses. This project will also contribute to understandings of how to
combine analyses of neuroimaging data and log data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.