* 1835847
* EAGER: Field-ready DNA Screening Platform for Seafood Species and Source-population Identification
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Karl Bohringer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2021
* USD 80,000.00

Identifying where our seafood originated once it has been processed into a
product, such as a filet, is extremely difficult. This challenge is particularly
frustrating to conservationists and enforcement officials who need to determine
if a product came from an illegal, unreported, or unregulated fishery. Such
fisheries are one of the biggest threats to sensitive marine ecosystems and
sustainable fishing practices. Source identification of an unknown seafood
product is possible with modern DNA testing capabilities, but facilities that
can perform these tests are limited and often long distances from where these
seafood products are encountered. Therefore, a new kind of screening tool is
needed that can perform a DNA test at the site of first interception by an
untrained user. To accomplish this vision, we aim to develop a platform that can
automate the core essential steps for a DNA test by pairing recent advances in
medical diagnostics for the developing world with a liquid handling system that
can be programmed to controllably manipulate droplets of water. This system will
use the droplets to move and combine samples with reagents, enabling a DNA test.
The realization of this platform will enhance our ability to detect and halt
seafood fraud and illegal substitutions. Further, this platform also shows much
potential for translation to other forms of wildlife trafficking, food safety,
and invasive species monitoring.

A portable DNA screening tool for rapid identification of Pacific cod (Gadus
macrocephalus), a priority species of concern for the National Oceanographic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), will be developed. This platform will be
designed for use by non-scientific operators in the field through the
development of a novel microfluidic system. This system has been well-
characterized in the laboratory and presents immense potential for automating
and multiplexing molecular tests, however the proposed work will be the first to
investigate the functional utility of these microfluidic devices for DNA tests
with relevant samples and reagents. The molecular assays proposed in this work
were initially developed for global health diagnostics. Here, we aim to apply
them towards marine species identification. Further, we aim to push the limits
of the selectivity for this approach by investigating the development of a probe
system that differentiates much subtler and more challenging genetic variances,
providing population-level identification of Pacific cod. This detection ability
will open the way for source-population and regional identification to
substantially enhance prevention of seafood imports from illegal fisheries.
Finally, this pairing of automated microfluidics with population genetics will
be translated to a field-ready platform and tested in a real-world environment
to gain crucial feedback from end-users. Bringing a developmental engineering
approach to conservation, we aim to deliver a platform that democratizes complex
engineering and genetic concepts for seafood screening. Thus, the proposed
scalable, portable DNA screening tool will be the first of its kind.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.