* 1835885
* Elements: Software: Multidimensional Fast Fourier Transforms on the Path to Exascale
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Dmitry Pekurovsky, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 04/30/2022
* USD 477,460.00

This project will contribute to software available freely to the public,
providing solution of an important class of problems in computational science,
namely the multidimensional Fast Fourier transforms (FFTs). This software will
enable scientists to run certain classes of computer experiments on powerful
state-of-the-art supercomputers, known as Exascale machines. A wide range of
science fields will benefit from such public software; thus, it will contribute
to innumerable discoveries related to fundamental understanding of nature,
protecting the environment, efficient energy and transportation, designing new
materials and improving medicine. It will also contribute to the computational
ecosystem by virtue of being a building block that can be used and reused by
other programs. This project also includes an educational effort in training a
wide range of supercomputer users, from undergraduate interns to
graduate/postdoctoral researchers and faculty. Effort will be made to reach out
to underrepresented groups when recruiting the interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI), in particular Strategic
Objective 4 "An Enduring National HPC Ecosystem", outlines the crucial need for
development of foundational algorithms and software for next generation
supercomputers, and for easing access to the next-generation compute resources
to wide classes of users. Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) is a ubiquitous tool in
scientific simulations, from Computational Fluid Dynamics to plasma physics,
astrophysics, ocean modeling, materials research, medical imaging, molecular
dynamics and many others. This project will fill the gap in highly efficient
software for multidimensional FFTs for use on Exascale platforms. While running
full FFT at exa-scale appears prohibitive due to strong interconnect bandwidth
dependence, steps must be taken towards this goal due to the importance of the
algorithm. Building on the previous work with P3DFFT, an open-source numerical
library used by many applications in diverse science fields, this proposal aims
to push the envelope in terms of adapting multidimensional FFT to new
architectures and aggressively scale its performance, without losing the
portability and the practical ease of use. The project will employ both novel
and proven state-of-the-art tools, such as auto-tuning, overlap of communication
with computation and GPU implementation, which will help reduce the bandwidth
bottleneck. In addition, features will be added that will make the software
appealing to a wider user base. The software will become an integral part of the
National Cyberinfrastructure and will aid in numerous scientific and engineering
advances, including in areas such as environmental research, energy, efficient
transportation, new drugs and new materials. This project includes training of a
new generation of scientific software developers through XSEDE training
webinars, conference training workshops and supervision of undergraduate
interns. The project plan includes reaching out to underrepresented groups when
recruiting undergraduate interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.