* 1835000
* NCS-FO: Closed-loop neuromodulation for chronic pain
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Zhe Chen, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2023
* USD 877,220.00

Proposal Title: NSF-FO: Closed-loop neuromodulation for chronic
pain&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pain is a complex and multi-dimensional experience
that nevertheless occurs commonly in people's daily lives. Chronic pain affects
1.5 billion people worldwide and has contributed to major healthcare costs. The
treatment of chronic pain remains insufficient, highlighted by the current
opioid epidemic. In the past few decades, neuroscience research has provided
accumulating knowledge of pain processing in the central nervous system.
However, effective analgesic options with limited side effects remain elusive,
in large part because the neural mechanism for how chronic pain is perceived and
modulated in the brain is poorly understood. This proposal tries to challenge
the status quo using chronic pain-treated rodent models. The use of rodent
models would allow researchers to examine the brain activity at specific
localized neural circuits at a cellular resolution, and to further provide a
guideline for neuromodulation-based pain treatment. The project has great
translational potential to advance personalized pain medicine and provide
therapy for the chronic pain associated with a wide range of neuropsychiatric
disorders. This project will also promote education and diversity in training
undergraduate/graduate students or postdoctoral fellows, and will be committed
to data sharing and outreach activity in order to maximize the benefit to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project will integrate
behavior and electrophysiology studies to investigate the causal impact of
neuromodulation on neocortical circuits in chronic pain conditions. The ultimate
objective of this proposal is to develop a noninvasive brain machine interface
system for detecting and relieving chronic pain in a rodent model. On the one
hand, this project will investigate examine basic neuroscience questions
regarding the neural variability underlying complex sensory and affective
processes. On the other hand, this project will investigate a minimally invasive
neuromodulation strategy for treating chronic pain. In Aim 1, in vivo
extracellular neural activity (including the ensemble spike activity and local
field potentials) will be recorded from the primary somatosensory cortex and
anterior cingulate cortex of freely behaving chronic pain-treated rats. This
will allow researchers to characterize nociceptive response variability under
different chronic pain conditions. In Aim 2, a closed-loop rodent
neuromodulation interface will be developed for chronic pain control, which
combines the detection of pain signals (?detection arm?) and neuromodualtion
(?treatment arm?). This aim will optimize neural signal processing using multi-
region local field potentials and further leverage advances in neuromodulation
techniques to employ epicranial current stimulation on the targeted brain region
(such as the primary motor cortex). In Aim 3, the current stimulation parameters
(e.g., intensity and duration) will be optimized using online neurofeedback to
improve the efficacy of neuromodulation in light of reinforcement learning. In
summary, the brain-machine interface system will tease apart the mechanism of
cortical pain circuits, and characterize the nociceptive response variability
under different (inflammatory vs. neuropathic) chronic pain conditions.
Together, these results will reveal novel insights into circuit mechanisms of
chronic pain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.