* 1835983
* ABR: Collaborative research: Smart earpiece for supporting healthy eating behaviors
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* David Kotz, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 992,098.00

Obesity is one of the most pressing health challenges faced by our country, and
has been the target of much attention in the mobile health (mHealth) community.
While the science of obesity indicates that diet is a major factor in healthy
weight management, scientists are still not able to effectively, quickly and
easily measure eating behavior. This project's goal is to develop a digital
earpiece comfortable enough to wear (on or near the ear) that can sense and
detect eating behavior. The project's long-term vision is to enable health
researchers to better understand eating-related behaviors and, subsequently, to
support the development of effective interventions that promote healthy diet and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, a better understanding of eating-
related behaviors, and better design of effective interventions regarding eating
behavior, will have profound impact on personal and public health as well as the
national economy. The project's hardware and software prototypes will be shared
widely in the research community to enable experimentation around the sensing
and interaction opportunities possible in an earpiece device. Furthermore, the
project directly involves undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary research, and outreach to middle-school students, expanding
the supply of scientists educated in this important emerging
topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build a prototype wireless
earpiece, with low-power (microwatt-scale) electronics and software sufficient
to allow for the battery to last a full waking day; to develop efficient
algorithms for detecting and distinguishing health-related behaviors; and to
develop easy and effective means for the wearer to interact with the earpiece
and its applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team expects to answer scientific
questions important to achieving the above goals. Specifically, they seek to
advance scientific knowledge through the design and development of a wireless
earpiece capable of sensing behavior and interacting with its wearer; develop
novel low-power analog electronics and distributed software algorithms for
inferring relevant behaviors from sensor data; develop novel interaction
modalities involving bone-conduction audio between the earpiece and its wearer,
complemented by tactile interfaces on the earpiece, on the skin, or on auxiliary
devices like a wristband or smartphone; and validate these approaches through
user studies and experiments inside and outside the
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.