* 1835511
* Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation - Software Elements: Cloud WRF for the Atmospheric Research and Education Communities
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Jordan Powers, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2020
* USD 284,201.00

This award supports the establishment of an officially-supported version of the
Weather and Research Forecast (WRF) model in the cloud environment. WRF is the
world's most popular numerical weather prediction model and is supported by the
National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR) for a community of users across
universities, research labs, and operational weather centers. This project will
address fundamental issues such as modeling system accessibility, improvement of
model support to the research and educational user communities, student and
scientist training, and facilitation of model development. Given WRF's
prominence in both atmospheric research and real-time weather forecasting, this
work will not only promote the advancement of science, but also will contribute
to the vigor of development and application of one of the nation's
cyberinfrastucture (CI) assets, a key weather prediction model used at
operational centers and for public purposes. Furthermore, this project will
contribute to education at minority-serving institutions and will yield tools to
better the training of new generations of the nation's atmospheric scientists.
Lastly, the project will leverage the resources and support of commercial cloud
service providers to serve these national interests, in a collaboration of the
principal researchers with industry.

The viability of running the WRF in the cloud has been previously demonstrated,
and this project would advance the field by configuring and supporting the
official version of the WRF in the cloud, with an up-to-date, cloud-configured
version of the WRF system code synced to the WRF GitHub repository. Other
materials that will be available include the WRF tutorial materials and system
documentation, WRF input and output datasets, and the WRF Testing Framework code
analysis package. The project will produce a configured and documented cloud WRF
system that will open a new arena for model use and that will enhance the
efficiency of both user support and the integration of contributed model
improvements. This cloud capability will exploit an emerging common cyber-ground
to facilitate code development for the target model and allow for critical
reproducibility in code analysis and testing. It will advance the delivery of
modeling system tutorials, and thus scientist training and education, through
establishing globally-accessible modeling spaces, enhancing instruction
portability and access, decreasing costs for host institutions, and improving
usability of on-line materials. These new cloud capabilities will be addressing
bottlenecks in model support and development, and once developed, the CI can be
adapted for other community models, thus benefiting other scientific disciplines
and their tools via its reuse.

This award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly
supported by the Cross-Cutting Program within the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.