* 1835421
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Software: Accelerating Discovery of the First Stars through a Robust Software Testing Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Bryna Hazelton, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 344,613.00

The birth of the first stars and galaxies 13 billions years ago -- our "Cosmic
Dawn" -- is one of the last unobserved periods in the history of the Universe.
Scientists are working to observe the 21 cm radio light emitted by the primeval
neutral hydrogen fog as the first stars formed. These observations are
considered one of the grand challenges of modern astrophysics. This project will
provide critical software infrastructure for the field of 21 cm cosmology,
enabling rapid vetting of the new analyses and techniques developed for these
observations and increasing their robustness, rigor, and reproducibility. Under
this project The investigators will train students in the best practices for
software and code development, preparing them to develop robust, reproducible
software for their own research, contribute to large open source projects, and
develop software in a professional setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
biggest challenges for the detection of the Epoch of Reionization is the
presence of bright astrophysical foregrounds that obscures the signal of
interest, requiring extraordinarily precise modeling and calibration of the
radio telescopes performing these observations. The 21 cm cosmology community is
rapidly developing new techniques for instrument calibration, foreground
removal, and analysis, but thorough testing and integration into existing data
analysis pipelines has been slow. This project will provide a software
infrastructure that can enable rigorous, seamless testing of novel algorithmic
developments within a unified framework. This infrastructure will ensure a level
of reliability and reproducibility not possible with current tools and
accelerate the speed at which developments become integrated into production
level code, providing an invaluable foundation for bringing our field into the
next decade and for leveraging the current NSF investments in these
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Astronomical Sciences in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.