* 1835267
* Elements: Software: NSCI: A Quantum Electromagnetics Simulation Toolbox (QuEST) for Active Heterogeneous Media by Design
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Shanker Balasubramaniam, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 563,340.00

Designing novel optical materials with enhanced properties would impact many
areas of science and technology, leading to new lasers, better components for
photonics, and to a deeper understanding of how light interacts with matter.
This project will develop software that simulates how light would propagate in
yet to be made complex optical materials. The final product will be a software
toolbox that computes the dynamics of each individual light emitter in the
materials rather than calculating an average macroscopic field. This toolbox
will permit the engineering and optimization of optical properties by combining
heterogeneous components at the nanoscale. The software will be disseminated
widely to enable scientists worldwide to conduct research on this area and will
provide a blueprint for broader applications to magnetic materials and
ultrasound acoustics. Two graduate students will be engaged in this research and
will be trained in interdisciplinary topics encompassing fundamental physics,
mathematics, materials science, and software
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three innovative modules will be implemented
and tested in the software toolbox: (i) A module based on Time Domain
Accelerated Integrated Methods. These methods rely on the separation into near
field and far field terms in the interaction between optically active centers
and introduce a hierarchical structure that can be computationally exploited.
This module will dramatically reduce computational costs, leading to simulations
of realistic systems with millions of optical emitters. (ii) A stochastic
optimization module that maximizes materials functionalities based on
geometrical and compositional distribution of the emitters in the medium. This
optimization module will simulate in parallel several virtual samples and will
guide the computational effort towards optimal materials. (iii) A rationalized
representation of electromagnetic field localization based on the novel
mathematical concept of landscape functions, which effectively reduces the
eigenvalue problem associated to localization into a static boundary condition
problem. This computationally efficient approach provides approximated
eigenvalues and quickly identifies the sub-regions of the system that support
electromagnetic field localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of
Materials Research in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.