* 1835735
* Collaborative Research: Framework: Data: HDR: Nanocomposites to Metamaterials: A Knowledge Graph Framework
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Chiara Daraio, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 10/31/2023
* USD 666,834.00

A team of experts from four universities (Duke, RPI, Caltech and Northwestern)
creates an open source data resource for the polymer nanocomposites and
metamaterials communities. A broad spectrum of users will be able to query the
system, identify materials that may have certain characteristics, and
automatically produce information about these materials. The new capability
(MetaMine) is based on previous work by the research team in nanomaterials
(NanoMine). The effort focuses upon two significant domain problems: discovery
of factors controlling the dissipation peak in nanocomposites, and tailored
mechanical response in metamaterials motivated by an application to personalize
running shoes. The project will significantly improve the representation of data
and the robustness with which user communities can identify promising materials
applications. By expanding interaction of the nanocomposite and metamaterials
communities with curated data resources, the project enables new collaborations
in materials discovery and design. Strong connections with the National
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the Air Force Research Laboratory
(AFRL), and Lockheed Martin facilitate industry and government use of the
resulting knowledge base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops an open
source Materials Knowledge Graph (MKG) framework. The framework for materials
includes extensible semantic infrastructure, customizable user templates, semi-
automatic curation tools, ontology-enabled design tools and custom user
dashboards. The work generalizes a prototype data resource (NanoMine) previously
developed by the researchers, and demonstrates the extensibility of this
framework to metamaterials. NanoMine enables annotation, organization and data
storage on a wide variety of nanocomposite samples, including information on
composition, processing, microstructure and properties. The extensibility will
be demonstrated through creation of a MetaMine module for metamaterials,
parallel to the NanoMine module for nanocomposites. The frameworks will allow
for curation of data sets and end-user discovery of processing-structure-
property relationships. The work supports the Materials Genome Initiative by
creating an extensible data ecosystem to share and re-use materials data,
enabling faster development of materials via robust testing of models and
application of analysis tools. The capability will be compatible with the NIST
Material Data Curator System, and the team also engages both AFRL and Lockheed
Martin to facilitate industry and government use of the resulting knowledge
base. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research
within the NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.