* 1835877
* Collaborative Research: CSSI: Framework: Data: Clowder Open Source Customizable Research Data Management, Plus-Plus
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kenneth Berry, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2024
* USD 638,151.00

Preserving, sharing, navigating, and reusing large and diverse collections of
data is now essential to scientific discoveries in areas such as phenomics,
materials science, geoscience, and urban science. These data navigation needs
are also important when addressing the growing number of research areas where
data and tools must span multiple domains. To support these needs effectively,
new methods are required that simplify and reduce the amount of effort needed by
researchers to find and utilize data, support community accepted data practices,
and bring together the breadth of standards, tools, and resources utilized by a
community. Clowder, an active curation based data management system, addresses
these needs and challenges by distributing much of the data curation overhead
throughout the lifecycle of the data, augmenting this with social curation and
automated analysis tools, and providing extensible community-dependent means of
viewing and navigating data. As an open source framework, built to be extensible
at every level, Clowder is capable of interacting with and utilizing a variety
of community tools while also supporting different data governance and ownership
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enhances Clowder's core systems
for the benefit of a larger group of users. It increases the level of
interoperability with community resources, hardens the core software, and
distributes core software development, while continuing to expand usage.
Governance mechanisms and a business model are established to make Clowder
sustainable, creating an appropriate governance structure to ensure that the
software continues to be available, supportable, and usable. The effort engages
a number of stakeholders, taking data from diverse but converging scientific
domains already using the Clowder framework, to address broad interoperability
and cross domain data sharing. The overall effort will transition the grassroots
Clowder user community and Clowder's other stakeholders (such as current and
potential developers) into a larger organized community, with a sustainable
software resource supporting convergent research data
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.