* 1835946
* Tracking the Longitudinal Development of STEM Majors' Autonomy and Agency in Mathematical Proof and Proving
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Shiv Karunakaran, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/28/2023
* USD 299,179.00

Student attrition from STEM majors undermines the nation's ability to develop a
STEM workforce that can lead the knowledge-based economy. A poorly studied point
of attrition occurs at the transition from lower- to upper-division mathematics
courses. This three-year research project intends to examine this transition by
tracking the development of college students' mathematical agency and autonomy
as they move into upper division math courses that emphasize mathematical proofs
and argumentation. For this work, agency refers to the student's capacity to
take the initiative for their learning; autonomy refers to the student's ability
to take responsibility for their learning. The project team will investigate the
agency and autonomy of students who are majoring or minoring in mathematics over
time, as the students work through an introduction to proof course and into
advanced proof-based courses. The project will contribute new knowledge about
students' development as mathematicians over the course of their college
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Learning the concepts and skills needed for
mathematical proofs and proving is a fundamental learning challenge for most
college students, as their prior mathematics work has emphasized "exercises"
(not problems), procedures modeled by instructors, and mastery via practice.
This project aims to understand the dynamics of the change that happens as
students move from computation-focused work to proof-focused work. This
information could inform improvements in introduction to proofs courses, in
instructional practices, and in support structures such as Math Help Centers, so
that students are better supported as they make the change. More broadly, this
information can deepen understanding of how college students make choices about
whether to continue in or leave challenging courses and majors. Consequently,
this study holds promise for improving both students' experience in and the
overall "flow" through the STEM pipeline. The project will recruit a sample of
20 students and track their experiences in proof-based courses for five
semesters. In that period, mathematics minors will take two proof-based courses,
and mathematics majors typically will take four or five. Primary data will
include interviews with students early and at the end of their mathematics
courses (including work on proof tasks), observations of students as they work
inside and outside of class, and course materials such as assignments and exams.
A qualitative analysis will produce dynamic profiles of the of positive and
negative changes in students' agency and autonomy over the five semesters. These
results will complement and potentially help to explain student outcomes such as
course grades, enrollment in additional math courses, and persistence in the
mathematics major or minor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.