* 1835290
* Standard: The Social Responsibilities of Scientists and Engineers: A Global Survey
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jessica Wyndham, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2021
* USD 399,975.00

The broader social responsibilities that scientists and engineers feel regarding
society and the larger communities of which they are members (i.e., their views
about what their work can and should do to help society and the environment) are
an important but understudied aspect of scientific practice and ethics. There is
no consensus inside or outside of the scientific and engineering communities
about the nature, scope, and sources of such social responsibilities. This
research project will conduct an international survey of scientists and
engineers regarding: (1) their beliefs about their social and ethical
responsibilities to society; (2) how they arrive at these beliefs; (3) the
challenges and opportunities they feel affect their ability to fulfill their
social responsibilities; and (4) the ways in which their attitudes and opinions
differ by factors such as discipline, job sector, age, gender, institutional
type, and region. The investigators will team up with overseas scientific and
engineering organizations to reach a global sample of scientists and engineers
from a wide variety of disciplines, nations, and cultures. This research builds
directly on an earlier NSF funded study that generated a robust, pre-tested
survey instrument, translated it into five languages, and created a process for
recruiting a globally representative sample of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project involves administering a
quantitative survey to 12,500 scientists and engineers around the world. The
main aim is to procure a globally representative sample of 4,000 scientists and
engineers and to gauge their opinions and attitudes about their social and
ethical responsibilities to society. Doing so will enable the investigators to
generate data and knowledge about how scientists and engineers from around the
world perceive their social responsibilities, and how these are informed by
factors such as national background, disciplinary affiliation, and other
demographic characteristics. This project will advance research on scientific
and engineering ethics in three main ways. First, it broadens the scope of
social studies of scientific and engineering ethics beyond the university and
laboratory to consider wider kinds of social responsibilities. Second, studying
the factors that determine and shape scientists' and engineers' opinions also
enables understanding of how to encourage members of these communities to be
more socially responsible in their work. Finally, this study will provide
important new tools (i.e. survey items, a global sampling protocol) for
advancing future international studies of scientific ethics. Findings and data
will be disseminated nationally and internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.