* 1835717
* Elements: Software: HDR: A knowledge base of deep time to facilitate automated workflows in studying the co-evolution of the geosphere and biosphere
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Xiaogang Ma, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 11/30/2023
* USD 620,375.00

This project will result in the creation of a software that will support
research in the Earth's deep time history. The co-evolution of the geosphere and
biosphere is one of the fundamental questions for the 21st century Earth
science. The multi-disciplinary characteristics of the research questions on co-
evolution are reflected in the various subjects of datasets that need to be
integrated. In the past decades, many open data facilities have been built
through the support from NSF and other sources. However, the shortage of
efficient methods for accessing and synthesizing multi-source datasets hamper
the data-intensive co-evolution research. Geologic time is an essential topic in
the co-evolving geosphere and biosphere, and can be used as a common reference
to connect various parameters among the data silos. This project will improve
the machine readability and alignment of various global, local and regional
geologic time standards and build a knowledge base of deep time and its service
on the Web. All the deliverables will be well-documented and offered under open-
access to promote a national cyberinfrastructure ecosystem. The planned tasks
and activities will leverage the usage of existing data facilities, facilitate
executable and reproducible workflows, generate best practices of cross-
disciplinary data science, generate state-of-the-art materials to education
programs, and engage the participation of female and underrepresented groups.
Shared in the national cyberinfrastructure, the knowledge base built in the
project will be able to support a broad range of research, education and
outreach programs, which will benefit not only science and engineering but also
the society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research question to be addressed
is the heterogeneity of geologic time concepts that hamper the data synthesis
among multiple data facilities. Accordingly, the objective of this project is to
build a knowledge base of deep time to automate geoscience data access and
integration in the open data environment, and to support data synthesis in
executable workflows for data-intensive scientific discovery. The development
approach will include both top-down and bottom-up tracks to leverage previous
works on geologic time ontologies and address end user needs through use case
analyses. With carefully designed activities and work plan, deliverables from
this project will include a machine-readable knowledge base of aligned geologic
time standards, services and packages for accessing and querying the knowledge
base, and best practices of data synthesis in workflow platforms for studying
the co-evolution. The developed knowledge base of deep time will provide
powerful support to co-evolution researchers to tackle data heterogeneity
issues. Robust services the knowledge base will be built to support automated
data synthesis in workflow platforms to advance the co-evolution research. The
source code and metadata of the knowledge base will be released on GitHub and
registered on community repositories to enable reuse and adaptation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Cross-Cutting Activities Program
of the Division of Earth Sciences within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences,
and the OAC Cyberinfrastructure for Emerging Science and Engineering Research
(CESER) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.