* 1835200
* NCS-FO: Individual variation in the fine-grained structure of distributed cortical systems for cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* James Haxby, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This research project will study how brain systems for face perception differ
across individuals. Face perception plays a central role in interactions among
people. The ability to recognize faces and interpret expressions can vary
greatly in healthy adults. Efficient face perception develops slowly through
childhood and into early adulthood. Face perception is much more efficient for
familiar individuals with whom we interact frequently. We will use new, state-
of-the-art methods for modeling the brain's system for face perception. The
model has interacting processing pathways. Each pathway serves a different
function. These include recognition of identity, interpretation of expression,
and activation of social knowledge. We study individual differences using a new
approach, called hyperalignment. Hyperalignment allows us to see how information
is encoded in fine-scale brain patterns. These studies can make it possible to
address questions about the effects of development, education, culture, and
clinical disorder on brain organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
investigate individual variation in the human cortical functional architecture
for face perception that leverages our previous work on multivariate models of
information in the distributed neural system for face perception and our work
creating hyperalignment to build high-dimensional common models of information
spaces in cortex. Our approach discovers shared basis functions for information
that is encoded in fine-scale cortical topographies, affording reliable
measurement of individual differences in the representation of this detailed
information. We will investigate individual variation in cortical systems for
face perception as a function of cognitive ability, development, and learning,
and build the common model of cortical information spaces using fMRI data
collected during viewing of naturalistic movies and in the resting state. We
will use response hyperalignment and connectivity hyperalignment to derive a
common model of the face perception system with shared basis functions for fine-
scale variation in response tuning and functional connectivity. By modeling
shared neural representation at a fine scale, measures of deviations from shared
representation are more sensitive to the inter-individual variation that
underlies differences in cognitive function. Our methods have the potential to
provide a firmer and more nuanced basis for addressing questions about the
effects of development, education, culture, and clinical disorder on brain
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.