* 1835499
* Elements: Software: Roundoff-Error-Free Algorithms for Large-Scale, Sparse Systems of Linear Equations and Optimization
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Timothy Davis, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 05/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Solving systems of linear equations is central to solving problems in numerous
applications within healthcare, power generation, national defense, economics,
physics, chemistry, mathematics, computer science and engineering. Nowadays, a
large number of these critical applications have an ever-increasing need for
faster, more reliable, and more accurate solutions. For example, more accurate
treatment plans are proven to be less costly, less invasive, safer, and more
reliable outcomes for prostate-cancer brachytherapy (placement of radioactive
"seeds" inside a tumor). Similarly, millions of dollars can be saved, and
cleaner energy can be produced, by solving the power generation dispatch
optimization problem with more accuracy. Paradoxically, today's state-of-the-art
software tools are limited to calculating limited-precision solutions (e.g.,
treatment plans and power dispatches). This is due in part to the prevalence of
computing methods relying on floating-point arithmetic (i.e., arithmetic using
truncated decimal numbers). At the same time, real-life problems in a wide range
of applications are becoming larger and so more prone to incorrect results due
to roundoff errors (errors introduced when truncating the decimal numbers). The
primary goal of this project is to design, create, and deploy computational
tools to solve large-scale, sparse systems of linear equations and optimization
problems without any error at all. Because of the ubiquity of solving systems of
linear equations and optimization problems, the outcomes of this project will
directly translate in software that is more reliable for applications across
academia, industry, and government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale, sparse
systems of linear equations (SLEs) and linear optimization problems (LPs) are
routinely solved and the accuracy/correctness of solvers is taken for granted.
However, state-of-the-art solvers commonly report incorrect results, some as
striking as misclassifying feasible problems as infeasible and vice versa or
even failing altogether. Moreover, exactly solving SLEs and LPs is of
fundamental importance for applications where fixed-precision standards have
been deemed inadequate, including specific applications in healthcare, power
generation, biology, combinatorial auctions, and formal verification of
mathematical proofs. Therefore, the first objective of this project is to devise
efficient algorithms and implement robust software to reliably and exactly solve
large-scale, sparse SLEs, free of any roundoff error. This objective will build
on our recently devised roundoff-error-free (REF) LU and Cholesky factorizations
for dense matrices. The second objective of this project is to devise efficient
algorithms and implement robust software to reliably and exactly (REF) solve
large-scale, sparse LPs. The specific outcomes of this project include: (1)
Devise an efficient REF factorization framework for large-scale sparse matrices,
including devising good fill-reducing orderings that consider the bit-size
growth of the entries; (2) Devise REF optimization algorithms to exactly solve
large-scale, sparse linear programs; (3) Our software will be rigorously tested,
with a full 100% test coverage suite and scaffolding code to test loop
invariants and data sanity. The software products will be submitted as algorithm
papers to the ACM Transactions on Mathematical software, where the code itself,
test suite and documentation undergo rigorous peer review. Finally, we will
incorporate our solvers into our existing SuiteSparse installations, including
all Linux distros with the ultimate goal of being integrated into MATLAB and
thus accessible to a wide user base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.