* 1835909
* Elements: libkrylov, a Modular Open-Source Software Library for Extremely Large Eigenvalue and Linear Problems
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Filipp Furche, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2022
* USD 599,852.00

Strongly coupled linear equation systems or eigenvalue problems with extremely
large numbers of unknowns are a critical bottleneck for computational solutions
to many grand challenges in science and engineering. For example, computational
design of light emitting or photovoltaic materials from first principles
requires the solution of tens of millions of strongly coupled linear equations
within minutes to be practical. This project aims to develop, implement, test,
and deploy libkrylov, a robust, efficient, and general open-source library of
"on-the-fly" Krylov space methods suitable for solving such extremely large,
dense problems. libkrylov will deliver the latest innovations in Krylov-space
methods to the scientific and engineering communities by providing a uniform,
reproducible, and user-friendly software standard. Coupled with electronic
structure codes, the library will enable large-scale simulations of molecular
time-dependent X-ray absorption spectra of organometallic and bio-inorganic
systems. This project will promote computational literacy through student
training and workforce education at University of California, Irvine and San
Diego State University, and enhance national software infrastructure through
collaboration with the NSF-funded Molecular Sciences Software Institute (MolSSI)
in Blacksburg, VA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his group have recently
developed nonorthonormal Krylov space methods for solving extremely large dense
eigenvalue and linear problems "on-the-fly", i.e., without explicit storage or
access of coefficient matrices, with demonstrated efficiency and stability. This
project aims to transform this methodology into robust, efficient, and
sustainable software infrastructure freely accessible to the public. Key
features include (i) unique capability to solve extremely large problems, (ii) a
highly flexible interface to matrix-vector multiplication "engines" (iii)
ultrahigh efficiency by minimizing the number and cost of matrix-vector
multiplications, (iv) outstanding robustness by dynamic control of errors and
condition, and stabilization methods, (v) versatility by exploiting symmetry and
special structure, real and complex arithmetic, (vi) configurable precision,
convergence control, preconditioning, memory and disk usage, (vii) portability
to broad range of platforms, environments, and languages, (viii) flexible and
user-friendly generic interfaces, documentation, and testing capabilities, (ix)
extensibility through object orientation and modularity, (x) reproducibility
through a dedicated test suite, (xi) community involvement and sustainability by
collaboration with MolSSI and deployment of a public issue and feature request
tracker.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.