* 1835055
* DCL: NSF INCLUDES: Leveraging Field-Campaign Networks for Collaborative Change
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Emily Fischer, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 08/31/2022
* USD 289,259.00

The project will engage the large networks supporting two upcoming major NSF-
supported field campaigns to understand and mitigate harassment in field
settings. The project team will develop, implement, test, and propagate
effective practices for improving field site climate and safety. Sexual
harassment is deeply entrenched in many workplaces including academia and
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields, and this issue has
gained attention recently. While sexual harassment has been studied extensively
in workplaces, including in academia, very little research has focused on this
problem in field settings. This work is an essential step toward broadening
participation of marginalized groups in the earth sciences in field-based
scholarship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage the large networks
supporting two upcoming major NSF-supported field campaigns (Western Wildfire
Experiment for Cloud Chemistry, Aerosol Absorption and Nitrogen: WE-CAN; Remote
sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And Mesoscale/microscale Processes with
Adaptive Ground Observations: RELAMPAGO) to better understand and mitigate
negative gender-based harassment in the field and during subsequent professional
conferences or science-team meetings. The project aims to dramatically reduce
sexual harassment in the earth sciences via these objectives: (1)Train
participants in two major upcoming field campaign networks to recognize, report,
and confront present and future situations of sexual harassment; (2) Build two
new multi-institutional and international networks of proactive scientists,
including men, who are invested in combating gender inequality; (3)Investigate
the perceptions, attitudes, behaviors, and experiences of earth science field
researchers regarding sexual harassment; (4) Create a practical guide for future
PIs to facilitate collaborative change around sexual harassment within major
field campaign networks. The project will engage the field campaign networks
throughout the entire lifecycle of the field campaign, from pre-campaign
planning to post-campaign conferences. Based on prior research about sexual
harassment in the workplace and academia, the study will focus on change in four
major areas: (1) sexual harassment behavior (either perpetrated or experienced
by participants); (2) sexual harassment knowledge; (3) sexual harassment
responses and impacts; and (4) psychological antecedents for sexual harassment.
A major strength of the proposal is that it will allow the examination of cross-
cultural effects, as the activities will be tested in the context of both
domestic and international field campaign settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.