* 1835400
* Science Opportunities Unique to the LWA
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Gregory Taylor, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2023
* USD 720,535.00

This project will support operations of the Long Wavelength Array (LWA) which
provides access to the little explored part of the electromagnetic spectrum
below 100 MHz. This region includes the recently detected sky-averaged
absorption feature at 78 MHz from cosmic dawn when the first stars began to
shine and the Universe was only 180 million years old. The LWA, operated by the
University of New Mexico, is one of the last remaining University Radio
Observatories. Such facilities are essential training grounds for the next
generation of instrument builders. Students and post-docs, both at UNM and other
US Universities, play an essential role as developers and
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this project the highly successful first
station of the Long Wavelength Array (LWA1) will be converted to a multi-site
observatory by combining LWA1 with the new LWA station at Sevilleta (LWA-SV),
and the new low-frequency capability on the Very Large Array (VLA). This
expanded LWA (ELWA) will overcome the primary limitation of LWA1 -- angular
resolution -- and make the observatory competitive with any other instrument in
the world operating in this frequency range. This new capability will be offered
to the community in regular calls for proposals. At the same time the existing
LWA1 and LWA-SV stations will also be open to the community either separately or
together. The LWA stations consist of 256 dual-polarization dipoles, which are
digitized and combined into beams, or cross-correlated to form all-sky images.
With its high temporal (50 nanoseconds), and high spectral (1 Hz) resolution the
LWA is making major contributions to established fields (Jupiter and Solar
bursts, pulsars, ionosphere), and opening up new areas of study (radio bursts
from fireballs, pulsar environments, and detections or limits on new transients
such as gravitational wave sources).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.