* 1835083
* EAGER: Permeability of Biomass and Impact of Transport on Reaction Rates Under Supercritical Carbon Dioxide Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Erica Belmont, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2022
* USD 101,220.00

Biomass has vast potential to replace petroleum as a feedstock for fuels and
chemicals, but low cost and environmentally-friendly processes for biomass
conversion need to be developed. Biomass conversion processes involve complex
chemistry and transport phenomena. Carbon dioxide at supercritical states has
shown promise as a solvent for pretreatment and direct extraction of biomass to
high-value chemicals. One limitation of this approach is low conversion
efficiency. There are also inconsistent results across different studies which
have been attributed to, among other factors, differences in the density and
morphology of the biomass. This project will investigate mass transfer
limitations within the biomass before and after supercritical carbon dioxide
treatment to understand the impact of these limitations on conversion rates and
extents. This project will advance the viability of supercritical carbon dioxide
treatment as an effective biomass conversion strategy to produce high value
chemicals. This work will also facilitate the development of new tools for
studying chemical kinetics and transport phenomena associated with biomass
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The evolution of biomass composition and
morphology during supercritical carbon dioxide treatment is poorly understood,
despite their demonstrated importance to conversion extent and efficiency. The
objective of this project is to investigate the evolution of biomass morphology
during supercritical carbon dioxide treatment in order to assess the role of
mass transfer in the conversion of hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin. This
objective will be achieved through experimental characterization of evolving
biomass morphology with treatment duration through the use of established
techniques and the development of novel techniques. Specifically, new insights
into the evolution of biomass morphology for a range of biomass structures,
densities and particle sizes will be gained. The use of supercritical carbon
dioxide with environmentally benign co-solvents, such as water, has been shown
to be effective at hydrolysis of biomass polymers via the formation of carbonic
acid. Thus, research will focus on this co-solvent system and results will be
incorporated into a model that accounts for hydrolysis chemistry and evolving
biomass morphology to describe the conversion process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.