* 1835690
* Elements: Software: Autonomous, Robust, and Optimal In-Silico Experimental Design Platform for Accelerating Innovations in Materials Discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Raymundo Arroyave, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Accelerating the development of novel materials that have desirable properties
is a critical challenge as it can facilitate advances in diverse fields across
science, engineering, and medicine with significant contributions to economic
growth. For example, the US Materials Genome Initiative calls for cutting the
time for bringing new materials from discovery to deployment by half at a
fraction of the cost, by integrating experiments, computer simulations, and data
analytics. However, the current prevailing practice in materials discovery
relies on trial-and-error experimental campaigns and/or high-throughput
screening approaches, which cannot efficiently explore the huge design space to
develop materials with the targeted properties. Furthermore, measurements of
material composition, structure, and properties often contain considerable
errors due to technical limitations in materials synthesis and characterization,
making this exploration even more challenging. This project aims to develop a
software platform for robust autonomous materials discovery that can shift the
current trial-and-error practice to an informatics-driven one that can
potentially expedite the discovery of novel materials at substantially reduced
cost and time. Throughout the project, the PI and Co-PIs will mentor students
and equip them with the skills necessary to tackle interdisciplinary problems
that involve materials science, computing, optimization, and artificial
intelligence. Research findings in the project will be incorporated into the
courses taught by the PI and Co-PIs, thereby enriching the learning experience
of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop an
effective in-silico experimental design platform to accelerate the discovery of
novel materials. The platform will be built on optimal Bayesian learning and
experimental design methodologies that can translate scientific principles in
materials, physics, and chemistry into predictive models, in a way that takes
model and data uncertainty into account. The optimal Bayesian experimental
design framework will enable the collection of smart data that can help
exploring the material design space efficiently, without relying on slow and
costly trial-and-error and/or high-throughput screening approaches. The
developed methodologies will be integrated into MSGalaxy, a modular scientific
workflow management system, resulting in an accessible, reproducible, and
transparent computational platform for accelerated materials discovery that
allows easy and flexible customization as well as synergistic contributions from
researchers across different disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of
Materials Research in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.