* 1835950
* The Value of Click-on-Diagram Questions in Geoscience
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Nicole LaDue, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The study of geology requires diagrams to represent the extreme spatial and
temporal scales of most geologic structures and processes, yet diagrams can be
the source of student misconceptions. Recent advancements in web-based
technology have resulted in classroom tools that allow students to click
directly on a diagram in response to an instructor's question. Instructors can
then display a heat map of the diagram that shows the frequency of students'
responses and use this feedback to guide instruction. The principle
investigators of this proposal have pilot tested this technique and found that
click-on-diagram questions reveal spatial misconceptions that are not documented
in the geoscience education literature. The goals of this project are to: (1)
Combine click-on-diagram questions with qualitative methods to validate the
existence of novel spatial misconceptions; (2) Contrast the learning from
multiple choice and open-ended click-on-diagram questions; and (3) Train
instructors to develop click-on-diagram questions that can improve students'
spatial understanding in geology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
improve STEM learning by building evidence about improved STEM instructional
practices and by implementing and testing approaches to improve adoption of
education research into teaching practice. The work will focus on geology
courses, but improved understanding of student misconceptions about diagrams and
charts is applicable to most, if not all STEM fields. A classroom study will
test two learning mechanisms identified in the education research literature:
spatial feedback and cued versus open retrieval. In addition to its education
research activities, the project also aims to foster widespread use of evidence-
based resources and pedagogies in undergraduate STEM classrooms. To this end, a
faculty workshop will help instructors develop questions that assess documented
geology misconceptions and that explore conceptual challenges that instructors
have observed in their own classrooms. A workshop deliverable will be design
recommendations for how to change existing classroom questions into effective
click-on-diagram questions. The questions developed in this project will be
hosted for open access on the STEM Education Resources Center Pedagogy in Action
webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.