* 1835602
* Framework: Software: Collaborative Research: CyberWater-An open and sustainable framework for diverse data and model integration with provenance and access to HPC
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Lan Lin, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2023
* USD 39,996.00

This project addresses a high priority need for water research communities:
interoperability among a wide variety of data sources and models, and
integration of different computational models into water research communities.
The project will develop an open and sustainable software framework enabling
integration of hydrologic data and models for interdisciplinary teamwork and
discovery. The models and datasets cover fields such as hydrology, biology,
environmental engineering and climate. The project also addresses one of the key
issues for extreme-scale computing: scalable file systems. The collaboration
draws upon computing, modeling, and hydrology expertise at six institutions:
University of Pittsburgh, University of Iowa, Ball State University, North
Carolina State University, Indiana University, and the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops CyberWater, a community-driven
software framework that integrates a wide range of models and datasets across
disparate temporal and spatial scales. The CyberWater framework allows
scientists to bypass challenges associated with model and dataset complexity.
The project designs a model agent tool enabling users to generate model agents
for common model types without coding, and integrates multiple existing software
codes/elements that provide for broad-scale use. To develop such a diverse
modeling framework, the project brings together hydrologists, climate experts,
meteorologists, computer scientists and cyberinfrastructure experts. The project
builds upon an existing prototype developed by the lead investigator; basic
elements for the system were developed, consisting of plugged-in models and data
sources with corresponding agents and a workflow engine allowing user workflow
control. The prototype was successfully demonstrated for two models, making use
of datasets plugged in from NASA, USGS and CUAHSI. For the current project, new
models and datasets are added to the framework; the ability to use high
performance computing resources is also incorporated. The team will use the
CUAHSI HydroShare System to distribute CyberWater software and its associate
model agents, including instructions on how to establish a local CyberWater
environment, models and model agents. The project will enable substantial
scientific advances for water related issues, and the solution can be applied to
other research disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.