* 1835317
* NCS-FO: Electrocortical Processes in Real World Locomotion
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Daniel Ferris, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 863,641.00

Technology for mobile brain imaging with electroencephalography (EEG) has
advanced in recent years, but it is still difficult to capture electrical brain
dynamics while people move in the real world. The body movement of walking and
running creates considerable motion and muscle artifacts, making it difficult to
determine what is true brain activity. This project proposes to advance
electrode technology and signal processing of EEG to enable measurement of brain
electrical activity outside the laboratory in the real world, including playing
tennis, a complex, active, goal-directed motor task. The project will use novel
methods to measure brain electrical activity as people walk on a university
campus. Some subjects will be physically intact; some will have lower limb
amputations. The technological and scientific advancements from these studies
will permit future use of mobile EEG for clinical diagnosis and rehabilitation,
as well as development of new mobile brain computer
interfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand how the human brain works in the
real world, it is necessary to study human brain dynamics in real-world
environments and tasks. Stationary functional brain imaging techniques like
magnetic resonance imaging and magnetoencephalography are inherently limited in
studying brain function of people moving through the real world. Creating and
validating new mobile brain imaging methods with both good temporal and spatial
resolution are necessary to advance neuroscience and facilitate non-invasive
brain computer interfaces for real-world use. This project will combine high-
density EEG with independent component analysis and source localization to
identify brain areas involved in the control and active perception of moving in
real-world urban and natural environments and in playing tennis. Motion and
muscle artifacts complicate interpretation of EEG data during active whole body
movement. New hardware and software solutions are necessary to increase the
quality of EEG as a mobile brain imaging tool during locomotion. This project
will advance novel dual-layer EEG electrodes that can cancel motion artifacts
and improve the fidelity of electrocortical measures. The project combines
cognitive neuroscience, signal processing, sensor technology, biomechanics, and
motor control to make recordings of human brain dynamics that have never been
made before. The advances and validation of neurotechnology will provide
neuroscientists with new capabilities to transform the study of human brain
function in the real world. This research will advance technology for mobile
brain imaging and provide new insight into the cortical control of human
movement in health and disability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.