* 1835371
* Element: Data: HDR: Enabling data interoperability for NSF archives of high-rate real-time GPS and seismic observations of induced earthquakes and structural damage detection in OK
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Mohamed Soliman, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 244,704.00

Recent studies have identified critical differences between earthquakes induced
by wastewater injection in tectonically passive regions of oil and gas
exploration (such as earthquakes recently experienced in Oklahoma, Texas, and
Kansas) and earthquakes in tectonically active environments (such as fault zones
in California). This has significant implications for earthquake engineering in
the Midwest, where the building inventory was not designed to withstand large
earthquakes or cumulative damage due to successive earthquakes. Estimating the
level of ground shaking at different frequencies is needed to calculate
structural response, understand which structures run higher risks of earthquake
damage, and establish criteria for building design and real-time decision
making. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project uses recent breakthroughs in real-
time GPS data analysis to address challenges limiting the use of real-time GPS
and seismic data by the geoscience and engineering communities. The effort
develops new capabilities to handle data streams in a manner that is independent
of the content and formats of the environmental sensor measurements. Creating
these links will have a substantial impact on interoperability among the
geodesy, seismology, and earthquake engineering research communities. The
project demonstrates the approach using multi-sensor geoscience and engineering
datasets recorded on structures on the Oklahoma State University campus and in
the field near the location of the September 2016 Pawnee earthquake. The effort
creates new methods for capturing permanent deformation in structures, and a
better understanding of building inventory resiliency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.