* 1835794
* Collaborative Research: Framework: Software: NSCI : Computational and data innovation implementing a national community hydrologic modeling framework for scientific discovery
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Michelle Strout, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2024
* USD 699,587.00

This award supports the design and implementation of a software framework to
simulate the movement of water at various scales. Understanding the movement and
availability of water locally and across the country is of paramount importance
to economic productivity and human health of our nation. Hydrologic scientists,
are actively tackling these challenges using increasingly complex computational
methods. However, modeling advances have not been easily translated to the
broader community of scientists and professionals due to technical barriers to
entry. This software platform draws from computer models and employs
supercomputers capable of analyzing big data to provide unprecedented
simulations of water movement over the continental US. Combining hydrologists
and computer scientists the team behind the project envision a broad community
of users who will have multiple ways to interact with the software framework.
For the hydrologic scientist who is interested in generating their own scenarios
the framework will facilitate direct interaction with the hydrologic models and
the ability to generate simulations on the fly. Conversely, the framework will
also provide a set of static output and a range of tools for a broader set of
users who would like to evaluate hydrologic projections locally or extract model
data for use in other analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Continental scale
simulation of water flow through rivers, streams and groundwater is an
identified grand challenge in hydrology. Decades of model development, combined
with advances in solver technology and software engineering have enabled large-
scale, high-resolution simulations of the hydrologic cycle over the US, yet
substantial technical and communication challenges remain. With support from
this award, an interdisciplinary team of computer scientists and hydrologists is
developing a framework to leverage advances in computer science transforming
simulation and data-driven discovery in the Hydrologic Sciences and beyond. This
project is advancing the science behind these national scale hydrologic models,
accelerating their capabilities and building novel interfaces for user
interaction. The framework brings computational and domain science (hydrology)
communities together to move more quickly from tools (models, big data, high-
performance computing) to discoveries. It facilitates decadal, national scale
simulations, which are an unprecedented resource for both the hydrologic
community and the much broader community of people working in water dependent
systems (e.g., biological system, energy and food production). These simulations
will enable the community to address scientific questions about water
availability and dynamics from the watershed to the national scale.
Additionally, this framework is designed to facilitate multiple modes of
interaction and engage a broad spectrum of users outside the hydrologic
community. We will provide easy-to-access pre-processed datasets that can be
visualized and plotted using built-in tools that will require no computer
science or hydrology background. Recognizing that most hydrology training does
not generally include High Performance Computing and data analytics or software
engineering, this framework will provide a gateway for computationally enhanced
hydrologic discovery. Additionally, for educators we will develop packaged
videos and educational modules on different hydrologic systems geared towards
K-12 classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Cross-Cutting Activities Program
of the Division of Earth Sciences within the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.