* 1835178
* Standard: The Ethics of Diversity--Fortifying Ethical Infrastructure to Prevent and Address Sexual Harassment in STEM Research &amp; Practice Settings
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Theresa Morris, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 10/31/2023
* USD 443,773.00

Sexual harassment is a major ethical issue across science and engineering
fields, but research on this topic is relatively rare in studies of scientific
ethics. This project will examine sexual harassment in science and the social
contexts in which it occurs to understand how best to prevent and address sexual
harassment in STEM settings. The investigators will do so first by conducting a
comprehensive literature review to determine the kinds of the policies and
practices that lead to ethical climates that prevent and remediate sexual
harassment. They will then develop a self-assessment tool that will enable
organizations to examine their ability to prevent and manage sexual harassment,
and to evaluate if and how the self-assessment tool contributes to improved
ethical infrastructures for preventing sexual harassment. Finally, they will
develop a teaching module focused on sexual harassment for undergraduate and
graduate students that will enhance ethical training and communication. The main
project goal is to understand the conditions that contradict sexual harassment
in STEM and empower research institutions to strengthen their ethical
infrastructures related to sexual harassment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will facilitate a more nuanced and realistic understanding of the social and
organizational conditions associated with sexual harassment in STEM, and of
methods, principles, and strategies for overcoming and preventing it. This
project is conceptually innovative in theorizing sexual harassment as resulting
from interactions among formal institutional systems, informal influences, and
local cultures and climates, rather than simply the behavior of one or two
unethical 'bad apples'. It is methodologically innovative in applying a
multimodal, multi-wave research design that combines comprehensive literature
reviews with social surveys and in-depth interviews to advance basic
understanding of these issues and to create a self-assessment tool with broad
utility across the sciences and engineering. Project findings and the self-
assessment tool will be broadly disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.