* 1835022
* ANES WEB: American National Election Studies 2018-2021
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Shanto Iyengar, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,305,000.00

The ANES Web 2020 study is designed to build upon the world's longest-running
time series of survey data on the vital signs of democracy. By uncovering the
determinants of vote choice and political participation in the 2020 presidential
election, the 2020 ANES will yield high-quality data focusing on questions that
go to the heart of democratic governance including citizens' satisfaction with
their government and their ability to hold political leaders accountable. While
the 2020 study continues the tradition of a fresh cross-section sample, it also
includes two panel components that allow researchers to examine changes in
American public opinion over an especially turbulent period of national
politics. Re-interviews with 2016 ANES respondents will shed light on long-term
changes in attitudes following the election of President Trump. Re-interviews
with a sub-sample of respondents who completed the General Social Survey in the
spring of 2020 will illuminate more short-term shifts in beliefs and opinions
over the course of the 2020 campaign. Overall, the ANES 2020 study provides
researchers with strong leverage over the dynamics of voter decision making.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2020 study will continue to serve as a benchmark for
research on American public opinion. The study will survey at least 3,500
Americans, recruited by mail to complete questionnaires online. These
participants will be recruited in three samples: (1) a new sample of 1,200
Americans, selected and recruited using a high-response-rate protocol developed
through extensive testing in 2016; (2) re-interviews with 1,400 respondents who
completed the ANES interviews in 2016; (3) re-interviews with 900 respondents
who completed the General Social Survey earlier in 2020. These datasets will
permit groundbreaking research on many important questions that would not be
possible with a single cross-sectional study, providing unique opportunities to
map continuity and change in American politics. The 2020 study also extends
recent and ongoing ANES efforts to reshape the trajectory of large-scale survey
research with high-quality mail-to-web data collection, and features the first-
ever collaboration between ANES and GSS. Sub-samples of around 500 Latinos and
500 African-Americans will exceed previous ANES studies and allow researchers to
investigate the role of race in reshaping major party coalitions and as a force
that propels voters to the polls. Given the powerful effects of gender on
voters' attitudes in 2016, the 2020 study will continue to highlight gender-
related issues in the survey instrument.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.