* 1835276
* Workshop: Assessing Ethics Education Interventions in Science and Engineering: Washington, D.C., August 2019
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Michael O'Rourke, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Parker
* 08/31/2020
* USD 49,656.00

For nearly a decade the National Science Foundation has required training in
ethics and responsible conduct of research for postdocs, graduate students, and
undergraduates who receive NSF funding, but much remains to be learned about the
kinds of approaches to ethics education that are the most effective. Workshop
participants will formulate a set of research questions for advancing the
assessment of ethics training initiatives and then meet to answer these
questions and advance collective understanding and practice related to ethics
training assessments. Workshop results will contribute to developing a more
robust evidence base for improving ethical sensitivity, clarifying ethical
decision making, and fostering cultures of research integrity.

This workshop will improve knowledge of factors affecting ethical decision
making in research and of how to systematically assess the efficacy of research
ethics training initiatives. Grant activities will be organized around
developing answers to several research questions. These include: (1) What goals
should ethics education interventions aim to achieve? (2) Which skills are
essential to ethical decision making? 3) How can ethics education interventions
contribute to a culture of integrity at the level of the individual, small
group, and institution? (4) How can we best assess the efficacy and efficiency
of different types of ethics education interventions? Workshop participants will
collaborate to answer these questions and increase our ability to build and
fairly assess next generation interventions for promoting research ethics.
Results will be disseminated via conference proceedings and publications, while
tools and assessment rubrics will be shared through The Online Ethics Center.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.