* 1835863
* Collaborative Research: HDR Elements: Software for a new machine learning based parameterization of moist convection for improved climate and weather prediction using deep learning
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Michael Pritchard, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2022
* USD 289,409.00

This project targets a difficult problem in weather and climate prediction --
the representation of convection. Accurate representation of convection is
important, since a majority of current model predictions depend on it.
Unraveling the physics involved in convective conditions, clouds and aerosols
may take years of modeling to fully understand; however, a set of machine
learning techniques, known as "neural net techniques", may provide enhanced
predictability in the interim, and this project explores their
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a Python library enabling
the use of machine learning (artificial neural networks) in a broad range of
science domains. The focus is on integration of convection and cloud formation
within larger-scale climate models, with the Community Earth System Model (CESM)
as an initial target. The project develops a new set of machine learning climate
model parameterizations to reduce uncertainty in weather and climate
predictions. The neural networks will be trained on high-fidelity simulations
that explicitly resolve convection. Two types of high-resolution simulations
will be used for training the neural networks: 1) an augmented super-
parameterized simulation, and 2) a full Global Cloud Resolving Model (GCRM)
simulation based on the ICOsahedral Non-hydrostatic (ICON) modelling frameworks
provided by the Max Planck Institute, using initial 5km horizontal resolution.
The effort has the potential to increase understanding of convection dynamics
and processes across scales, and could potentially be implemented to address
other scale problems as well, where it is too computationally costly or
impractical to represent processes occurring at much finer scales than the main
grid resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.