* 1835897
* ELEMENTS: DATA: HDR: SWIM to a Sustainable Water Future
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Josiah Heyman, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 12/31/2022
* USD 615,451.00

The project develops a system that automates ingestion of data into models, the
integration of decoupled models, and the dynamic generation and interpretation
of models. The focus is on water resources. The team leverages software
development from an ongoing USDA-funded project, and the expertise of an
interdisciplinary, international team of scientists and students who are
investigating future scenarios of water availability and use in the Middle Rio
Grande valley of southern New Mexico, west Texas, and northern Chihuahua
(Mexico).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances water sustainability
research capabilities by creating a Sustainable Water through Integrated
Modeling (SWIM) framework that automates ingestion of data into models,
facilitates integration of decoupled models, and supports dynamic generation and
interpretation of models. The four objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;1) foster use
of water models by stakeholders (non-modelers) through direct participation
enabled by a web-based interface and provenance capture; &lt;br/&gt;2) enable
seamless model-to-model integration through service-driven data exchange and
transformation; &lt;br/&gt;3) develop data- and technology-enabled approaches
for reasoning with biophysical and social models; and &lt;br/&gt;4) engage data
providers, modelers and stakeholders in conceiving and testing the
framework.&lt;br/&gt;The research and products of this project contribute to
advanced research capabilities on water sustainability. By providing seamless
integration of scientific data and models, and generating provenance data to
create dynamic user interfaces, the project instills trust in the models
generated through participatory analysis. This approach is built around a strong
appreciation of the value of stakeholder engagement and alignment to achieving
the described goals. The research is carried out by a diverse and experienced
team, and will contribute to understanding of how to more effectively conduct
convergent research with researchers and stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.