* 1835939
* Collaborative research: experimental and computational study of structure and thermodynamics of rare earth oxides above 2000 C
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Axel van de Walle, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 06/30/2022
* USD 213,761.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Materials that can withstand ultrahigh temperatures
are important to ceramic processing, aerospace, and nuclear applications. Oxides
containing rare earth elements have high melting points, do not evaporate
easily, and are generally chemically unreactive. This refractory nature favors
high temperature applications, but at the same time makes the determination of
their heat and energy relationships (thermodynamic) properties challenging, and
current data are incomplete. Such data are essential for prediction of material
stability or degradation during use in both simple and complex systems in a
variety of extreme environments (such as high-temperature or high-pressure
environments). New experimental and computational approaches to determine
thermodynamics above 2000 degrees C form the primary focus of the project, which
represents collaboration between Navrotsky's group at University of California
at Davis performing thermochemical measurements and structural studies, and van
de Walle's group at Brown University undertaking calculations and phase diagram
assessments. The project provides university-level students an opportunity to
participate in state-of-the-art experimental and computational research applied
to high temperature processes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The
goals are to develop, test and apply new methodology (i) to determine
temperatures and heats of phase transitions (both solid-solid and melting) of
rare earth oxides and oxycarbides above 2000 degrees C, (ii) to measure
structural parameters, including thermal expansion and volume change upon phase
transition by synchrotron X-ray diffraction on levitated samples above 1500
degrees C, (iii) to calculate high-temperature thermodynamic properties using ab
initio density functional theory (with hybrid functionals) and molecular
dynamics in conjunction with statistical mechanical techniques, and (iv) to
generate a unified picture, based on both theory and experiment, of
thermodynamic properties, to be made publicly available for use in calculation
of phase diagrams (CalPhaD) modeling and other applications. The combination of
calorimetry, X-ray diffraction, and computation provides both needed
thermodynamic data and physical insight into the properties of refractory rare
earth oxides, with extensions into more complex systems. In addition to
international journals and meetings on ceramics, dissemination is taking place
through smaller focused conferences and lectures on their websites. Newly
developed ab initio computational techniques are being integrated within the
widely used and freely distributed ATAT software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.