* 1835673
* Collaborative Research: Frameworks: Software: Future Proofing the Finite Element Library Deal.II -- Development and Community Building
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Wolfgang Bangerth, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Partial differential equations (PDEs) are used as mathematical models throughout
the natural sciences, engineering, and more recently also in the biomedical and
social sciences as well as in finance. Their numerical solution is,
consequently, of great relevance in understanding, accurately simulating, and
optimizing natural, human, and engineered systems. In many applications, finite
element methods (FEM) are the method of choice converting the PDE into finite
dimensional, computationally solvable problems. The deal.II project is an open
source FEM software library that enables scientists to solve PDEs across many
disciplines, that supports simulation and computational discovery in virtually
all parts of the sciences and engineering by providing tools to solve
essentially all PDEs amenable to the FEM. In this project new capabilities will
be added and the user and contributor community expanded to include additional
science domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deal.II is a project with a thriving,
world-wide user and developer community. This project will further enable its
community of users and developers, by undertaking specifically for work that can
either not be expected of volunteers, or that is necessary to strengthen the
long-term independent sustainability of the project. Based on a recent user
survey, the following work items in the following four categories will be
addressed: 1. Foundational features too large or complicated to be tackled by
volunteers: the team will research and implement efficient and scalable
approaches to support parallel, adaptive multigrid and hp FEM. 2. Expand
documentation and training modules through more tutorial programs and YouTube-
hosted video lectures: This will further broaden the reach of the project and
extend the education for the computational science community. 3. Continuous
integration and packaging infrastructure to better support the pace of
development. 4. Support and expand deal.II's thriving communities through a
summer school, workshops, hackathons, and careful mentoring of
newcomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.