* 1835688
* EAGER: Biodegradable Hybrid Nanoparticles Containing Photosensitizing Agents
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Juan Vivero-Escoto, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,987.00

Non-Technical Summary The development of biodegradable materials represents a
revolution in science and has led to significant biotechnological advancements
in drug delivery, biomaterials, tissue engineering, and medical devices. Hybrid
materials, composed of both organic and inorganic components, illustrate a new
field of basic research that has attracted a great deal of attention for
designing novel biodegradable and biocompatible composites. In particular,
hybrid systems that can efficiently transport and release photosensitizing
agents can make a tremendous impact in novel alternatives to treat diseases such
as photodynamic therapy. The overall goal of this EAGER project is to develop
novel biodegradable multifunctional hybrid polysilsesquioxane nanoparticles to
carry photosensitizing agents. By fine tuning the chemical features of
polysilsesquioxane nanoparticles, the degradability of these materials under
specific conditions and their interaction with mammalian cells can be
controlled. The success of the proposed work will open new synthetic avenues to
fabricate biodegradable hybrid polysilsesquioxane materials for transporting
photosensitizing agents. The fundamental knowledge developed by the proposed
research will provide a deeper understanding of the interaction and
photochemistry of polysilsesquioxane nanoparticles inside mammalian cells. The
multidisciplinary research involving chemistry, materials science, cell biology
and nanomedicine provides ample opportunities to train and educate students at
undergraduate and graduate levels. Moreover, the -Think Big, Do Nano- outreach
program is designed to foster public awareness, engagement, and understanding of
nanoscale science and nanotechnology in the Charlotte community at all levels.

Technical Summary The development of biodegradable hybrid materials represents
a revolution in medicine that led to significant biotechnological advancements
in biomaterials and tissue engineering. Despite the impressive success of
composite-based platforms, the need for smarter, more precise and optimally
tuned carriers is critical. Therefore, the development of alternative
nanoparticle-based strategies to conventional composite systems is imperative.
Hybrid platforms offer optimized structural, chemical, optical and mechanical
features, besides other suitable characteristics such as biodegradability and
biocompatibility for their application as biomaterials. This EAGER award
supported by the Biomaterials program in the Division of Materials Research to
the University of North Carolina Charlotte focuses on developing biodegradable
multifunctional polysilsesquioxane (PSilQ) nanoparticles (NPs) for carrying
photosensitizing agents. The specific aims of this proposal include: I) Design,
synthesize and characterize biodegradable PSilQ NPs that undergo degradation
upon encountering a high reducing environment or acidic pH; II) Test the
photophysical and photochemical properties of PSilQ NPs in solution and in
vitro; and III) Study the mechanisms of endocytosis, intracellular
transportation, and degradation of PSilQ NPs. Exposure of underrepresented
minority students to this research is expected to engage students in new and
exciting ways, and advance NSFs goal to broaden participation among
underrepresented populations in STEM and STEM research. In addition, this
project integrates an outreach program, -Think Big, Do Nano-, designed to foster
public awareness, engagement, and understanding of nanoscale science and
nanotechnology in the Charlotte community at all levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.