* 1835040
* I-Corps: Add-on Brillouin Module for Confocal Microscopes
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* giuliano scarcelli, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
introduction of a new microscopy modality, which enables non-contact mechanical
mapping, and the development of the corresponding add-on module compatible to
commercial confocal microscopy instruments. Confocal microscopy instruments are
widely used in academia and industry but do not provide mechanical information
of samples; mechanical testing instruments are also ubiquitous in both academia
and industry but are contact-based. This project brings the non-contact
mechanical testing capability to optical microscopy instruments. Beyond enabling
traditional material characterizations with high spatio-temporal resolution, the
instrument will be highly impactful in biomedical research. The past two decades
have seen increasing recognition of the prominent role of the mechanical
interplay between cells and their local microenvironment to regulate cell
function. A widely utilized optical microscope for cell biomechanics would
accelerate our understanding of mechano-chemical pathways and their role in the
control of biological processes. Thus, this instrument is expected to be broadly
used by biomedical researchers and material scientists in industry and academia
to access cell, tissue and biomaterial mechanical properties without perturbing
the sample and with high 3D resolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project explores the commercialization of an add-on module for confocal
microscopes that features novel Brillouin spectroscopy. Brillouin spectroscopy
has been widely used for material testing and environmental sensing since the
1970's using specialized spectrometers that required 10 min to hours for a
single measurement. In recent years, a new type of spectrometer was developed to
improve speed of acquisition by several orders of magnitude and allowed to
obtain 3D elasticity maps of biomaterials, biological cells and tissues. Thanks
to the integration in commercial confocal microscopes, several highly impactful
areas (e.g. stem cell lineage differentiation, malignancy transformation) will
benefit from this technology as it enables gathering biomechanical information
in environments and settings such as 3D microenvironments that mimic the in vivo
conditions. In addition, the instrument will enable the study of cell
biomechanics on microfluidic platforms in order to control microenvironment
conditions. Being compatible with traditional optical microscopes, this
technology can also be combined with force mapping modalities thus enabling to
investigate how cells sense mechanical stimuli and transduce them into
biochemical signals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.