* 1835366
* Standard: Developing a Value Literate Culture in Science
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Scott Tanona, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 12/31/2022
* USD 354,264.00

This project explores an underexamined cultural aspect of Responsible Conduct in
Research (RCR) -- the Goals and Values of Science (GVS) that inform everyday
scientific practice. Examples of such practices include identifying a research
topic, designing a research plan that will yield robust evidence, and selecting
and recruiting research participants. By contrast, RCR training courses
typically focus on narrow, rule-based prohibitions, an approach which has been
shown to have limited scope and impact. This project is important because it
moves beyond the limits of institutionalized, rule-based ethical proscriptions
and into the heart of what scientists think and value. Moving in this direction
has potential to open a new line of research between philosophy of science with
educational research on RCR. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Operationally, the project
involves two research strands. Strand I involves the creation of a set of guided
deliberations that will be used with a cohort of 15 science faculty. These
deliberations explore how GVS might better motivate scientists to engage in RCR,
to reason ethically, and to integrate GVS into their teaching, research, and
mentoring. The guided deliberations will be examined to evaluate their effects
on scientists' motivation and reasoning about RCR and their literacy about GVS
topics. Relations among these factors will also be examined. Building on this
work, Research Strand 2 involves the development of a survey instrument to study
attitudes towards GVS among a much wider group of faculty, post-doctoral
researchers, graduate students, and undergraduates. An initial version of the
survey instrument will be piloted with 40 STEM professionals. The team will
conduct interviews with these participants about their interpretations of the
survey. A revised version of the survey will then be disseminated to
approximately 300 STEM professionals and students. Analyses will examine whether
attitudes regarding GVS topics differ across fields and groups, and to see if
GVS attitudes correlate with motivations to engage in
RCR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.