* 1835526
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Software: NSCI: HDR: Building An HPC/HTC Infrastructure For The Synthesis And Analysis Of Current And Future Cosmic Microwave Background Datasets
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Thomas Crawford, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2021
* USD 39,994.00

The photons created in the Big Bang have experienced the entire history of the
Universe, and every step in the evolution of the Universe has left its mark on
their statistical properties. Observations of these photons have the potential
to unlock the secrets of fundamental physics and cosmology, and to provide key
insights into the formation and evolution of cosmic structures such as galaxies
and galaxy clusters. Since the traces of these processes are so faint, one must
gather enormous datasets to be able to detect them above the unavoidable
instrumental and environmental noise. This in turn means that one must be able
to use the most powerful computing resources available to be able to process the
volume of data. These computing resources include both highly localized
supercomputers and widely distributed grid and cloud systems. The PI and Co-Is
will develop a common computing infrastructure able to take advantage of both
types of resource, and demonstrate its suitability for ongoing and planned
experiments by adapting the analysis pipelines of four leading Big Bang
observatories to run within it. In addition to enabling the full scientific
exploitation of these extraordinarily rich data sets, the investigators will
mentor students engaged in this research and run summer schools in applied
supercomputing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to enable the detection
of the faintest signals in Cosmic Microwave Background radiation, and in
particular the pattern of peaks and troughs in the angular power spectra of its
polarization field. In order to obtain these spectra one must first reduce the
raw observations to maps of the sky in a way the preserve the correlations in
the signal and characterizes the correlation in the noise. While the algorithms
to perform this reduction are well-understood, applying them to data sets with
quadrillions to quintillions of observations is a very serious computational
challenge. The computational resources available to the project to address this
include both high performance and high throughput computing systems, and one
will need to take advantage of both of them. This project will develop a joint
high performance/high throughput computational framework, and deploy within it
analysis pipelines currently being fielded by the ongoing Atacama Cosmology
Telescope, BICEP/Keck Array, POLARBEAR, and South Pole Telescope experiments. By
doing so one will also demonstrate the frameworks efficacy for the planned
Simons Observatory and CMB-S4 experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for
Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of
Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.