* 1835181
* NCS-FO: Distributed neural organization of sensorimotor dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Daniel Margoliash, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Speaking is one of the most complicated human behaviors and yet speech is
produced easily and with little conscious effort. Understanding the way the
brain controls the various organs and muscles of vocalization is a basic
scientific question that may illuminate more general principles that can
describe how the brain programs and controls all behavior. In order to
understand the neural mechanisms of motor behavior in vocal production, the
proposed research will test specific hypotheses about the timing of different
brain regions, the timing of muscles that produce vocal behavior, and the
response to normal and abnormal auditory feedback. Understanding the neural
mechanisms of motor control can have broad implications, including the
development of more human-like robots, better computer-generated speech and
vocal prostheses, as well as new therapies for treating articulatory disorders
such as stuttering, dysarthria, aphasia, and other problems in speech
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will measure the timing
of neural circuits that control vocalization in humans and song birds. The bird
song production system has long been used as a model system that has relevance
to understanding speech production. While simpler than humans and with less
behavioral control of the experiments, studying birdsong is complementary in
providing more granular measurements of neural activity in a vocal learning
system than possible in humans. The experiments will test a novel hypothesis,
that the motor system is not organized by the commonly assumed "top down"
organizational scheme, but by a coherent network that operates as a unitary
mechanism as described by certain mathematics of non-linear systems. The
comparison between species will also be informative about how robust the results
are across very different species and neural systems offering the possibility of
generalization of the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.