* 1835473
* Elements: Data:  Integrating Human and Machine for Post-Disaster Visual Data Analytics:  A Modern Media-Oriented Approach
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Bedrich Benes, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 597,955.00

This project creates a science-oriented visual data service that facilitates the
query of datasets based on visual content. The approach allows a user to search
for data based on visual similarity, even in cases where a term for the failure
or observation does not yet have a scientific name. The visual analysis data and
application services will be deployed on a cloud-based platform. The results
will produce a framework enabling access to and analysis of a large amount of
imagery from diverse sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team creates
VISER (Visual Structural Expertise Replicator), which will serve as a
comprehensive cloud-based data analytics service and will facilitate the use of
and integrate data and applications most needed by the user. The framework will
implement two novel concepts: data-as-a-service and applications-as-a-service,
which will bring data and applications to the user without the need to configure
software systems or packages. The approach also employs artificial intelligence
to interpret the contents of the images. VISER will use convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) to train custom classifiers for new categories. Three
applications will be developed and deployed within VISER: App1 will extract
relevant visual context, App2 will facilitate similarity-based visual searching
(through the use of a Siamese CNN), and App3 will help perform automatic
extraction of pre-event/pre-disaster images based on Google Street View. The
application of these tools would advance both the science of automated pattern
recognition and of more effective construction
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.