* 1835321
* Elements: Software. icepack: an open-source glacier flow modeling library in Python
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Daniel Shapero, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2023
* USD 388,314.00

This project supports the development of a software package named "icepack",
that will enable simulations of how glaciers, such as those in Greenland,
Antarctica, and mountain ranges around the world, will flow in response to the
environment around them. Glaciologists use software tools to run simulations so
that they can make predictions of how large the Greenland and Antarctic ice
sheets will be in the future. With these predictions, scientists can give
policy-makers and the public better predictions on the sea level rise in the
coming decades. While the ability to run simulations is essential for advancing
our understanding of science, doing so requires a significant programming and
scientific expertise. The goal of this project is to lower this barrier to
entry. Led by an early career scientist, the team, from University of Washington
will develop a tool that is easier to use for researchers and students, whether
they are experts or novices. The software applications will be freely available
and an open source license.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;icepack allows for estimating
parameters, such as a basal friction or internal rheology, that are not
observable via remote sensing. Glaciologists use simulation tools like icepack
for (1) exploring aspects of the physics of ice sheets that are not completely
understood, (2) drawing inferences from observational data, and (3) making
predictions of the future state of the ice sheets in order to estimate future
sea-level rise. While modeling is an essential tool for practicing
glaciologists, it is still a complex endeavor. In addition to supporting
development of more features and improvements to icepack, we will create an
extensive set of tutorial materials for a workshop aimed at graduate students
and early-career researchers on how to use icepack. Additionally, the
investigators will implement novel algorithms for parameter estimation and
uncertainty quantification in icepack. These will allow the investigators to
leverage the entire time series of observations of the ice sheets, while current
algorithms are limited in how much data they can use, and to get a better idea
of the statistical spread on estimates of the current and future states of the
ice sheets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Cross-Cutting Program within the
NSF Directorate for Geosciences, and the EarthCube Program jointly sponsored by
the NSF Directorate for Geosciences and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.