* 1835692
* Collaborative Research: Framework: Data: NSCI: HDR: GeoSCIFramework: Scalable Real-Time Streaming Analytics and Machine Learning for Geoscience and Hazards Research
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Ivan Rodero, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Amy Walton
* 03/31/2022
* USD 899,139.00

This project develops a real-time processing system capable of handling a large
mix of sensor observations. The focus of this system is automation of the
detection of natural hazard events using machine learning, as the events are
occurring. A four-organization collaboration (UNAVCO, University of Colorado,
University of Oregon, and Rutgers University) develops a data framework for
generalized real-time streaming analytics and machine learning for geoscience
and hazards research. This work will support rapid analysis and understanding of
data associated with hazardous events (earthquakes, volcanic eruptions,
tsunamis). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a collaboration between
computer scientists and geoscientists to develop a data framework for
generalized real-time streaming analytics and machine learning for geoscience
and hazards research. It focuses on the aggregation and integration of a large
number of data streams into a coherent system that supports analysis of the data
streams in real-time. The framework will offer machine-learning-based tools
designed to detect signals of events, such as earthquakes and tsunamis, that
might only be detectable when looking at a broad selection of observational
inputs. The architecture sets up a fast data pipeline by combining a group of
open source components that make big data applications viable and easier to
develop. Data sources for the project draw primarily upon the 1500+ sensors from
the EarthScope networks currently managed by UNAVCO and the Incorporated
Research Institutions for Seismology (IRIS), as well as the Ocean Observatories
Initiative (OOI) cabled array data managed by Rutgers University. Machine
learning (ML) algorithms will be researched and applied to the tsunami and
earthquake use cases. Initially, the project plans to employ an advanced
convolutional neural network method in a multi-data environment. The method has
only been applied to seismic waveforms, so the project will explore extending
the method to a multi-data environment. The approach is expected to be
extensible beyond detection and characterization of earthquakes to include the
onset of other geophysical signals such as slow-slip events or magmatic
intrusion, expanding the potential for new scientific discoveries. The framework
is applied to use cases in the Cascadia subduction zone and Yellowstone: these
locations combine the expertise of the science team with locations where
EarthScope and OOI have the greatest concentration of instruments. The
architecture will be transportable and scalable, running in a Docker environment
on laptops, local clusters and the cloud. Integral to the project will be
development, documentation and training using collaborative online resources
such as GitLab and Jupyter Notebooks, and utilizing NSF XSEDE resources to make
larger datasets and computational resources more widely
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Cross-Cutting Program and
Division of Earth Sciences within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences, the Big
Data Science and Engineering Program within the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering, and the EarthCube Program jointly sponsored
by the NSF Directorate for Geosciences and the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.