* 1835944
* 2019 GRC Complex Active and Adaptive Material Systems: Exploiting the Functionality of Soft Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Richard Vaia, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2019
* USD 10,420.00

NON-TECHNICAL AND TECHNICAL ABSTRACT: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for participants to the 2019 GRC/GRS conference on "Complex
Active and Adaptive Material Systems: Exploiting the Functionality of Soft
Materials", to be held January 26-27 (GRS) and January 27-February 1st (GRC) in
Ventura, CA. The aim of the GRC is to stimulate the soft-materials community to
discuss ideas from nature (materials occurring in nature), and state-of the-art
soft-materials science and technologies that can be used to design new materials
for a broad range of applications such as soft robotics, sensors, smart
materials, and adaptive surfaces. These discussions are intended to lead to the
exploration of transformative concepts in a range of fields encompassing
materials science and engineering (soft matter, biomaterials, biophysics,
chemical engineering), as well as theoretical and computational modeling. An
overall intended hallmark of this GRC is to address the barriers to practical
applications of exotic and complex materials, including consideration and
adoption of nature-inspired self-assembly processes apparent in many biological
systems. The themed GRC technical sessions will cover the following areas:
Building with structured fluids; Self-assembling complex materials; The cellular
machine; Taming active matter; Structured surfaces; Responsive materials;
Biomimetics: exploiting evolution; and Soft machines. The GRS organized by
graduate students and postdocs will be held the weekend prior to the GRC when
talks based on selected submitted abstracts will be delivered by the graduate
students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.