* 1835082
* DCL NSF INCLUDES: A National Summit to Survey and Stimulate  Broadening Participation Research at Historically Black and Tribal Colleges/Universities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* IVORY TOLDSON, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 08/31/2020
* USD 246,936.00

A National Summit to Survey and Stimulate Broadening Participation Research at
Historically Black and Tribal Colleges/Universities&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
Quality Education for Minorities (QEM) Network and the QEM INCLUDES Design and
Development Launch Pilot (DDLP) core partners is proposing Quad-C Broadening
Participation (BP) a national summit in response to the National Science
Foundation's Dear Colleague Letter 17-111. The two-day national summit on
broadening participation of Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs)
and Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) in STEM Education Research will
commence early Spring 2019, in the Washington, DC metropolitan area. The
proposed Summit will create a platform for new collaborations within the NSF
INCLUDES National Network, so participating institutions can cultivate shared
goals, common metrics, and mutually reinforcing activities. The Summit's overall
goal is to synthesize current knowledge of, and stimulate further collaborative
research on, broadening participation of HBCU/TCU students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). The Summit's key objectives
will be to Convene, Connect, Collect, and Convey results (Quad-C) to reinforce
the NSF INCLUDES National Network and the HBCU/TCU BPR Community of
Practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.