* 1835063
* DCL NSF INCLUDES: Increasing the Number of Women in Mechanical Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Ashley Huderson, American Society of Mechanical Engineers
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 03/31/2022
* USD 245,973.00

The broader impact of this NSF INCLUDES project address the culture and
preparation of the current and future mechanical engineering workforce, as well
as expand the breadth of stakeholders responsible for contributing to the
preparation and development of future mechanical engineers from underrepresented
groups. A project of this magnitude would contribute to the emerging field of
research that bridges various stakeholders in engineering preparation and
workforce development. Cross-disciplinary approaches will be highlighted and
used to contribute to the emerging field of research that bridges various
stakeholders in engineering preparation and workforce development. The outcomes
of this convening have the potential to: 1) advance knowledge for all
organizations working to address the gap in mechanical engineering preparation
of women and workforce and 2) lay the foundation for exploring other non-male
identified individual's role in mechanical engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to bring together qualified
experts in engineering diversity and inclusion, industry, professional
societies, government, and academia(colleges of engineering and community
colleges) to apply their collective knowledge to discuss the current academic
and professional preparation and retention of women in mechanical engineering.
This conference will align and leverage the various individual strategies of
stakeholders working to address the gender gap and build a connectedness that
would fuel cultural change. This conference aims to examine, challenge, and
discuss engineering education practices and culture as key elements in
increasing the number of women in mechanical engineering, thereby contributing
more significantly to increasing the diversity and competitiveness of the
overall engineering workforce. The overall goal of this conference is to engage
current NSF INCLUDES awardees working on broadening participation in engineering
as well as the broader academic, industry, and nonprofit engineering community,
to provide a platform for the examination of demonstrated approaches,
activities, and implementation strategies to increase the number of women
graduating and working in the mechanical engineering field. Projected outcomes
include expanded/strengthened networks, improved knowledge of baseline research
and models to improve women's participation in ME, the creation of a national
community of support for women in ME, and implementation of the recommendations
from the research strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF INCLUDES Conference
is co-funded by the Broadening Participation in Engineering (BPE) program. BPE
is dedicated to supporting the development of a diverse and well-prepared
engineering workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.