* 1835270
* NCS-FO: Unraveling Cortical Circuits for Auditory Scene Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Xue Han, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,736.00

In everyday social situations, normal hearing humans are able to listen to a
speaker in the midst of other people talking and other sound sources. This is an
example of a general problem termed auditory scene analysis. The understanding
of auditory scene analysis remains a challenging problem in a diverse range of
fields such as neuroscience, computer science, speech recognition and
engineering, after more than 50 years of research. Although a difficult problem
for machines and hearing impaired listeners, humans with normal hearing solve it
with relative ease. This suggests the existence of a solution to this problem in
the brain, but this solution remains unknown. This project will investigate how
the brain solves this problem. By revealing circuits in the brain that
contribute to the solution, this project will ultimately improve quality of life
through applications in medical devices, e.g., hearing aids and cochlear
implants; benefit society through applications in technology, e.g., applications
for speech recognition; and create an educational platform to train students to
integrate knowledge from a variety of disciplines to address challenging and
important societal problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial location of
different sound sources is an important component of auditory scene analysis.
The auditory cortex, with its unique spatial sound processing ability, is
thought to play an important role in auditory scene analysis, although the
underlying neural network mechanisms remain largely unknown. This project will
investigate cortical circuits for auditory scene analysis in the primary
auditory cortex of the mouse, employing powerful optogenetic tools to
investigate both bottom-up and top-down mechanisms. First, the investigators
will examine the influence of behavioral states on cortical spatial
representations of sound mixtures across different cortical layers and test the
hypotheses that such spatial representations vary across cortical layers and
behavioral states of the animal. Second, the investigators will examine the
causal role of parvalbumin positive (PV) inhibitory interneurons versus
somatostatin positive (SOM) inhibitory interneurons in the primary auditory
cortex, using optogenetic manipulations, and test the hypothesis that PV
interneurons are critical in mediating bottom-up signaling, whereas SOM
interneurons are selectively engaged during active behavioral states. Finally,
the investigators will construct a computational model of the primary auditory
cortex including excitatory, PV and SOM neurons to explain the experimental
results and make predictions for future experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.