* 1835563
* Workshop: Coastal Engineering Research Framework, Arlington, Virginia, November 12-13, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Patrick Lynett, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

This grant provides funds to convene a 1.5 day Coastal Engineering Research
Framework Workshop to be held November 13-14, 2018 at the Virginia Tech
Executive Education Center in Arlington, Virginia. The Workshop objective is to
solicit and synthesize directions for coastal engineering research and education
in the United States over the next ten years and further into the future. There
will be approximately 45 participants from academia, government, and industry.
The organizers will take care to ensure that a wide cross-section of the coastal
engineering community is represented. Additional outside experts will also be
invited to stimulate cross-fertilization. The product of the Workshop will be a
report with recommendations for future research directions both at NSF, and in
the larger coastal engineering field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal engineering
requires many different toolsets ? beginning with climatological and weather
studies (and sometimes seismic for tsunamis); encompassing parts of
oceanography, marine geology, economics, sociology, planning, policy, and
ecology; including many different aspects of structural loading and design and
geotechnical engineering; and thoroughly intertwined with large scale
infrastructure. Thus, there is no shortage of scientific challenges. While
disciplines such as earthquake engineering have long had a reasonable
understanding of hazard loading, this continues to be an important item on
coastal engineering research agendas. Particularly in complex built or natural
environments, prediction of many coastal engineering processes remains reliant
on semi-empirical estimates based on idealized cases or historical records.
Similarly, human interaction with the coastline as individual or community-wide
planning and response to disasters, analysis of ecosystem benefits, or planning
for long-term changes in coastal environments, requires expertise in many
disparate disciplines. While parts of these issues are presently being addressed
by a variety of agencies, there remains a wide opening for NSF to address both
small-scale and large-scale coastal engineering research and educational needs
and opportunities. The results from this Workshop will help to provide sustained
direction for coastal engineering research and education, both at NSF and other
agencies. Areas ripe for cross-fertilization with other disciplines will be
identified. The Workshop will reserve at least 25% of spaces for early career
professionals to ensure that they obtain experience into larger aspects of
coastal engineering, and can meet more established researchers. Similarly, the
PIs will ensure that women and underrepresented minorities form a critical mass
for participation. This will be accomplished through direct targeting of
specific people at all levels. The Workshop will also keep a few spaces open for
those who hear about it and contact the organizers
directly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.