* 1835029
* Institutional Transformation: Empowering Faculty to Cultivate a Culture of Ethics in Engineering
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Cynthia Schairer, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 06/30/2022
* USD 349,827.00

Most scientific ethics training programs rely heavily on online or in-person
training, but such programs are limited in their efficacy and often fail to
address the broader cultural aspects of scientific ethics and scientific
misconduct. The goal of this project is to cultivate a culture of scientific
ethics at the UC San Diego Jacobs School of Engineering. The investigators will
do so by using a diversity of approaches at multiple levels within the school. A
major component will be to empower faculty and other stakeholders to create a
self-perpetuating culture of scientific ethics at their institution. Social
surveys will be used to assess and understand the current ethical culture at UC
San Diego. Next, the investigators will organize a retreat with deans, faculty,
and administrators to discuss scientific ethics and hold a workshop based on
findings from conversations at the retreat. The workshop will also be used to
conduct a comprehensive literature review on pathways for creating a culture of
scientific ethics, and to develop specific plans for doing so at UC San Diego.
The final research component will be systematically testing and evaluating the
impact of their activities on scientific ethics at their
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this study is to understand
how to create a culture of scientific ethics at a major university and to then
use that information to create institutional transformation at UC San Diego. The
project moves beyond current approaches to studying and encouraging scientific
ethics in four ways: (1) comparing faculty perceptions to gauge the presence of
an ethical culture; (2) empowering faculty as agents of cultural change; (3)
applying department specific approaches to encouraging and cultivating a culture
of ethics; and (4) emphasizing the importance of local cultures and climates for
shaping ethical behavior, rather than simply explaining it as the behavior of
one or two unethical individuals. These four novel elements will advance
understanding of research integrity and provide tools for affecting cultural
changes towards ethical science at major research universities. Overall, the
project will benefit society by promoting ethical teaching, training, and
learning, and by nurturing a community of researchers who will be better
prepared to engage in discussions about ethical dimensions of academia and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.