* 1835838
* Element:Software:Enabling Millisecond-Scale Biomolecular Dynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Carol Hall, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,998.00

Computer simulation methods based on Molecular Dynamics (MD) have been used for
decades to understand chemical and biochemical phenomena at the molecular level.
MD is a very powerful tool that has enabled scientists to understand the
behavior of molecules crucial for life such as proteins and nucleic acids. MD
has also been used to understand diseases and develop new drugs. However, MD is
limited in both the size of the systems that can be studied and the amount of
time that can be simulated. Many complex phenomena relevant to life involve
systems too large to study with MD, or require following the system for much
longer times. An alternative to traditional MD called discontinuous molecular
dynamics (DMD) has been shown to be much more efficient to study biomolecular
processes. To date, however, the use of DMD has been limited due to its
inability to take advantage of modern parallel computers. This project will
develop a next-generation parallel DMD software that will enable the study of
complex molecular phenomena involving larger systems and longer time scales.
Detailed knowledge of such processes will considerably advance the development
of new materials and drugs, and human health. The project team combines the
computational and experimental expertise to successfully develop and validate a
robust parallel DMD software framework. The software and results will be
actively shared both with the computational simulation community and with the
scientific and engineering community at large, contributing to the capability,
capacity, and cohesiveness of the national cyber-infrastructure ecosystem.
Furthermore, the results of this project will be used in outreach efforts geared
toward the education and inclusion of minorities traditionally underrepresented
in higher STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop an open software framework that enables multi-millisecond dynamic
simulations of peptides and peptide-mimetics by implementing a parallel
discontinuous molecular dynamics (DMD) package. Unlike current molecular
dynamics (MD), which features limited simulation timescales, discontinuous
molecular dynamics (DMD) assumes ballistic motion of the particles between
interaction events and enables the study of phenomena across much longer time
scales. To demonstrate the approach, the project will (1) develop a parallel
version of existing serial DMD codes to enable extending simulation times from
hundreds of microseconds to several milliseconds; (2) extend and improve the
available DMD peptide force field, adding parameters for non-natural peptides
and peptoids; and (3) develop software for translating interaction potentials
from traditional MD to DMD. The project team possesses the complementary
expertise necessary for this project, including coarse-grained models and force
fields for complex polymers and peptoids, MD simulation of protein self-assembly
and peptide-protein binding processes, synthesis of protein-binding peptides and
peptoids, and measurement of thermodynamic and kinetic binding parameters. The
tools resulting from this research will allow the scientific and engineering
community to model and study very long time-scale phenomena, such as biopolymer
folding, aggregation and inhibition of aggregation, fibril formation, and
protein-binding. This toolbox shows great promise to not only accelerate
innovation in the computational design of biomaterials, but also to impact the
molecular simulation community focusing on highly complex systems, up to cell-
level dynamics. Notably, this project is ideal for the National Science
Foundation's Cyber-infrastructure for Sustained Scientific Innovation (CSSI), as
it (i) contributes to the capability, capacity, and cohesiveness of the national
cyberinfrastructure ecosystem by providing user-friendly open-source
computational tools, (ii) actively engages CI experts and testers of our
toolbox, who would potentially be its ultimate users, (iii) advances our current
capabilities in developing bioactive peptides and peptoids, (iv) establishes
plans and metrics that encourage measurement of progress and certify the quality
of shared tools and results, and (iv) devise strategies to combine wide-access
with long-term community-driven development and
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.