* 1835576
* Collaborative Research: HDR: Data-Driven Earth System Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Raffaele Ferrari, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,250,000.00

Global weather and climate models represent the atmosphere on computational
grids with horizontal spacing of perhaps 100km, stacked in layers which can be
over a kilometer thick. Such grids suffice to capture the dynamics of cyclones,
fronts, and other large-scale atmospheric phenomena, but these phenomena depend
critically on processes with spatial scales much smaller than the grid spacing.
The small-scale processes must be represented indirectly, through
parameterization schemes which estimate their net impact on the resolved
atmospheric state. For example clouds are typically too small for the grid
spacing yet they are critical for moving moisture from the ocean surface to the
mid-troposphere, thus cloud parameterizations play a key role in determining
atmospheric humidity even on the largest spatial scales. Parameterization
schemes are inherently approximate, and the development of schemes which produce
realistic simulations is a central challenge of model development. Shortcomings
in parameterization limit the usefulness of weather and climate models both for
scientific research and for societal applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
parameterization schemes depend critically on various parameters whose values
cannot be determined a priori but must instead be found through trial and error.
This task, referred to as "tuning", is laborious as it is performed separately
for each parameterization scheme and involves multiple integrations of the model
in multiple configurations. It is also inefficient in its use of observations,
which is unfortunate given the large amount of observational data available from
satellites and other sources. The resulting parameter sets may not be optimal
and may produce unexpected results when all the schemes interact with each other
in global simulations. Finally, manual tuning is not conducive to uncertainty
quantification, which would be valuable for estimating the uncertainty in future
climate change projections. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
replace ad hoc manual tuning with a combination of data assimilation, machine
learning, and fine-scale process modeling using large eddy simulation (LES)
models. LES models have grid spacings of a few tens of meters and can explicitly
simulate the clouds and turbulence represented by parameterization schemes.
These ingredients are combined to create a global Machine Learning Atmospheric
Model (MLAM), in which LES models embedded in selected grid columns of a global
model explicitly simulate subgrid-scale processes which are represented by
parameterization schemes in the other columns. Machine learning is used to tune
the schemes to emulate the behavior of the LES simulations, so that explicit
simulations become an online benchmark for parameterization. In this way all the
schemes can be tuned together and interactively within a running global
simulation. Observational data from a variety of sources is assimilated during
the model integration to provide a further constraint on parameter values, and
estimates of parameter uncertainty are generated as part of the automated
tuning. A similar tuning process is implemented in an ocean general circulation
model, and the two are combined to produce a machine learning climate model.
Model tuning is generally viewed as a necessary but mundane activity which is
not in itself a research topic. But a model capable of learning its parameters
from observations and process models offers a new path forward, toward both
better models and better ways of using models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has
broader impacts due to the societal value of better forecasts and projections
from weather and climate models. The work directly addresses uncertainty in
forecasts and projections used by decision makers to plan for weather and
climate impacts. In addition, the modeling strategy developed here is applicable
to a broad class of research areas which face the problem of relating large-
scale behaviors to small-scale unresolved processes (the problem of relating
genotypes to phenotypes in evolutionary biology, for example). In addition, the
PIs will establish a cross-disciplinary graduate program on data-driven Earth
system modeling. The program bridges the gap between environmental and
computational sciences which currently hinders progress in environmental
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.