* 1835892
* Elements:Software:NSCI: Empowering Data-driven Discovery with a Provenance Collection, Management, and Analysis Software Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* William Hase, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,982.00

Scientific breakthroughs are increasingly powered by advanced computing and data
analysis capabilities delivered by high performance computing (HPC) systems. In
the meantime, many scientific problems have moved to a level of complexity that
the ability of understanding the results, auditing how a result is generated,
and reproducing the important experiments or simulation results, is critical to
scientists. Enabling such a capability in HPC systems requires a holistic
collection, management, and analysis software infrastructure for "provenance"
data, the metadata that describes the history of a piece of data. Such a
software infrastructure does not exist yet, which motivates the proposed
software development of a lightweight provenance service. With such a software
element, many advanced data management functionalities such as identifying the
data sources, parameters, or assumptions behind a given result, auditing data
history and usage, or understanding the detailed process that how different
input data are transformed into outputs can be possible. Responding to the
National Strategic Computing Initiative, this project will provide an attractive
software infrastructure to future national HPC systems to improve the
productivity of science in complex HPC simulation and analysis cycles. The
project team will also recruit underrepresented students, mentor graduate and
undergraduate students, integrate results into curriculum, and publish and
disseminate results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lightweight provenance service
software on HPC systems will provide: 1) an always-on, background service that
automatically and transparently collects and manages provenance for scientific
applications, 2) captures comprehensive provenance with accurate causality to
support a wide range of use cases, and 3) provides easy-to-use analysis tools
for scientists to quickly explore and utilize the provenance. This project will
integrate the development, education, and outreach efforts tightly
together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.