* 1835441
* Collaborative Research: Framework: Software: CINES: A Scalable Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Innovation in Network Engineering and Science
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Albert Esterline, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2023
* USD 40,000.00

Networks are ubiquitous and are a part of our common vocabulary. Network science
and engineering has emerged as a formal field over the last twenty years and has
seen explosive growth. Ideas from network science are central to companies such
as Akamai, Twitter, Google, Facebook, and LinkedIn. The concepts have also been
used to address fundamental problems in diverse fields (e.g., biology,
economics, social sciences, psychology, power systems, telecommunications,
public health and marketing), and are now part of most university curricula.
Ideas and techniques from network science are widely used in making scientific
progress in the disciplines mentioned above. Networks are now part of the public
vocabulary, with news articles and magazines frequently using the term
"networks" to refer to interconnected entities. Yet, resources for effective use
of techniques from network science are largely dispersed and stand-alone, of
small scale, home-grown for personal use, and/or do not cover the broad range of
operations that need to be performed on networks. Compositions of these diverse
capabilities are rare. Furthermore, many researchers who study networks are not
computer scientists. As a result, they do not have easy access to computing and
data resources; this creates a barrier for researchers. This project will
develop a sophisticated cyberinfrastructure that brings together various
resources to provide a unifying ecosystem for network science that is greater
than the sum of its parts. The resulting cyberinfrastructure will benefit
researchers and students from various disciplines by facilitating access to
various tools for synthesizing and analyzing large networks, and by providing
access points for contributors of new software and data. An important benefit of
the system is that it can be readily used even by researchers who have no formal
training in computer programming. The cyberinfrastructure resulting from this
work will foster multi-disciplinary and multi-university research and teaching
collaborations. As part of this project, comprehensive education and outreach
programs will be launched by the participating institutions, spanning educators
and K-12 students. These programs will include network science courses with
students from minority and under-represented groups, and students at smaller
institutions who do not have easy access to high performance computing
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resources for doing network science
are largely dispersed and stand-alone (in silos of isolated tools), of small
scale, or home-grown for personal use. What is needed is a cyberinfrastructure
to bring together various resources, to provide a unifying ecosystem for network
science that is greater than the sum of its parts. The primary goal of this
proposal is to build self-sustaining cyberinfrastructure (CI) named CINES
(Cyberinfrastructure for Sustained Innovation in Network Engineering and
Science) that will be a community resource for network science. CINES will be an
extensible and sustainable platform for producers and consumers of network
science data, information, and software. CINES will have: (1) a layered
architecture that systematically modularizes and isolates messaging,
infrastructure services, common services, a digital library, and APIs for
change-out and updates; (2) a robust and reliable infrastructure that---for
applications (apps)---is designed to accommodate technological advances in
methods, programming languages, and computing models; (3) a resource manager to
enable jobs to run on target machines for which they are best suited; (4) an
engine to enable users to create new workflows by composing available components
and to distribute the resulting workload across computing resources; (5)
orchestration among system components to provide CI-as-a-service (CIaaS) that
scales under high system load to networks with a billion or more vertices; (6) a
digital library with 100,000+ networks of various kinds that allows rich
services for storing, searching, annotating, and browsing; (7) structural
methods (e.g., centrality, paths, cuts, etc.) and dynamical models of various
contagion processes; (8) new methods to acquire data, build networks, and
augment them using machine learning techniques; (9) a suite of industry-
recognized tools such as SNAP, NetworkX, and R-studio that make it easier for
researchers, educators, and analysts to do network science and engineering; (10)
a suite of APIs that allows developers to add new web-apps and services, based
on an app-store model, and allows access to CINES from third party software; and
(11) metrics and a Stack Overflow model, among other features, for producers and
consumers to interact (in real-time) and guide the evolution of CINES. CINES
will enable fundamental changes in the way researchers study and teach complex
networks. The use of state-of-the-art high-performance computing (HPC) resources
to synthesize, analyze, and reason about large networks will enable researchers
and educators to study networks in novel ways. CINES will allow scientists to
address fundamental scientific questions---e.g., biologists can use network
methods to reason about genomics data that is now available in large quantities
due to fast and effective sequencing and the NIH Microbiome Program. It will
enable educators to harness HPC technologies to teach Network Science to
students spanning various academic levels, disciplines, and institutions. CINES,
which will be useful to researchers supported by many NSF directorates and
divisions, will be designed for scalability, usability, extensibility, and
sustainability. This project will also advance the fields of digital libraries
and cloud computing by stretching them to address challenges related to Network
Science. Given the multidisciplinary nature of the field, CINES will provide a
collaborative space for scientists from different disciplines, leading to
important cross fertilization of ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.