* 1835608
* Elements: Software: Distributed Workflows for Cyberexperimentation
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 10/31/2022
* USD 598,798.00

Industry and academic research in computing systems, networking and security
suffers from the inability to demonstrate and validate research outcomes,
because the process of research consists of complex but largely experiments on
distributed, large-scale, networked test-beds. This project will address this
issue by enabling rigorous and repeatable experimentation on test-beds by
enabling experiments to be defined as executable workflows, that can then be
repeatably run, as well as managed. This project will develop and deploy a
software framework called Elie. Elie consists of an experiment representation
capability, along with several supporting services that make experimentation
workflows robust, fault tolerant, easily sharable and reusable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, Elie consists of: (1) A new experiment
representation, called DEW, which encodes experiment behavior and allocation
constraints instead of just experiment topology. (2) Capture tools, which
capture a researcher's manual actions on the testbed and facilitate script-
building, and DEW generation (3) Testbed-integrated version control, (4) An
experiment orchestration mechanism, (5) Lightweight failure detection, (6) A
GUI, which allows for experiment management throughout an experiment lifecycle.
Elie's technologies can be used by researchers as a full environment or as
individual tools. Collectively these technologies provide basic testbed support
throughout an experiment lifecycle including the design, running, analysis,
monitoring, storage and sharing stages. All of Elie's technologies are
extensible, and open-sourced, to allow the research community to contribute to
their development and customize them to their needs. This project fundamentally
differs from the prior work in its goal to co-exist with current testbed
experimentation approaches (manual and scripted experimentation) and to be
applicable to a broad range of testbeds (via its translation and generation
tools). Outcomes of this project will significantly improve ease of testbed
experimentation, by offloading tedious, repetitive and detail-sensitive tasks to
testbeds. This will shorten experiment duration and improve quality and
reliability of results. This work will further make experiments more robust,
enable easy sharing and reuse of experiments with minimal user effort, and
facilitate repeatability and reproducibility. Overall, such advances in testbed
experimentation will enable vertical development (building upon the work of
others) in fields, which use testbeds, such as distributed systems, networking
and cybersecurity. Sharing and reuse will also improve quality of scientific
research in these fields, by enabling creation of larger and more complex
experiments built on the shared artifacts of other researchers. The project team
will also conduct extensive user outreach and building collaborations with other
researchers that work on improving rigor of testbed experimentation, with the
goal of building a strong user and developer community for
Elie.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.