* 1835640
* Collaborative Research: Framework: Data: Toward Exascale Community Ocean Circulation Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Alexander Szalay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,850,538.00

This project designs and implements a software framework for handling petabyte-
scale datasets; the focus is on global ocean circulation. A team of three
universities (Johns Hopkins University, MIT, and Columbia University) builds a
unified data system that is capable of delivering global ocean circulation model
output at 1 km horizontal resolution. The product will be hosted in an open
portal, providing the community with scalable software tools to enable analysis
of the dataset. The team will use this data to answer specific questions about
mixing and dissipation processes in the ocean. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this effort is the creation and demonstration of a complete and replicable
cyberinfrastructure for sharing and analysis of massive simulations. The focus
is on high resolution ocean circulation modeling, with software tools that will
enable efficient storage. Two major challenges to the study of ocean and climate
dynamics are addressed: handling large datasets from high-resolution
simulations, and understanding the role of small-scale ocean processes in large-
scale ocean/climate systems. Resolving the first challenge would significantly
facilitate ongoing and future studies of the ocean/atmosphere/climate system;
addressing the second challenge would profoundly improve understanding of
ocean/climate dynamics. The project builds a unified data system consisting of
high-resolution global ocean circulation simulations, a petascale portal for
data sharing, and scalable software tools for interactive analysis. The software
framework from this project is expected to handle petascale to exascale datasets
for users. Several pre-existing capabilities are leveraged for this project: the
JHU regional numerical model of the Spill Jet on the East Greenland continental
slope, software from the Pangeo project, the SciServer data-intensive software
infrastructure, and lessons learned from the North East Storage Exchange multi-
petabyte regional data store. The broader target is next generation simulation
software in the geosciences and other disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Integrative and Collaborative Education
and Research Program within the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.