* 1835028
* I-Corps:  High Endurance Power System for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) Using Radiosotopic Power
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Steven Krahn, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
investigate the commercial potential of a developed power system for unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) with a high potential impact on military operations and
commercial industries. Ultimately, the technology simply produces ultra-long
endurance energy, and after proving the safety and reliability of the power
system, can be expanded to other industries. For example, the power system could
be used in an ultra-long endurance unmanned undersea vehicle, to power a
desalination plant, or even just as a power source for buildings. As the
miniaturization of the technology improves, the power system could also be used
in consumer devices- providing ultra-long endurance power for cell phones,
tablets, and laptops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
commercializing a power system design that will produce 300W of electric power
and weigh under 150 lbs. Detailed studies have supported the feasibility of the
design of the power system. The power-to-weight ratio of this power system's
design is similar to current unmanned aerial systems having proven flight
capability. This comparison also supports the feasibility of the power system
being used for powered flight, and potentially increasing UAV endurance to over
one year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.