* 1835764
* Framework: Software: NSCI: Collaborative Research: Hermes: Extending the HDF Library to Support Intelligent I/O Buffering for Deep Memory and Storage Hierarchy Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Gerd Heber, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 10/31/2023
* USD 2,866,000.00

Modern high performance computing (HPC) applications generate massive amounts of
data. However, the performance improvement of disk based storage systems has
been much slower than that of memory, creating a significant Input/Output (I/O)
performance gap. To reduce the performance gap, storage subsystems are under
extensive changes, adopting new technologies and adding more layers into the
memory/storage hierarchy. With a deeper memory hierarchy, the data movement
complexity of memory systems is increased significantly, making it harder to
utilize the potential of the deep memory and storage hierarchy (DMSH) design. As
we move towards the exascale era, I/O bottleneck is a must to solve performance
bottleneck facing the HPC community. DMSHs with multiple levels of
memory/storage layers offer a feasible solution but are very complex to use
effectively. Ideally, the presence of multiple layers of storage should be
transparent to applications without having to sacrifice I/O performance. There
is a need to enhance and extend current software systems to support data access
and movement transparently and effectively under DMSHs. Hierarchical Data Format
(HDF) technologies are a set of current I/O solutions addressing the problems in
organizing, accessing, analyzing, and preserving data. HDF5 library is widely
popular within the scientific community. Among the high level I/O libraries used
in DOE labs, HDF5 is the undeniable leader with 99% of the share. HDF5 addresses
the I/O bottleneck by hiding the complexity of performing coordinated I/O to
single, shared files, and by encapsulating general purpose optimizations. While
HDF technologies, like other existing I/O middleware, are not designed to
support DMSHs, its wide popularity and its middleware nature make HDF5 an ideal
candidate to enable, manage, and supervise I/O buffering under DMSHs. This
project proposes the development of Hermes, a heterogeneous aware, multi tiered,
dynamic, and distributed I/O buffering system that will significantly accelerate
I/O performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to extend HDF
technologies with the Hermes design. Hermes is new, and the enhancement of HDF5
is new. The deliveries of this research include an enhanced HDF5 library, a set
of extended HDF technologies, and a group of general I/O buffering and memory
system optimization mechanisms and methods. We believe that the combination of
DMSH I/O buffering and HDF technologies is a reachable practical solution that
can efficiently support scientific discovery. Hermes will advance HDF5 core
technology by developing new buffering algorithms and mechanisms to support 1)
vertical and horizontal buffering in DMSHs: here vertical means access data
to/from different levels locally and horizontal means spread/gather data across
remote compute nodes; 2) selective buffering via HDF5: here selective means some
memory layer, e.g. NVMe, only for selected data; 3) dynamic buffering via online
system profiling: the buffering schema can be changed dynamically based on
messaging traffic; 4) adaptive buffering via Reinforcement Learning: by learning
the application's access pattern, we can adapt prefetching algorithms and cache
replacement policies at runtime. The development Hermes will be translated into
high quality dependable software and will be released with the core HDF5
library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.