* 1835992
* Traditional Knowledge of the Central and Upper Yukon Basin: Gathering Resiliency Data
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Maryann Fidel, Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2019
* USD 29,223.00

Embedded within culture is wisdom about resilience that can support communities
faced with rapid environmental and social change. This project will capture data
and knowledge from the last generation of Tanana and Gwich'in Athabascan elders
who were raised in tribal communities largely untouched by Western colonization.
This generation, now in their 70s, 80s, and 90s, are taking key knowledge and
data sets with them as they die, leaving subsequent generations impacted by this
loss of knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will document Indigenous
Knowledge of resilience through a qualitative phenomenology framework in using
semi-structured interviews conducted by community researchers with Indigenous
elders of the Central and Upper Yukon Basin, born between the years 1920 and
1950. Primary research questions are:&lt;br/&gt;- How have adaptation strategies
changed over a lifetime?&lt;br/&gt;- How did environmental changes trigger
changes in community social structure?&lt;br/&gt;- What lessons about resilience
can be learned from the generation that bridged the gap between largely
traditional Athabascan lifestyle and Anglo-European
colonization?&lt;br/&gt;Interviews will be conducted with up to six Elders from
the central Yukon Athabascan region - a remote area that was one of the last
areas in Alaska to experience colonization. This project is urgent as the Elders
who are the subjects of this research project are near end of life with three of
the original Elders identified for this project having passed away during the
previous two years. Additionally, a rural, Alaskan Native person will be trained
in the project methodology and taught to harness the tools of science in the
preservation of culture. Products include a plain language report that will be
geared toward Native Alaskans, and the collected information and data will be
made available via a public repository for other Native Alaskans and scientific
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.