* 1835254
* Building the Event Horizon Telescope:  Observing Black Holes with Schwarzschild Radius Resolution
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2019
* Sheperd Doeleman, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Kurczynski
* 08/31/2019
* USD 431,655.00

There is a massive black hole at the center of our galaxy, and similar objects
at the centers of other galaxies, objects that distort spacetime by the strength
of their immense gravitational fields. Spatially, a black hole is phenomenally
compact. Nonetheless, Dr. Doeleman and his colleagues, utilizing the combined
millimeter-wave radio signals from an array of radiotelescopes located on
different continents, will image the event horizon of a black hole. The
combination of high frequency and long interferometer baselines will produce an
unprecedented high spatial resolution, and this project presents a
scientifically compelling way to utilize it.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will develop broadband very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI) instrumentation
matched to the millimeter- and submillimeter-wave receivers now in use at
radiotelescopes suitable for use in the intercontinental array. With
commercially available digital signal processing devices incorporated into
custom systems, the instrumentation to be built will achieve 8 GHz of bandwidth
in each polarization. That broad bandwidth is critical for maximizing system
sensitivity. The resulting VLBI network will achieve, at 1.3 mm wavelength, tens
of microarcseconds of angular resolution on the sky. Earlier observations by
this team have measured structure on the scale of the Schwarzschild radius of
the black hole at the center of our galaxy, and this project plans to observe
and image the actual black hole event horizon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hardware
developed under this program will be made available to the astronomy community.
High-school teachers, undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral
fellows will be involved in the research program. Valuable hands-on training in
instrumentation will be provided that will be valuable on other modern
radiotelescopes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is being
provided by NSF's Division of Astronomical Sciences through its Advanced
Technologies and Instrumentation program.