* 1835231
* NCS-FO: Analyzing Synapses, Motifs and Neural Networks for Large-Scale Connectomics
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2021
* Hanspeter Pfister, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 10/31/2021
* USD 999,568.00

High-resolution analysis of the brain's connectivity, which reveals the actual
wiring diagram connecting nerve cells of the brain, provides insights
unattainable any other way into the way the healthy brain works and what goes
awry in diseases and disorders of the nervous system. The primary challenge of
this approach is that at present there are no reliable, robust and powerful
computer-based techniques to analyze the extraordinarily large and vastly
complicated networks of brain cells to detect connectional motifs in their
highly branching and connected structure. Nor are there visualization tools that
allow neuroscientists to explore the brain network patterns effectively. This
work will analyze large brain networks from electron microscopy datasets in
young and old mammalian brain samples. These data sets each contains hundreds of
thousands of nerve cells and billions of synapses that interconnect them. The
proposal aims to develop new methods and tools to analyze these vast brain
networks at the synapse, motif, and network levels. If successful, the project
will provide data and analysis tools for the development of new theories of how
the brain works.

Recent advances in image acquisition using multi-beam serial-section electron
microscopy (sSEM) and automated segmentation methods have enabled data
collection for large tissue samples in a variety of animals. These data will be
used to curate large-scale datasets with one million labeled synapses with
synaptic cleft locations, pre- and postsynaptic polarity predictions, and
excitatory and inhibitory type predictions. This has not been accomplished
previously given the enormous amount of data. The aim is to discover synaptic
motifs by subdividing complex neural networks into quantifiable and meaningful
subgraphs. Automatic generation of candidates for motifs will be created by
developing an efficient neurite-centric wiring-diagram reconstruction method and
subgraph detection algorithm to find common patterns. These data will be used to
quantify and compare reconstructed neural networks from different specimens at
different spatial and temporal scales and build a visualization platform to
assist neuroscientists to analyze these networks as they seek to ask and answer
fundamental questions related to neural circuits in the brain.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.