* 1835161
* Collaborative Research: Emerging Cultures of Data Science Ethics in the Academy and Industry
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Anna Hoffmann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 12/31/2020
* USD 64,477.00

The 'big data' era has created new scientific roles in the form of 'data
scientists' - specialized information knowledge workers who apply technical and
research skills to derive knowledge from large-scale databases. Concomitant with
the creation of these new roles, however, has been the rise of high-profile
controversies around the potential abusive use of big data and of the algorithms
whose creation they enable. This project thus focuses on 'data science ethics'
and works to understand how to best cultivate a culture of ethics in data
science. It will assess the state, structure, and substance of data ethics in
both educational and industrial contexts. Within the academic sector, the
project will conduct interviews with faculty and undergraduates and analyze
relevant syllabi to develop an account of what constitutes data ethics in the
academy. Comparing these data across faculty and disciplines will show major
areas of agreement and disagreement over what data ethics education should
entail. Within the industrial sector, the project will research how data ethics
are beginning to figure into corporate practice and study how companies define
data ethics and attempt to integrate ethical considerations into everyday work.
Data will come from in-depth interviews with those in industry and analyses of
corporate documents from companies that have made public commitments to
addressing data ethics. The PIs would then compare data and findings from across
these two contexts to identify commonalities, differences, and useful strategies
for advancing data ethics across social contexts and professional
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will draw together a diverse group of
researchers who in collaboration with educators and data science practitioners
will: (1) document and assess barriers and opportunities for integrating ethics
into data science practice; (2) assess the continuities and discontinuities
emerging between industrial and academic contexts; and (3) develop a foundation
for cohesive, comprehensive, integrative data ethics education. The
investigators will use a range of complementary methods to do so, including
qualitative interviews, expert judgement, and quantitative computational
analyses of the latent thematic and topical structure of documents from academia
and industry. Project outcomes and findings will be disseminated through
conferences, journals, and through holding a synthetic workshop after the
completion of data collection and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.