* 1835378
* Seeking Synergy: K-12 Professional Development as a Model for College Science Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jennifer Knight, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2021
* USD 49,005.00

It is a national priority to produce a well-prepared workforce in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). This workforce is needed to
make progress in science, to advance national health initiatives, and support
overall national prosperity in an increasingly technical economy. One
contemporary challenge colleges and universities face in meeting this challenge
is the need to provide effective professional development opportunities for
faculty members. For example, professional development could help faculty learn
about emerging research related to student learning, and this knowledge could
inform teaching practices. This project aims to serve the national interest by
convening professional development leaders from both K-12 and higher education
to determine the design principles of a new model of professional development
for college science teaching. This project is designed to draw upon evidence-
based, effective professional development practices from the K-12 sector, and to
apply these strategies to programs for faculty members teaching undergraduate
biology students. Multiple K-12 models for professional development have been
rigorously tested and shown to improve teacher knowledge, skill, and student
learning. This gathering is designed to focus specifically on teaching and
learning methods designed to reveal and respond to student
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support a three-day conference
to define the design principles of a new professional development program for
college biology faculty. The model will derive components from K-12 professional
development models and focus on helping faculty learn the pedagogy of revealing
and responding to student thinking. The conference will extend the work of two
well-established research and professional development groups in STEM education,
the Automated Analysis of Constructed Response project (AACR) and the Science
Teachers Learning from Lesson Analysis project (STeLLA). AACR focuses on
undergraduate science education and addresses: the creation of constructed-
response assessments that reveal students' mental models of scientific concepts;
the creation of machine learning models to predict experts' scoring of student
responses; the production of reports for faculty that describe the computerized
analysis of student writing; and long-term, local faculty learning communities
that support faculty users of AACR. STeLLA supports K-12 teachers to view their
teaching through the lens of student thinking. The efficacy of STeLLA's approach
to professional development has been demonstrated through randomized and quasi-
experimental studies that link teacher learning with increased student learning.
The conference will include members of AACR and STeLLA as well as experts from
other higher education and K-12 professional development arenas. The conference
will produce a framework for developing a new college biology professional
development program, which can be implemented and researched. It also will
create a network of science education professional development specialists and
researchers from both K-12 and higher education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.