* 1835720
* Collaborative Research: NSCI Framework: Software: SCALE-MS - Scalable Adaptive Large Ensembles of Molecular Simulations
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Michael Shirts, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 12/31/2023
* USD 286,504.00

Molecular simulations are becoming important tools in understanding nanoscale
processes in science and engineering. Such processes include the motions of
proteins and nucleic acids that will enable design of better drugs, the
interactions of liquids and metals in photovoltaic and catalytic applications,
and the behavior of complex polymers used in industrial materials. Although
national cyberinfrastructure investments are increasing raw computational power,
the molecular timescales that scientists can simulate are not increasing
proportionately. This means that most simulations are significantly shorter than
the physical processes they are designed to study. Fortunately, many researchers
have developed powerful algorithms that combine multiple simulations to overcome
this molecular timescale problem, but these algorithms can still be very
difficult to use effectively. This project, called SCALE-MS, will develop
computing tools to simplify the process of writing algorithms that use large
collections of molecular simulations to simulate the long timescales needed for
scientific and industrial understanding. These tools will make it much simpler
to have simulations interact adaptively, so simulation results can automatically
guide the creation and running of new simulations. By making these complex
multi-simulation algorithms easier to create and run, this project will enable
users to run existing methods in computational molecular science more easily and
make it possible for researchers to create and test new, even more powerful,
methods for molecular modeling. This project also brings together researchers
from biophysics, chemical engineering, and materials science, combining
expertise from multiple simulation fields to develop important new ensemble
simulation algorithms. This adaptive ensemble framework will enable communities
of molecular simulation users in chemistry, chemical engineering, materials
science, and biophysics to more easily exchange advanced methods and best
practices. Many aspects of this framework can also be applied to aid societal
problems requiring modeling in other domains, such as climate and earthquake
modeling and prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses a
fundamental need across molecular simulation communities from chemistry to
biophysics to materials science: the ability to easily simulate long-timescale
phenomena and slowly equilibrating ensembles. Researchers are increasingly
developing high-level parallel algorithms that utilize simulation ensembles,
loosely coupled molecular simulations that exchange information on a slower time
scale than standard parallel computing techniques. However, most existing
molecular simulation software cannot express ensemble simulation algorithms in a
general manner and execute them at scale. There is thus a need for (i) the
ability to express ensemble-based methods in a simple, easy- to-use manner that
is agnostic of the underlying simulation code, (ii) support for adaptive and
asynchronous execution of ensembles, and (iii) a scalable runtime system that
encapsulates the complexity of executing and managing jobs seamlessly on
different resources. The project will develop an extensible framework, including
a simple high-level API and a sophisticated runtime system, to meet these design
objectives on NSF?s production cyberinfrastructure. A key element of this design
is the ability to specify ensemble-based patterns of work- and data-flow in a
fashion independent of the challenges and complexity of the runtime management
of the ensembles. This project will develop a framework consisting of a simple
adaptive ensemble API with an underlying runtime platform that enables
expression of ensemble simulation methods in a fashion agnostic of the
underlying simulation code. This will facilitate design of new ensemble-based
methods by the community and enable scientific end users to simply encode
complex adaptive workflows. This approach separates the complexity of compute
job management from the expression of sophisticated methods. The framework will
support adaptive and asynchronous execution of ensembles, removing
synchronization blocks that have restricted peta- and exa-scaling of simulation
methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Chemistry within the
NSF Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences and the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems within the NSF
Directorate for Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.