* 1835237
* Standard: RR: Authors Without Borders: Continuing Investigation of International Authorship Norms among Scientists and Engineers
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Dena Plemmons, Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 162,451.00

In science, authorship of a research article or report is widely used as an
indicator of scientific success. This can result in significant conflict in any
collaboration, but international collaborations pose unique challenges with
respect to ethical issues and conflict related to scientific authorship. Social
norms about scientific authorship differ markedly across national contexts in
ways that may create confusion or conflict to an extent not typical in domestic
forms of scientific collaboration. This project will explore these issues by
studying international norms surrounding scientific authorship, sources and
explanations for conflict surrounding authorship in international
collaborations, and the extent to which the society in which a researcher lives
shapes their ideas about authorship practices. In doing so it will identify
roadblocks to effective international collaboration, and develop a set of best
practices and a set of guidelines to address sources of conflict in scientific
authorship. Findings will also be used to develop educational materials on these
issues for domestic and international scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
cross-national study of authorship norms and of conflict surrounding issues of
scientific authorship will develop a social survey for national and
international dissemination across a wide array of scientific disciplines. This
project will expand upon a previous study by these investigators in which they
researched these issues in two disciplines across four nations. Surveys for this
project will be based on those from the pilot study and will be translated into
thirteen languages and administered to scientists working in eighty-two nations
in a wide-variety of disciplines. The survey will consist of demographic
questions, open-ended responses, and Likert-scale survey items measuring levels
of agreement and disagreement about authorship practices in international
collaborations. The survey will yield qualitative and quantitative data that
will be analyzed using established qualitative and quantitative analysis
software. Findings from the study will be disseminated in publications and
conferences, and through their integration into existing training modules for
promoting responsible conduct of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.