* 1835141
* Undergraduate Sounding Rocket Field School Training Workshop at the Andoya Space Center in Northern Norway: Andenes, Norway - Fall 2018 and Winter 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* David Miles, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2020
* USD 49,995.00

This award supports the travel of two University of Iowa (UI) undergraduate
students and two UI faculty lecturers to attend an international undergraduate
student sounding rocket field school called CaNoRock that is a week-long
workshop based upon collaboration between the Andoya Space Center and seven
Canadian and Norwegian Universities. The two UI professors will participate in
the development of the geospace curriculum at the Andoya Rocket Range by
teaching regular classes and helping to support the student rocket experiment
preparations. In addition to these lectures, the workshop would focus upon
hands-on student rocket activities to help train students while introducing them
to the possibilities of graduate study or the prospects of a career in the
aerospace industry. The primary project objectives are aimed at increasing
awareness of US educational opportunities for space research activities and
experimental rocket research. Eventually, it is expected that this collaboration
would be developed into a more extensive activity that would include
participation by students from other US educational
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.