* 1835352
* Collaborative Research: Establishing Norms of Data Ethics in Citizen Science
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Caren Cooper, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Citizen science refers to a broad spectrum of ways in which scientists and
members of the public collaborate in scientific discovery. Though the phrase
?citizen science? is relatively new, members of the lay public have been
involved in with citizen science activities for centuries. Nevertheless, the
current scale and rate of growth of citizen science, often mediated by digital
communication technology, is a new phenomenon. Millions of people globally
contribute to science through citizen science projects, often facilitated by
mobile phones equipped with GPS, apps, and cameras. Increasing numbers of
teachers and youth educators are introducing citizen science to children, and
increasing numbers of professional scientists and research institutions are
incorporating citizen science into their research programs. Citizen science has
been rapidly spreading around the world and across disciplines. It is typically
funded outside traditional institutions and conducted without the traditional
regulatory oversight mechanisms that exist in institutions such as universities.
This project will address these issues and the resulting ethics gap within
citizen science. The project will focus on an issue common across nearly all
citizen science projects - voluntary data collection and use, which presents an
important ethical tension between confidentiality and openness. This research
will involve: (1) identifying and encouraging ethical research by citizen
scientists; and (2) building capacity within the Citizen Science Association to
establish and maintain an ethical framework for this newly emerging form of
organizing science work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized around a
three stage, mixed-methods research design to investigate current and ideal
ethical practices in citizen science and to use human-centered methodology to
create an ethical culture of citizen science through collaboration with the
Citizen Science Association. These outcomes will be achieved by: (1) creating an
inventory and typology of data collection practices; (2) employing a mixture of
surveys, interviews, and focus groups to determine the views of practitioners
and volunteer data collectors on the ethics of data collection and management;
(3) creating a guide for best ethical data practices; (4) disseminating tools
for ethical practices in data science; and (5) assessing the use and efficacy of
these tools and best practice trough the creation and dissemination of a
quantitative survey of the ethical culture of the Citizen Science
Association.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.