* 1835414
* Software Elements: NUPACK: Molecular Programming in the Cloud
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Niles Pierce, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

Life is orchestrated by programmable biomolecules (DNA, RNA, and proteins) that
interact within complex molecular machines and biological circuits to grow,
regulate, and repair organisms. These biological proofs-of-principle inspire
diverse engineering efforts within the new fields of molecular programming,
nucleic acid nanotechnology, and synthetic biology. Over the coming decades,
these fields are poised to generate transformative programmable molecular and
cellular technologies addressing challenges to science and society ranging from
neuroscience and development, to diagnosis and treatment, and from renewable
energy to sustainable manufacturing. To support these engineering efforts, the
PI is engaged in a multi-decade effort to develop NUPACK (Nucleic Acid Package),
a growing software suite for analyzing and designing nucleic acid structures,
devices, and systems. Launched in 2007, NUPACK usage has grown to the point
where the NUPACK compute resource is frequently overwhelmed by the research
community. With the proposed work, the NUPACK web application will be re-
architected from the ground up to run in the cloud, enabling the resource to
scale dynamically in response to spikes in researcher demand and to growth year-
over-year. The NUPACK user interface will be substantially expanded to allow
users to harness next-generation analysis and design tools. Additionally, the
re-architected web application will benefit from a complete re-write of the
NUPACK scientific code base (moving from NUPACK 3.2 to 4.0) to achieve dramatic
computational speed-ups and exploit enhanced physical models. With NUPACK in the
cloud, users will be able to perform calculations far beyond current
capabilities both in terms of scale and scientific scope, enabling exploration
of a growing frontier of programmable molecular
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NUPACK is a growing software suite for the
analysis and design of nucleic acid structures, devices, and systems serving the
needs of researchers in the emerging disciplines of molecular programming,
nucleic acid nanotechnology, and synthetic biology. NUPACK algorithms are unique
in treating complex and test tube ensembles containing arbitrary numbers of
interacting strand species, providing crucial tools for capturing concentration
effects essential to analyzing and designing the intermolecular interactions
that are a hallmark of these new fields. Usage has increased to the point where
the NUPACK compute cluster is frequently overwhelmed. With the proposed work,
the NUPACK web application will be re-architected to enable deployment on the
cloud, containerizing the dozens to thousands of jobs that are launched by a
single click, and enabling the scale of the resource to vary dynamically minute-
to-minute and year-over-year. To move to a sustainable model for NUPACK compute
hardware and engineering support, NUPACK user accounts will be created that
enable users to view and retrieve old jobs, to seamlessly pay for the cloud
compute cycles that are used for their jobs, and to provide incremental support
for the NUPACK Software Engineer proportional to their usage of this non-profit
academic resource. The user interface will be substantially expanded to allow
users to harness the new capabilities of the enhanced NUPACK backend, including
kinetic analysis for complex and test tube ensembles, kinetic design for test
tube ensembles, equilibrium design for large-scale pseudo-knotted structures in
test tube ensembles, and use of new computationally parameterized physical
models generated for custom experimental conditions. The re-architected web
application will also benefit from a complete re-write of the NUPACK scientific
code base, featuring improved implementations, reduced-complexity algorithms,
overflow-safe evaluation algebras, and expanded physical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.