* 1835186
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Unlocking Legged Mobility Through Structured Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Patrick Wensing, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 07/31/2020
* USD 75,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) collaborative project
will explore a novel interdisciplinary approach to motion planning and control
for robust and capable legged machines, inspired by the way that humans navigate
challenging terrain, and implemented using computational methods originally
developed for space missions. Whether for agriculture, construction, or disaster
response, the mobility afforded by legs offers promise for future robots that
can go where people go, either in their place or by their side. Yet, for these
future robots to succeed in real-world environments they must -- as humans do --
plan and execute purposeful movements, to respond to unexpected obstacles as
they arise. Human capabilities in this regard vastly exceed those of modern
robots. When humans move through the world, they appear to adjust the level of
complexity that they include in their planning to the immediacy of the need.
That is, movements that must be executed within the next few moments are
visualized in detail, while those that will not occur for some time are
abstracted more coarsely. The control scheme created in this project will apply
a similar approach in legged robots, to achieve safe, precise movements guided
by a long-range strategy. The results will advance the national prosperity and
welfare, by enabling legged machines that can make the rapid decisions necessary
to keep their balance and avoid falls, improving robustness for practical
deployment as first responders, home health aides, explorers, or co-
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will lay the foundation for a new
paradigm of robot control that makes use of a rigorous methodology for optimal
control over hierarchical abstractions with a novel computational solution
framework. Optimal control over hierarchical abstractions will provide a new
tool for control designers, allowing them to strategically enforce consistency
between coarse-grained long-term plans and fine-grained near-term control. In
legged robots, the absence of a rigorous framework for managing such a challenge
has 1) prevented practical hardware implementation of full-model trajectory
optimization and 2) limited the robustness of control based on simple models. In
this work, these separate approaches will be unified and their combined benefits
captured. The envisioned solver uses a new multiple-shooting formulation to
reduce problem sensitivity and a new quasi-Newton approximation to reduce
runtime. Fundamental efforts as part of the EAGER effort will consider control
synthesis for simplified 2D models of quadruped bounding and biped running. The
generality of envisioned abstractions for these cases will be studied. Necessary
control rates will be assessed in simulation, and a breakdown of the
computational requirements for different algorithm components will be
determined. This data will be critical to identify further advances to the
approach that will be necessary for its future use as an online control method
to stabilize locomotion in 3D robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.