* 1835379
* Elements: Bringing Montage To Cutting Edge Science Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Graham Berriman, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 02/28/2023
* USD 598,369.00

Astronomy is undergoing a transformation in the way data are acquired, and this
is driving a corresponding transformation in the way astronomers process these
data. Telescopes and sky surveys that are operating now or will begin to operate
in the coming years will deliver data that are too large and complex to analyze
by the traditional method of downloading data to desktops and local clusters.
Thus a transformation is underway to use new technologies to process data.
Astronomers have embraced the Python language for analysis because it provides
the necessary flexible building blocks to handle complex data, and are embracing
new Python-based technologies to manage and control processing that allows the
software to run next to the data themselves. The Montage image mosaic engine, a
toolkit already used widely by astronomers, will join this transformative
community and deliver high-performance, next generation image processing
capabilities for astronomers and computer scientists. It will allow astronomers
to create large-scale images of the sky, and study these images with the many
powerful tools available in Python.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Python has become the
language of choice for astronomy, and environments such as JupyterLabs and
JupyterHub are almost certainly the science environments of the future. The LSST
is committed to using such an environment for its science platform, which will
be the primary way LSST users will discover, access and analyze data. Astronomy
science archives are actively building similar platforms. NOAO has deployed
their DataLab, which supports datasets acquired at Kitt Peak and CTIO. We will
incorporate the functionality of the Montage image mosaic engine - a scalable
toolkit written in ANSI-C and in wide use in astronomy and information
technology - into environments such as these to unleash its full power when
applied to large and complex new datasets. Moreover, the same functionality can
be incorporated into a single desktop platform, or into a new scalable
environment built to support a new project or mission, or into a distributed
scalable environment such the Amazon Elastic Cloud ("bringing the code to the
data"). As a component-based toolkit, Montage will be well positioned to respond
to the rapid changes expected as these new platforms develop and contribute
substantially to understanding their performance and
usefulness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.