* 1835390
* Collaborative Research: NCS-FO: Discovering Dynamics in Massive-Scale Neural Datasets Using Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Matthew Kaufman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2021
* USD 189,049.00

For decades, neuroscientists have recorded from single brain cells (neurons) to
understand how the brain senses, makes decisions, and controls movements. We can
now record from hundreds of neurons simultaneously but are still at an early
stage in developing tools for determining how networks of neurons work together
to perceive the world and to generate the control signals needed to produce
coordinated movement. Focusing on movement, this project brings to bear the
power of deep learning --- powerful new machine learning algorithms --- on the
problem of understanding neural activity. Because deep learning thrives on big
data, the investigators can leverage massive-scale brain recordings. These
include month-long recordings chronicling the activity of 100 neurons as a
monkey goes about its daily business, or recording from thousands of neurons for
hours in the mouse, each identified with an exact location in the brain and tied
to the mouse's on-going behaviors. These approaches will open new windows on how
neurons act together moment-by-moment to produce movement. The investigators
will develop simple descriptions of the underlying processes to be shared with
the public through venues including online tutorials, a new open course that
will be developed at Emory University and Georgia Tech, the Atlanta Science
Festival, and Atlanta's Brain Awareness Month. They will also make their data
sets publicly available, and host data tutorial and modeling competitions at key
scientific meetings, to accelerate progress by engaging the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the fifty years since Ed Evarts first
recorded single neurons in M1 of behaving monkeys, great effort has been devoted
to understanding the relation between these individual signals and movement-
related signals collected during highly constrained motor behaviors performed by
over-trained monkeys. In parallel, theoreticians posited that the computations
performed in the brain depend critically on network-level phenomena: dynamical
laws in brain circuits that constrain the activity and dictate how it evolves
over time. The goal of this project is to develop a powerful new suite of tools,
based on deep learning, to analyze these dynamics at unprecedented temporal and
spatial scales. The investigators will leverage recordings with month-long M1
electrophysiology, EMG, and behavioral data during natural behaviors from
monkeys, and vast numbers of neurons recorded with two-photon imaging from
behaving mice. Novel machine learning techniques using sequential auto-encoders
will enable the investigators to learn the dynamics underlying these data. This
combination will provide windows into the brain's control of motor behavior that
have never before been possible. The novel analytical framework developed here
will be extensible from motor behaviors to higher level problems of error
processing, decision making, and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.