* 1835890
* Framework: Software: HDR Globus Automate: A Distributed Research Automation Platform
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

Rapid increases in data volumes and velocities are overwhelming finite human
capabilities. Continued progress in science and engineering demands that we
automate a broad spectrum of currently manual research data manipulation tasks,
from transfer and sharing to acquisition, publication, indexing, analysis, and
inference. To address this need, which arises across essentially all scientific
disciplines, this project will work with scientists in astronomy, engineering,
geosciences, materials science, and neurosciences to develop and apply Globus
Automate, a distributed research automation platform. Its purpose is to increase
productivity and research quality across many science disciplines by allowing
scientists to offload the management of a broad range of data acquisition,
manipulation, and analysis tasks to a cloud-hosted distributed research
automation platform. By thus enabling scientists to hand off responsibility for
managing frequently performed tasks, such as acquiring, analyzing, and storing
data, Globus Automate will increase the productivity of scientific instruments
and the scientists that use them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand
the capabilities and reach of the highly successful Globus research data
management platform. Globus combines a professionally operated cloud-hosted
management service with Globus Connect software deployed on more than 12,000
storage system endpoints, spanning most research universities, NSF-funded
compute facilities, and NSF disciplines. Users employ Globus web interfaces and
APIs to drive data movement, synchronization, and sharing tasks at and among
endpoints. This ability to hand off responsibility for such tasks to cloud-
hosted management logic has enabled substantial increases in data management
efficiency, and spurred development of a wide range of innovative data
management applications. Globus Automate will extend Globus capabilities to
produce a full-featured distributed research automation platform that will
enable the reliable, secure, and efficient automation of a wide range of
research data management and manipulation activities. It will extend intuitive
trigger-action programming models, suitable for non-programming users, to enable
the specification and execution of a series of actions. It will provide for the
detection of data events both at Globus storage system endpoints (e.g., creation
or modification of new data files, extraction of new metadata) and at other
sources (e.g., completion or failure of Globus transfer tasks); the propagation
of such events to a cloud-hosted orchestration engine for reliable, efficient,
and secure processing; and the invocation of remote actions on Globus endpoints
and other resources. The project will leverage these basic event mechanisms to
implement solutions to challenging science problems associated with partner
science projects, and create a library of automation flows, both general-purpose
(e.g., data publication and data replication) and domain-specific (e.g., feature
detection in experimental data). These data event mechanisms will be made
available on all storage systems relevant to research (Globus already supports
most on-premises and cloud systems) and integrated with the Python language and
JupyterLab environment that have become popular in science, so that researchers
can define and share data automation behaviors as simple Python programs. A
quantitative and qualitative research agenda will analyze the usability and
adoption of both the platform and the research automation
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.