* 1835135
* NSCI Elements: Software - PFSTRASE - A Parallel FileSystem TRacing and Analysis SErvice to Enhance Cyberinfrastructure Performance and Reliability
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Richard Evans, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2022
* USD 385,893.00

This project will develop an open-source software service, the Parallel
FileSystem TRacing and Analysis SErvice (PFSTRASE), that improves the
reliability and performance of data storage systems for the nation?s largest
supercomputers. As simulations and computations represent reality more
faithfully they grow commensurately in scale along with the size of the data
they consume and generate. To handle the storage and movement of this data,
supercomputing systems are built on the backbone of massively parallel data
storage systems. Due to their parallel nature these storage systems are capable
of moving data at hundreds of times the speed of conventional storage systems,
enabling otherwise impractical computations. The performance capabilities these
storage systems provide is accompanied by a complexity that results in them
often functioning significantly less than optimally and even in some instances
failing. This results in wasted computational time and ultimately lost
scientific progress. The state of development of tools that could cast light on
these problems and improve storage system reliability and performance is
inadequate for current and future computing systems. PFSTRASE will fill this gap
by continually and automatically monitoring storage system health and
performance, providing insights through an easy to use interface that will
improve the reliability and performance of storage and supercomputer systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parallel filesystems (PFSs) are the most critical high-
availability components of High Performance Computing (HPC) architectures,
providing input/output (I/O) services to running computations, the environment
that users and system services operate in, and storage for applications and
data. Because of this central role, failure or performance degradation events in
the PFS impact every user of an HPC resource. PFS events must be dealt with
quickly and effectively by system administrators; however, there is typically
insufficient information to establish precise causal relationships between PFS
activity and events, impeding the implementation of timely and targeted
remedies. To fill this information gap, an open-source Parallel FileSystem
TRacing and Analysis SErvice (PFSTRASE) that traces and analyzes the requisite
data to establish causal relationships between PFS activity and both realized
and imminent events will be developed. This project will implement the service
for the open-source Lustre filesystem, which is the most commonly used PFS at
large-scale HPC sites. Loads for specific PFS directory and file operations will
be measured and incorporated into the service to construct authentic server load
contributions from every job, process, and user. The service?s infrastructure
will continuously monitor the entire PFS and generate a real-time, seamless
representation that connects contributions of jobs, processes, and users to
storage server loads, network bandwidth, and storage capacities. The
infrastructure will provide an easily navigable web interface that presents this
data, both real-time and historical, in a visual
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.