* 1835512
* Collaborative Research:  Elements: Data: HDR: Developing On-Demand Service Module for Mining Geophysical Properties of Sea Ice from High Spatial Resolution Imagery
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Xin Miao, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 12/31/2022
* USD 187,966.00

Sea ice acts as both an indicator and an amplifier of climate change. At
present, there are multiple sources of sea ice observations which are obtained
from a variety of networks of sensors (in situ, airborne, and space-borne). By
developing a smart cyberinfrastructure element for the analysis of high spatial
resolution (HSR) remote sensing images over sea ice, the science community is
better able to extract important geophysical parameters for climate modeling.
The project contributes new domain knowledge to the sea ice community. This is
accomplished by integrating HSR images that are spatiotemporally discrete to
produce a more rapid and reliable identification of ice types, and by a
standardized image processing that allows creating compatible sea ice products.
The cyberinfrastructure module is a value-added on-demand web service that can
be naturally integrated with existing infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
key objective is to develop a reliable and efficient on-demand Open Geospatial
Consortium-compliant web service, which is capable of extracting accurate
geographic knowledge of water, submerged ice, bare ice, melt ponds, deformed
'ridging' ice, ridge shadows, and other information from HSR images with limited
human intervention. The embedded spatial-temporal analysis framework provides
functions to search, explore, visualize, organize, and analyze the discrete HSR
images and other related remote sensing data and field data. The project creates
a data and knowledge web service for the Arctic sea ice community by integrating
computer vision and machine learning algorithms, computing resources, and HSR
image data and other useful datasets. The conceptual model improves data flow,
so users would query data, download value-added data, and have more consistent
results across various sources of information. This creates new opportunities
for scientific analysis that minimizes the investment of time in processing
complex and spatiotemporally-discrete HSR imagery. The project includes a strong
emphasis on teaching and development of the next-generation workforce through
course curricula development, involvement of graduate and undergraduate students
in research, and the offering of summer workshops for K-12 teachers (funded by
other agencies). The collected images and results of the image analyses will be
shared with the public in a timely manner through the NSF Arctic Data
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by EarthCube and the Office of the
Polar Programs Arctic Natural Sciences Program, within the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.