* 1835278
* NCS-FO: Engineering Living Neural Networks for Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Zhiyuan Yan, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 517,038.00

Recent developments in optogenetics, patterned optical stimulation, and high-
speed optical detection enable simultaneous stimulation and recording of
thousands of living neurons. Connected biological living neurons naturally
exhibit the ability to perform computations and to learn. The proposed project
will engineer living neural network to compute for learning task. Experimental
testbed will be built to allow optical stimulation and detection. Algorithms
will be developed to train the living neuron networks. The proposed testbed can
be used by neuroscientists to verify network-level hypotheses. Insights learned
from the proposed research can inspire other neuromorphic architectures based on
solid state devices. Throughout this project, graduate students will be trained
in computer engineering, bioengineering, and signal processing. Students will
have the opportunity to work on interdisciplinary research in these fields. New
courses based on the results from the proposed work will be introduced and new
modules will be added to existing curriculum. The proposed outreach activities
aim to attract interest to computer engineering and neural
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use optogenetic
in vitro neural network to run learning applications. Living neural networks
have spontaneous activities, which can interfere with precise modification of
synaptic strength. This research will study how to stabilize the living neural
network such that a Spike Time Dependent Plasticity (STDP)-based programming
protocol can imprint the desired synaptic strengths onto a living neural
network. This research will also investigate how to strategically design and
apply an STDP-based protocol to maximize programming throughput and optimize
convergence rate of the network states. On the algorithm side, the proposed
research will study data representation and training algorithms that consider
various constraints of the proposed wetware system. Learning algorithms will be
designed to work on random neural networks of unknown topology. Observable
details of neuron activities will be used to improve accuracy of learning
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.