* 1835272
* Collaborative Research: Framework: Software: HDR: Building the Twenty-First Century Citizen Science Framework to Enable Scientific Discovery Across Disciplines
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Laura Trouille, Adler Planetarium
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 12/31/2023
* USD 732,172.00

A team of experts from five institutions (University of Minnesota, Adler
Planetarium, University of Wyoming, Colorado State University, and UC San Diego)
links field-based and online analysis capabilities to support citizen science,
focusing on three research areas (cell biology, ecology, and astronomy). The
project builds on Zooniverse and CitSci.org, leverages the NSF Science Gateways
Community Institute, and enhances the quality of citizen science and the
experience of its participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates an
integrated Citizen Science Cyberinfrastructure (CSCI) framework that expands the
capacity of research communities across several disciplines to use citizen
science as a suitable and sustainable research methodology. CSCI produces three
improvements to the infrastructure for citizen science already provided by
Zooniverse and CitSci.org: &lt;br/&gt; - Combining Modes - connecting the
process of data collection and analysis; &lt;br/&gt; - Smart Assignment -
improving the assignment of tasks during analysis; and &lt;br/&gt; - New Data
Models - exploring the Data-as-Subject model. By treating time series data as
data, this model removes the need to create images for classification and
facilitates more complex workflows. These improvements are motivated and
investigated through three distinct scientific cases:&lt;br/&gt; - Biomedicine
(3D Morphology of Cell Nucleus). Currently, Zooniverse 'Etch-a-Cell' volunteers
provide annotations of cellular components in images from high-resolution
microscopy, where a single cell provides a stack containing thousands of sliced
images. The Smart Task Assignment capability incorporates this information, so
volunteers are not shown each image in a stack where machines or other
volunteers have already evaluated some subset of data.&lt;br/&gt; - Ecology
(Identifying Individual Animals). When monitoring wide-ranging wildlife
populations, identification of individual animals is needed for robust estimates
of population sizes and trends. This use case combines field collection and data
analysis with deep learning to improve results.&lt;br/&gt; - Astronomy
(Characterizing Lightcurves). Astronomical time series data reveal a variety of
behaviors, such as stellar flares or planetary transits. The existing Zooniverse
data model requires classification of individual images before aggregation of
results and transformation back to refer to the original data. By using the
Data-as-Subject model and the Smart Task Assignment capability, volunteers will
be able to scan through the entire time series in a machine-aided manner to
determine specific light curve characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;The team explores the
use of recurrent neural networks (RNNs) to determine automated learning
architectures best suited to the projects. Of particular interest is how the
degree to which neighboring subjects are coupled affects performance. The
integration of existing tools, which is based on application programming
interfaces (APIs), also facilitates further tool integration. The effort creates
a citizen science framework that directly advances knowledge for three science
use cases in biomedicine, ecology, and astronomy, and combines field-collected
data with data analysis. This has the ability to solve key problems in the
individual applications, as well as benefiting the research of the dozens of
projects on the Zooniverse platform. It provides benefits to researchers using
citizen scientists, and to the nearly 1.6 million citizen scientists
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Division of Research on Learning
in Formal and Informal Settings, within the NSF Directorate for Education and
Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.