* 1835090
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 Computational Modeling in Biology Network (COMBINE) Forum
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Chris Myers, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

Standards for data exchange are critical to the development of any field. They
enable researchers and practitioners to exchange information reliably, apply a
variety of tools to their problems, and reproduce scientific results. The
COmputational MOdeling in Biology NEtwork (COMBINE) was created in 2010 to
organize standardization efforts for systems biology. This effort includes,
among others, the systems biology markup language (SBML) for mathematical models
created by systems biologists; and the synthetic biology open language (SBOL)
for describing genetic designs created by synthetic biologists. While systems
biology and synthetic biology have many unique requirements, there are also a
lot of overlapping features such as the need to construct mathematical models,
describe pathways, and provide visual representations. The COMBINE meetings
bring together representatives from both fields to enable these communities to
share existing standards, software, and other infrastructure. This project will
help enable US-based students from these two communities, particularly those new
to these efforts or from underrepresented groups, to meet together at the 2018
COMBINE Forum to be held at Boston University in Boston, Massachusetts on
October 8th to 12th (http://co.mbine.org/events/COMBINE_2018).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshops like this one are instrumental in making
progress in the development of these standards. Currently, most standardization
efforts are either unfunded or only have very limited support. Indeed, the
success of these standards has been due to the donation of time from many
individuals to participate in discussions, write specifications, serve as
standard editors, and attend workshops. Many of these individuals working on the
development of these standards are students based in the US who would otherwise
find it difficult to find the funds to attend this meeting. Therefore, this
project would help support travel expenses for these US-based students working
on these standards to travel to Boston for COMBINE 2018. Not only would this be
a valuable experience for these students, but it would also greatly enhance the
synthetic biology community's goal of bringing together researchers in synthetic
biology with those working in systems biology leading to integrated standards
and shared software and infrastructure. The goals of this workshop will be to
continue to (1) develop synergistic relationships between systems and synthetic
biology researchers; (2) provide a tighter integration of standard development
for systems and synthetic biology; (3) perform outreach to modelers and
experimentalists; and (4) discuss a coordinated effort to advocate the use of
standards in publications and archival databases to enhance reproducibility of
scientific results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.