* 1835573
* Elements: Software: The Integrated Geoscience Observatory (InGeO)
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Russell Cosgrove, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2021
* USD 599,750.00

This award will support the development of the Integrated Geoscience Observatory
(InGeO). InGeO is an online platform that integrates data and associated
software tools contributed by researchers into a unified toolset to enable
studying the convergent, systems science. Complex processes in the Sun-Earth
system affect the habitability of earth. As technological progress continues,
our society also becomes increasingly vulnerable to the disruptions introduced
by these complex processes. Study of the Sun-Earth system is traditionally
broken-up into separate geoscience disciplines, typically focusing on a specific
region of the system. However, often the interaction between several regions end
up significantly affecting terrestrial systems. For example, a chain of
processes occurring between the Sun, magnetosphere, and ionosphere often result
in loss of GPS signal that severely affects all the communication/navigation and
infrastructure that depends on this technology. To broach the larger question of
the interaction of the subsystems studied by the separate communities, it is
necessary to overcome the barriers of communication posed by different
observational instruments, software tools for interpreting data, and modeling
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To promote systems science, InGeO creates an
integrated package of software tools specifically designed to help researchers
find and integrate diverse observational data and distributes this toolkit to
the community in the most flexible way possible. Building on the pilot project
supported by the NSF EarthCube program, the specific features of the toolkit
include: (a) linking diverse data sets from multiple observational data
repositories; (b) using these data within a shareable computing environment,
complete with a full selection of standard numerical and data-processing tools;
and (c) enabling an ever growing assortment of targeted, user-contributed tools,
such as assimilative models or interpolation methods. The toolkit can be
accessed and used either through a web-based computing environment or by
downloading Docker containers for local installation, with a nearly seamless
transition between the two. The toolkit is open-source and ensures credit
attribution to data and software contributors, and the InGeO team works with
members of scientific community (especially students and early career
researchers) to improve the toolkit and build a sustainable, more connected
user-base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the Cross-Cutting Activities Program
within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.