* 1835996
* Student Support for the 44th International Conference on Very Large Databases (VLDB 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2019
* Michael Carey, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 04/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

This award will support 14 U.S.-based graduate students to attend and
participate in the 44th International Conference on Very Large Databases (VLDB
2018) to be held in Rio De Janeiro, Brazil from August 27-31, 2018
(http://vldb2018.lncc.br/). The International Conference on Very Large Databases
(VLDB) is a premier international annual technical event that brings together
technical research papers, tutorials, and workshops centered on various aspects
of database research and practice. VLDB series provides researchers and
practitioners from academia, industry and government agencies with an excellent
opportunity to share their research and experiences on all aspects of data
management and analyses at scale. VLDB has a goal to enable the next generation
of students and researchers to identify scientific foundations for building
large-scale database management systems that can work ever more effectively. The
aims of the conference are multi-fold: (1) to provide an international forum for
sharing research results related to the investigation of major challenges in
next-generation database research; (2) to stimulate interactive discussions on
research in the database area through panels, posters, tutorials, student
scholar roundtables, etc.; and (3) to motivate and engage future generations of
researchers via the many conference and workshop presentations, interactive
poster sessions, and panel and breakout sessions. The conference will contribute
directly to training the next generation of scientists who are both consumers
and developers of technology in database management system design and
implementation. Efforts will be made to engage a diverse body of students in
order to broaden the participation of researchers from underrepresented groups.
The student support will have direct impact in creating a highly-qualified
workforce who can take on the emerging data science challenges of the future.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rising use of cloud computing, the ability for users
to create very large datasets, and the emerging field of data science have
placed database research at the forefront of Computer Science. Database research
is an integral component of a new approach to data-driven science and technology
that stands to revolutionize almost all aspects of society by leading to new
scientific discoveries and game-changing improvements to engineered systems that
we use in our daily lives. Database research profoundly influences domains that
include health sciences, the emerging field of IoT, service-oriented computing,
real-time business analytics, and social computing. The VLDB 2018 Proceedings
are will be broadly accessible at The Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment
(http://www.vldb.org/pvldb/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.