* 1835792
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Software: NSCI: Constitutive Relation Inference Toolkit (CRIKit)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Tobin Isaac, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,136.00

Constitutive relations are mathematical models that describe the way materials
respond to local stimuli such as stress or temperature change, and are essential
to the study of biological tissues in biomechanics, ice and rock in geosciences,
plasmas in high-energy physics and many other science and engineering
applications. This project seeks to infer constitutive relations from practical
observations without requiring isolation of the material in conventional
laboratory experiments, which are often expensive and difficult to apply to
volatile materials such as liquid foams or materials such as sea ice that
exhibit homogenized behavior only at large scales. The investigators and their
students will develop underlying algorithms and the Constitutive Relation
Inference Toolkit (CRIKit), a new community software package to leverage recent
progress in machine learning and physically-based modeling to infer constitutive
relations from noisy, indirect observations, and disseminate the results as
citable research products for use in a range of open source and extensible
commercial simulation environments. This development will create new
opportunities and increase accessibility at the confluence of data science and
high-fidelity physical modeling, which the investigators will highlight through
community outreach and educational activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CRIKit
software will integrate parallel partial differential equation (PDE) solvers
like FEniCS/dolfin-adjoint with machine learning (ML) packages like TensorFlow
to infer constitutive relations from noisy indirect or in-situ observations of
material responses. The forward simulation is post-processed to create synthetic
observations which are compared to real observations by way of a loss function,
which may range from simple least squares to advanced techniques such as ML-
based image analysis. This approach results in a nonlinear regression problem
for the constitutive relation (formulated to satisfy invariants and free energy
compatibility requirements) and relies on well-behaved and efficiently
computable gradients provided by PDE solvers using compatible discretizations
with adjoint capability. The inference problem exposes parallelism within each
forward model and across different experimental realizations and facilitates
research in optimization. The research enables constitutive models to be readily
updated with new experimental data as well as reproducibility and validation
studies. CRIKit's models will improve simulation capability for scientists and
engineers by providing ready access to the cutting edge of constitutive
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information
Science &amp; Engineering and the Division of Materials Research in the
Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.