* 1835739
* Elements: Data: U-Cube: A Cyberinfrastructure for Unified and Ubiquitous Urban Canopy Parameterization
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Rajesh Kalyanam, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 12/31/2023
* USD 599,999.00

Urban canopy parameters (UCPs) can be used in model simulations to study the
health and behavior of a city, determine the ability to sustain a growing
population, and study potential impacts of extreme weather events. The ability
to identify and compute urban canopy parameters has been a missing element in
city models; this project develops that capability for use in city design and
analysis, integrating weather models and remote sensing data to infer a 3D model
of cities of various sizes. The project deploys innovative science-based
analysis tools within an extensible, broadly-available cyberinfrastructure
portal, allowing users to ingest satellite imagery and other geographic
information system (GIS) data to calculate urban canopy parameters. The
cyberinfrastructure would improve urban modeling and planning, particularly for
extreme weather events. The tools and high-performance computing and storage
resources would be usable by other researchers through a portal. Potential
beneficiaries include smaller and disadvantaged cities and countries without the
resources for urban characterization and modeling necessary for such urban
planning. There are also plans to transfer the results of this research to
communities beyond college students -- to local teachers and secondary students
and museums, and to the GIS urban planning user communities at local, state, and
international levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops
cyberinfrastructure which would use a novel inverse modeling approach
incorporating satellite images, social science and urban zonal data, to infer a
3D model of a city from which urban canopy parameters could be derived for use
in simulation models. The focus is on weather modeling, urban parameterization
and a desire to better understand sustainable urbanization. The main
cyberinfrastructure products will be 3D urban models and UCP values for urban
locations. These UCP parameters will be used for fine-scale urban weather
modeling, and evaluation of various classification techniques and simulation
models in an integrated portal. The approach differs from prior work that relied
on simple urban canopy models, either tuned for a large metropolis or assuming
that all cities are the same. The team uses a cyberinfrastructure platform at
Purdue (HubZERO) and the Geospatial Data Analysis Building Blocks (GABBs), a
suite of software modules developed during a previously funded NSF Data
Infrastructure project. The resulting platform can be deployed using Amazon Web
Services, extending built-in geospatial data capabilities and providing a
scalable CI solution. This platform can be used by researchers to test
predictive models or deploy applications that have been developed. The team has
cultivated relationships with the research communities and stakeholders relevant
to the proposed research. Through the World Urban Database and Access Portal
Tools (WUDAPT) project -- a community-based project to gather a census of cities
around the world -- the team is already connected to the urban planning
community globally. The project will improve urban weather modeling accuracy and
increase availability of and access to the new techniques, capabilities and
dedicated cyberinfrastructure. The results have the potential to support city
officials and urban planners, especially in regions with the fastest rate of
urbanization and/or those in developing countries, where access to computational
resources is likely to be limited. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the NSF
Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure will be jointly supported by the Division
of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, within the
NSF Directorate for Engineering; and the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace
Sciences and the Integrative and Collaborative Education and Research (ICER)
Program, within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.