* 1835389
* NCS-FO: How Ecology Induces Cognition: Paleontology, Machine Learning, and Neuroscience
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Daniel Dombeck, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,015,000.00

We think of nervous systems as the means by which an animal organizes its world,
but a deep time perspective suggests that it is rather the world of an animal
that organizes its brain. Prior to the vertebrate invasion of land 385 million
years ago, vision, our most powerful long-range sense, took in a largely blurry
world at short range while underwater, with little variability in scene as the
eyes move. Once on land, vision takes in a high contrast world at long range,
with high variability as the eyes move. A possible reason for the greatly
increased size and complexity of terrestrial vertebrate brains over those of
fish is that this environment provides selective advantage to long sequences of
actions toward distant goals, reaching its most complex form in varieties of
prospective cognition in certain mammals and birds. A team of Northwestern
researchers will conduct research into the computational, behavioral, and neural
basis of planning, rooted in an evolutionary and computational sensory ecology
perspective and a commitment to ethologically relevant behaviors. Planning is an
immensely important capacity to understand the mechanistic basis of, as it
participates in a diverse range of behaviors, and its diminishment favors
impulsivity and reliance on the habit system. Up to now, laboratory studies of
planning have typically relied on reduced environments and simple behaviors
which are either appetitive or (more rarely) aversive, without a sentient
target, the dynamics and unpredictability of which is likely key to the adequate
analysis of prospective cognition. Methods from neuroengineering and data-
intensive neuroscience will be brought to bear on the problem of making a more
ethologically relevant, yet tightly controlled approach to investigating
planning possible. The computational and behavioral work will be used to guide
neurobiological interventions in two of the key brain structures that
participate in reactive versus reflective decision making and choice: the
striatum and hippocampus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will pursue research
with an unusually bold intellectual dynamic range well beyond a typical
disciplinary approach, from its motivation rooted in evolutionary biology and
computational sensory ecology, to the extension of the latest machine learning
methods, through to single-cell resolution imaging of live animal behavior in a
virtual reality system. The researchers will knit together parallel synergistic
efforts in the simulation of planning, a mechatronically reconfigurable behavior
arena with a robot predator, and two-photon single cell resolution imaging in a
virtual reality system, resulting in an ethologically relevant context
significantly more complex than current practice in laboratory settings. There
are few areas of neuroscience that have as much potential to impact society as
research on the neural basis of planning. Discussions of self-control,
marshmallow tests, grit, and challenges we face in making long term plans such
as retirement or adapting to changing climate for future generations fill the
media. One of the team's research goals is to understand the manner in which the
nervous system participates in constraining the temporal and spatial range of
prospective cognition,which is clearly quite limited even in humans, toward a
neuroscience of sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.