* 1835108
* Standard: Indigenous Ethics in STEM
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jani Ingram, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Jason D. Borenstein
* 08/31/2024
* USD 387,991.00

Our collective understanding of what constitutes ethical science, technology,
and engineering (STEM) continues to grow, but we know little about how STEM
ethics intersect with Indigenous cultural knowledge. This project will explore
if and how culturally-embedded ethical issues affect indigenous participation in
STEM fields. It will do so by researching the ethical issues experienced by
Indigenous students and faculty, testing if Indigenous spiritual beliefs create
cultural barriers for pursuing STEM related careers, and exploring the extent to
which ethical issues impact the retention and promotion of Indigenous STEM
professionals. Providing answers to these questions will enable: (1) the
development of a theory about how scientific ethics intersects with Indigenous
cultures; (2) the creation of a set of best practices for universities and
faculty members related to ethical challenges for Indigenous students and
faculty in STEM fields; and (3) identification of a set of future research
questions and policy issues related to STEM participation by Indigenous
individuals and communities. The results from this research project will enable
more equitable representation of Indigenous peoples in STEM, and will enhance
understanding of how local cultures interact with ethical issues to shape
participation the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-method
research project will use surveys and interviews to understand how Indigenous
cultures and taboos shape Indigenous college students' participation in STEM
fields. It will blend grounded theory with a Critical Indigenous Research
Methodology to conceptualize these issues. Methodologically, the research design
will be based on a broad social survey of the experiences and attitudes of
Indigenous students in the western United States with STEM professions, followed
by in-depth interviews with a strategic subset of survey respondents. These two
data streams will then be combined and analyzed in an iterative and comparative
fashion. This project will provide important intellectual advancement on three
fronts: (1) it will provide theoretical and data-driven insights into how
Indigenous cultures interact with scientific cultures in ways that can hinder
participation in science, engineering, and mathematics; (2) it will provide
practical insights and implementable knowledge for developing new policies to
improve participation in STEM fields by one of the most underrepresented social
groups in science; (3) it will create new tools and methods that will be useful
for future researchers working to understand similar issues. Overall, this
project directly advances NSF's goal of broadening participation in STEM fields
by underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.