* 1835050
* Conference Support for the ASME 2018 6th Global Congress on NanoEngineering for Medicine and Biology
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Bumsoo Han, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 11/30/2018
* USD 20,000.00

Advancement of nanoengineering for medicine and biology is critically important
to maintain technological competitiveness of the US biotechnology and healthcare
industries. Strong education and research training of next generation scientists
and engineers in this emerging area will build a foundation to achieve this
goal. This proposal is to support participation of students, postdocs and junior
faculty investigators in the ASME 2018 6th NanoEngineering for Medicine and
Biology Conference (NEMB 2018). The NEMB 2018 aims to bring together leading
experts in bioengineering, nanomaterials, biology and medicine, to discuss
recent advances and to stimulate new ideas in nanoengineering for medicine and
biology. The requested funds will be used to provide travel support of 18
students, 5 postdocs and 8 junior faculty investigators to this emerging
conference, which will provide a forum, through lectures and workshops to
exchange scientific information and to educate participants, and to broadly
disseminate information about this research to the broader public. This meeting
will also let participants to identify opportunities for collaboration within
academia, government agencies, and industry; and in particular among disparate
fields that are traditionally not connected, and educate scientists at all
levels about them. Particular efforts will be devoted to involve students and
junior researchers from underrepresented groups.

The intellectual merit of the NEMB is to integrate nanoengineering and biology
with a strong focus in medical applications. We will actively involve a large
community of participants, and provide an exciting forum to exemplify the
intellectual merit of nano- and micro-technology based biosensing, biotransport,
biomechanics and other bioengineering areas in the solution of pressing problems
in biology and medicine. Key intellectual questions include the sensitivity and
specificity in disease detection using nanoparticle imaging probes, efficacy of
targeted drug/gene delivery using nanocarriers, multiscale measurement and
modeling of nanoparticle transport in vitro and in vivo, understanding of
mechanobiology for engineered and diseased tissues, and manufacturing of nano-
and biomaterials. These are emerging areas of bionanoengineering, biotransport
and biomechanics that will receive considerable attention throughout this event.
The conference will also showcase translational and commercialization efforts,
and discuss policy and ethical issues related to nanoengineering applications in
medicine. The requested funds will be used to provide travel support of 18
students, 5 postdocs and 8 junior faculty investigators by inviting them through
student's poster competition and session/track organization. These are emerging
areas that are of great importance for Nano-Biosensing, and Engineering of
Biomedical Systems Programs of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and
Transport Systems Division.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.