* 1835727
* Collaborative Research: Elements: Software: NSCI: Chrono-An open-source simulation platform for computational dynamics problems
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* He Shen, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 07/31/2023
* USD 70,516.00

This project seeks to augment modeling and solution methods employed by Chrono,
an open-source computer simulation platform for multi-body dynamics (MBD) and
fluid-solid interaction (FSI) problems. Chrono will be able to capture dynamics
at various size and time scales spanning from millisecond (impact phenomena) to
decades (geophysics). These performance levels open up new directions of
research in several fields. Chrono is widely used and further developed by other
users and has an active forum with more than 250 registered users currently.
This project will enhance the richness of Chrono's modeling features, sound
numerical solution foundation, and leverage of emerging hardware architectures
to elevate this simulation capability to the status of ready-to-use, open-
source, best-in-class computational dynamics platform. Chrono has been used by
universities, national labs, and industry. Over the past two years, various
groups have used Chrono in extraterrestrial applications, machine learning in
robotics, image processing, pattern recognition and computer vision, mechanical
watch design, architectural studies, autonomous vehicles, fluid-solid
interaction applications, wind turbine dynamics, next generation space suit
design, oil extraction and accident mitigation, hardware-in-the-loop simulation,
etc. Finally, this project will engage high-school students from under-
represented groups in a six-day residential camp run (now at its 12th edition)
and will train a group of undergraduate students from California State
University at University of Wisconsin-Madison through a new residential program
that will introduce them to the use of Chrono in simulation-based robotics
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to augment modeling and solution
methods employed by Chrono, a BSD3 open-source simulation platform for multi-
body dynamics (MBD) and fluid-solid interaction (FSI) problems. The software
infrastructure enhancements in this project aim at sustaining teraflops-grade
simulation of MBD and FSI systems with more than ten billion degrees of freedom;
i.e., two to three orders of magnitude beyond conventional simulations today. In
order to increase adoption and impact, the performance levels aimed at will be
reached on budget/affordable hardware that leverages GPU computing. Chrono will
be able to capture micro-, meso- and macro-scale dynamics on time scales
spanning from millisecond (impact phenomena) to decades (geophysics). The
intellectual merit of this project stems from the following key ideas: (i) with
an eye towards the sunsetting of Moore's law, the software design solution
embraces a scalable multi-GPU hardware layout poised to solve effectively large
multi-physics problems; (ii) a hardware-aware software design paradigm, which
aggressively reduces data storage and movement, will allow budget-conscious
hardware systems to run billion-degree-of-freedom models, or, for models of
similar size, accomplish a two orders of magnitude speedup when compared to the
state of the art; (iii) a unified Lagrangian formulation for both solid and
fluid dynamics is implemented in one software platform that can simulate complex
multi-physics (coupled) problems; and (iv) Chrono promotes an alternative
approach for handling friction and contact that revolves around the concept of
differential variational inequality and thus avoids the small integration time
step and numerical instability issues that hinder most of the existing many-body
dynamics simulators. In relation to its educational and outreach initiatives,
this project: (a) will be instrumental in establishing a new University of
Wisconsin-Madison undergraduate course that introduces students to computing
concepts subsequently refined in a graduate advanced computing class; (b) will
promote the discipline of Computational Science and Computational Dynamics at
high-school and undergraduate levels via two yearly residential summer programs
for under-represented students; (c) will expand an advanced computing forum that
facilitates technology transfer to industry and promotes Chrono adoption; and,
(d) will strengthen ongoing collaborations that critically depend on Chrono in
robotics, geomechanics, and soft-matter physics. Chrono is presently cloned on
average 10 times every day, has been forked from its public repository by more
than 150 parties, and has an active forum with more than 250 registered users.
This project will enhance the richness of Chrono modeling features, improve its
numerical solution foundation, and leverage emerging hardware architectures to
elevate this simulation capability to the status of ready-to-use, open-source,
best-in-class computational dynamics platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.