* 1835851
* Life STEM EAGER: Exploring the efficacy of an undergraduate voluntary intervention using near-peer mentoring to transfer positive behaviors through extracurricular team competition
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Andrea Beyer, Virginia State University
* Standard Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 02/28/2021
* USD 299,649.00

The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that will
generate foundational knowledge in the field. This project will explore an
early-stage, untested intervention aimed at promoting ways to help
underrepresented minority students succeed in introductory biology courses and
persist in STEM careers. The project will study whether combining team-based
geocaching gameplay with near-peer mentoring will help students master content
and skills in biology. It will also examine whether or not the intervention will
transform students' beliefs and behaviors about science as they take part in
problem-based learning activities and content-driven social interactions. The
intervention will take place in an out-of-class context to help students develop
self-worth and self-direction as part of building a broader STEM community of
learners. Near-peer mentors of similar backgrounds as the students will be
trained in both academic and social areas to ensure that students gain a deeper
understanding of biology and see the relevance of this field to their lives and
other STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will take a radically
different approach to research by combining theories to examine multiple factors
shown to synergistically influence motivation and improve learning for
underrepresented students. Through a mixed methods approach, data will be
collected and analyzed on both academic and personal factors. Despite these
notable aspects of the project, this intervention will have risks. Specifically,
it is a novel research topic, and the activities do not include direct day-to-
day faculty supervision or regular graded classwork. Additionally, the project
will require students to be self-motivated and self-directed to complete the
tasks, and will neither guarantee that students will volunteer to participate
nor resist social pressures that may prevent them from engaging in the study.
Therefore, it is not clear if this study can be done or if it will alter
students' academic knowledge and skills or beliefs and behaviors. However, the
intervention is potentially transformative in shaping the development of
effective models of intervention and reducing the number of underrepresented
students who switch to different majors or drop out of STEM fields. These
potential outcomes make this project a priority for funding and will contribute
to foundational knowledge about STEM education in the ECR program
portfolio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.