* 1835409
* Embodied Mathematical Imagination and Cognition: Professional Development for Undergraduate Mathematics Instructors
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Hortensia Soto, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 11/30/2020
* USD 49,326.00

This workshop will enable mathematics instructors to build new knowledge and
skills in an emerging area of STEM education research known as embodied
mathematical imagination and cognition (EMIC). A sample illustration of the idea
of EMIC entails having learners move their bodies in a way that represents an
underlying mathematical concept such as rotation. Similarly, learners might
manipulate other physical objects to represent more complex transformations; and
the idea extends to virtual manipulations and simulations. This area of research
has informed the design and creation of new resources, activities, and
methodologies that can promote teaching and learning of a breadth of
mathematical content, including concepts such as ratio, slope, and frequency, or
tools to express equality or other algebraic relationships, or even theorems
from geometry and complex analysis. Through this professional development
experience undergraduate mathematics faculty and graduate students will weave
ideas from the recently published Mathematical Association of America
Instructional Practices Guide with EMIC research results.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The fifty participants of this two and a half-day workshop will (1)
become familiar with EMIC research, (2) engage in a variety of EMIC activities,
(3) create/build EMIC activities and materials for their own classrooms,
including lesson plans and assessment strategies, and (4) seed a national
community of practice of EMIC-informed undergraduate mathematics instructors.
Selected products will be available to the wider mathematics education community
via a website created for this project. The workshop presents an opportunity to
bridge research and practice at the collegiate level by introducing faculty to
embodied activities and related research as well as providing a space to create
their own activities that meet the needs of their own students. These embodied
activities offer promise to help learners delve deeply into mathematical ideas
that may sometimes be obscured by the algorithms and procedures they are taught.
The workshop will also allow the project team to increase the number and
diversity of the community of investigators who are bridging research and
practice related to embodied cognition and design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.