* 1835426
* Collaborative Research:Framework:Software:NSCI:Enzo for the Exascale Era (Enzo-E)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Brian O'Shea, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 480,055.00

The earliest stages of the formation of galaxies and quasars in the universe are
soon to be explored with a powerful new generation of ground and space-based
observatories. Broad and deep astronomical surveys of the early universe
beginning in the next decade using the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope and the
James Webb Space Telescope will revolutionize our understanding of the origin of
galaxies and quasars, and help constrain the nature of the dark matter which is
the dominant matter constituent in the universe. Detailed physical simulations
that model the formation of these objects are an indispensible aid to
understanding the coming glut of observational data, and to maximize the
scientific return of these instruments. In this project, PIs at the Univ.
California San Diego, Columbia Univ., Georgia Tech, and Michigan State Univ. are
collaborating with the goal of developing a next generation community simulation
software framework for the coming generation of supercomputers for cosmological
simulations of the young universe. Undergraduate and graduate students will be
directly involved in the software development as well as its application to
several frontier cosmological research topics. The software framework that will
be produced will be disseminated as open source software to enable a much
broader range of scientific explorations of astrophysical topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project brings together the key developers of the open
source Enzo adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) hydrodynamic cosmology code, who will
port its software components to a newly developed AMR software framework called
Cello. Cello implements the highly scalable array-of-octrees AMR algorithm on
top of the powerful Charm++ parallel object system. Designed to be extensible
and scalable to millions of processors, the new framework, called Enzo-E, will
target exascale high performance computing (HPC) systems of the future. Through
this project, the entire Enzo community will have a viable path to exascale
simulations of unprecedented size and scope. The PIs have chosen three frontier
problems in cosmology to drive the development of the Enzo-E framework: (1) the
assembly of the first generation of stars and black holes into the first
galaxies; (2) the role of cosmic rays in driving galactic outflows; and (3) the
evolution of the intergalactic medium from cosmic dawn to the present day.
Annual developer workshops and software releases will keep the broader research
community informed and involved in the developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the
Division of Astronomical Sciences in the Directorate of Mathematical and
Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.