* 1835239
* NCS-FO: How real-world interaction networks shape and are shaped by neural information processing
* SBE,SMA
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Mason Porter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 976,747.00

Human thought and behavior is embedded in social contexts. However, research on
social networks and neural information processing are almost always conducted in
isolation. Cognitive neuroscientists typically study mental processing without
considering how individuals are influenced by their social networks, and the
structure and dynamics of social networks are usually studied without
considering the workings of the minds that comprise them. This research effort
integrates theory and methods from cognitive neuroscience and network science to
test how the brain shapes and is shaped by its social context. It will
synthesize and extend recent developments in social cognitive neuroscience and
network science to test how individual differences in unconstrained processing
of naturalistic stimuli shape and are shaped by individuals' positions in a
real-world social network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will characterize
the multirelational social network of a bounded community based on all members'
reported relationships and interactions with each other. A subset of the members
will complete a series of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies
involving free-viewing of audiovisual stimuli. This project is grounded in prior
work that suggests that inter-subject similarities of fMRI response time series
predict distances between people in their social network, but extends that work
in four novel directions. First, by capitalizing on developments in multilayer
network analysis, which will also be advanced further, the research will relate
neural response similarities to distances between individuals within and across
layers of their shared social network. This will yield insight into the extent
to which associations between social network proximity and inter-individual
similarities in neural responding are specific to friendship or extend more
generally to homophily. Second, integrating multilayer network analysis and
longitudinal fMRI will elucidate the extent to which neural response
similarities cause or result from proximity between individuals in the
multirelational social network of their community. Third, pairing multilayer
network methods and longitudinal fMRI will shed light on how a person's
importance across interaction types in a social network may relate to his/her
influence on how other network members process the world around them. Fourth,
the project will relate social network position to inter-individual neural
variability not only in terms of fMRI response time series, but also in terms of
multi-voxel response patterns corresponding to high-level event representations
and how such representations are stored in memory. This work will also develop
and advance approaches for analyzing multirelational networks; this will be
useful to the broad range of scholars who study network phenomena, particularly
in social and brain networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.