* 1835202
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research - Human decision-making in complex environments
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sridevi Sarma, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 632,675.00

Decision-making is one of the most central cognitive functions of importance at
practically all levels of society. In many real-world decisions, which of the
available alternatives is chosen is influenced by many different attributes.
Such multi-attribute decisions are complex because they require the integration
and comparison of many pieces of information. For instance, selecting the bundle
of goods that maximizes value given a budget constraint in a supermarket that
only stocks 100 different goods requires checking approximately 10^30 possible
combinations. For this reason, humans do not use rational choice theory in all
their decisions. In addition to having to combine the influence of all the
different attributes, another complexity is that one alternative is often
preferable on one set of attributes, but another is preferred on others. Making
a choice then requires a trade-off, which further complicates the decision
process. However, the cognitive and neural processes that are at the heart of
preference formation are still poorly understood. This complexity is thought to
tax limited cognitive resources in humans who therefore can pay attention only
to a limited set of information, on which the decision is then based. In
addition, task history often systematically changes decision biases. This
research program takes advantage of the opportunity to obtain direct recordings
from individual's brains while they perform such complex decision. It will study
these activity patterns to determine whether they can be explained via
mathematical models of decision making. Understanding which attributes are
considered during decision making, and how they are weighted could explain
decision making in typical and a-typical populations. Furthermore this
integrative research program forms an opportunity to expose engineering students
to dynamical systems and control theories in an interdisciplinary
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines behavioral data, neural
recordings in humans (patients undergoing epilepsy evaluation) implanted with
multiple depth electrodes covering many cortical and subcortical brain areas,
and computational approaches to develop a new theory of the neural mechanisms
underlying multi-attribute decision-making in complex environments. This is a
unique opportunity to study brain circuits simultaneously across multiple brain
areas while humans make these decisions. The overall goal of the present
proposal is to understand the neural circuit involved in (1) representing the
relevant decision variables, (2) integrating these variables to form subjective
values, and (3) selecting one of the options in multi-attribute decisions.
Participants, with implanted electrodes, will work in a novel behavioral task
that makes it possible to observe their focus of attention while they evaluate
the offers and select one of them. Data will constrain cutting edge
computational models of multi-attribute decision making that will combine: (i) a
procedural model of the decision in each trial, and (ii) a latent variable model
of biasing influence on decision-making resulting from past trial history. The
computational models will make it possible to identify neuronal activity that
represents task-relevant variables and the dynamic flow of information across
the different elements of the identified neural
circuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.