* 1835821
* Elements: Software: NSCI: A high performance suite of SVD related solvers for machine learning
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Zhenming Liu, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

The accrual of vast amounts of data is one of the defining characteristics of
our century. With the help of computers, scientists use this data to make and
test hypotheses, draw inferences, predict complex phenomena, and make educated
policy decisions. Machine learning (ML) is an area in computer science that uses
statistical methods to allow computers to "learn" from data, with and without
human supervision. Central to the application of machine learning methods is the
numerical computation of the Singular Value Decomposition (SVD) of matrices of
very large dimension, often larger than a million or even a billion. Since "off-
the-shelf" algorithms and SVD software, however, cannot handle matrices of very
large dimension, iterative methods used in scientific computing are more
appropriate. Yet their stringent approximation quality requirements are often
excessive for downstream applications, and result in slow execution times.
Recently, methods based on randomization have improved execution times, but
their implementations relax the approximation quality, often to detrimental
levels. This project proposes to develop a software package that unifies
randomized and iterative methods with a particular focus on the specific
requirements of various ML applications and with high performance optimizations
for modern computing platforms. This will allow scientists to analyze
significantly larger datasets, ML researchers to study large models that could
not be tackled before, and ML service providers to use the new solvers to reduce
their operational cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to develop a
software package that unifies randomized and iterative methods with a particular
focus on the specific requirements of various ML applications and with high
performance optimizations for modern computing platforms. This will allow
scientists to analyze significantly larger datasets, ML researchers to study
large models that could not be tackled before, and ML service providers to use
the new solvers to reduce their operational cost. Specifically, the software
package builds upon the state-of-the-art eigenvalue/singular value software
package PRIMME that integrates cutting-edge iterative methods and high-
performance implementations. The development of the package consists of two
thrusts: (T1) Unifying state-of-the-art algorithmic techniques including
randomized, streaming, and iterative methods, to deliver consistent experience
for a diverse range of matrices with different quality requirements, hardware
platforms and precisions, and programming environments. (T2) Developing software
devices that enable downstream systems and SVD solvers to interoperate so that
users can tune and customize solvers without being experts in numeric linear
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.