* 1835967
* EAGER: Identifying Active Sites in Electrocatalysis by Steady-State Isotope-Transient Technique
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Adam Holewinski, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2019
* USD 104,929.00

The project will develop and apply new methods to understand molecular-level
processes applicable to the design of catalysts for direct methanol fuel cells
(DMFCs). Fuel cells utilizing liquid fuels pose benefits in energy density,
safety, and ease of fuel transport and storage. DMFCs, in particular, are
attractive because of ready availability of methanol, and the potential for
producing methanol from renewable resources. However, the low energy conversion
efficiency of current DMFC technology has curtailed widespread use. This work
will provide detailed understanding of the catalytic reactions that occur in a
DMFC, such that more efficient catalyst materials and structures may be
proposed. The methods developed should advance direct methanol fuel cell
technology along the path toward broader commercial application, thereby
enabling cleaner and more efficient energy production.

The project will enable a new method for operando counting of active catalytic
sites via the first demonstration of liquid-phase electrochemical steady-state
isotope-transient kinetic analysis (SSITKA). The method development will utilize
- as a probe system - the electrochemical methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) over
carbon-supported platinum (Pt) and platinum-ruthenium (PtRu). On these
materials, the MOR involves several well-known intermediates, and it yields
products that are amenable to characterization by both SSITKA and auxiliary
techniques that can corroborate SSITKA data. Complementary analyses, including
in-situ infrared spectroscopy and numerous X-ray and electron-based materials
characterization techniques, will be used to inform a holistic examination of
the reaction mechanism. New understanding will be generated along several lines
of inquiry as captured in two themes. Theme I will focus on experimental
kinetics, and will link SSITKA data - obtained across a range of experimental
conditions, catalyst particle sizes, and catalyst compositions - to microkinetic
models that relate current-voltage characteristics to possible elementary steps.
Theme II will utilize a broad range of ex-situ and in-situ characterization
methods to identify and control active sites as a function of catalyst
composition and synthesis methods. Taken together, the two themes should
generate unprecedented insight regarding the factors that control activity and
selectivity of catalytic electrochemical methanol oxidation, while also
providing a platform for development and refinement of the SSITKA technique.
From a technological point of view, the fundamental understanding enabled by the
SSITKA technique with respect to kinetics, detailed reaction mechanisms, and
catalyst structure-function relationships will be translatable to a broad range
of electrochemical reactions. In combination with other techniques, it will
provide insight regarding active materials and surface structures that will
guide the design of better-performing catalysts. The project will also support
graduate and undergraduate education in the area of electrochemistry and
renewable energy, as well as several educational and outreach activities already
under development by the principal investigator.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.