* 1835822
* Framework: Data: HDR: Extensible Geospatial Data Framework towards FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) Science
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jian Jin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,971,003.00

This project provides seamless connections among platforms, data and tools,
making large scientific and social geospatial datasets directly usable in
scientific models and tools. Users with little or no programming experience will
be able to create and build data pipelines that collect and process data at
multiple scales and convert such data into usable results. Four case studies
demonstrate the capability of the data framework: flood hazard prediction, plant
phenotyping, water quality monitoring and sustainable
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates an extensible geospatial
data framework (GeoEDF) to address prevalent geospatial data challenges, support
domain science needs, and contribute to a national geospatial data and software
ecosystem. Specific objectives include: &lt;br/&gt; - development of a plug-and-
play data framework (GeoEDF),&lt;br/&gt; - use of the framework to address
domain science needs, &lt;br/&gt; - development of interoperability with other
cyberinfrastructures, and &lt;br/&gt; - dissemination of GeoEDF to the broader
community. &lt;br/&gt;Use of modular plug-and-play application programming
interfaces (APIs) would enable integration of domain-specific geospatial data in
a meaningful and accessible manner, leveraging an existing cyberinfrastructure
capability (HUBzero) to facilitate adoption and dissemination without
reinventing existing components. The project engages a substantial number of
domain scientists from a variety of stakeholder communities; by incorporating
the framework into HUBzero-powered sites, the team anticipates having access to
more than 750,000 users. Training will be provided to the next-generation of
researchers and professionals; internship programs are planned for undergraduate
and underrepresented groups. The project allows users / scientists to connect a
range of data sources, potentially increasing interdisciplinary work. The
ultimate goal is to put easy-to-use tools and platforms into the hands of
researchers and students to conduct scientific investigations using findable,
accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR) science
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.