* 1835656
* Framework: Sofware: Collaborative Research: CyberWater -An open and sustainable framework for diverse data and model integration with provenance and access to HPC
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Yang Zhang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefan Robila
* 03/31/2020
* USD 95,000.00

This project addresses a high priority need for water research communities:
interoperability among a wide variety of data sources and models, and
integration of different computational models into water research communities.
The project will develop an open and sustainable software framework enabling
integration of hydrologic data and models for interdisciplinary teamwork and
discovery. The models and datasets cover fields such as hydrology, biology,
environmental engineering and climate. The project also addresses one of the key
issues for extreme-scale computing: scalable file systems. The collaboration
draws upon computing, modeling, and hydrology expertise at six institutions:
University of Pittsburgh, University of Iowa, Ball State University, North
Carolina State University, Indiana University, and the Consortium of
Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Science, Inc. (CUAHSI).

The project develops CyberWater, a community-driven software framework that
integrates a wide range of models and datasets across disparate temporal and
spatial scales. The CyberWater framework allows scientists to bypass challenges
associated with model and dataset complexity. The project designs a model agent
tool enabling users to generate model agents for common model types without
coding, and integrates multiple existing software codes/elements that provide
for broad-scale use. To develop such a diverse modeling framework, the project
brings together hydrologists, climate experts, meteorologists, computer
scientists and cyberinfrastructure experts. The project builds upon an existing
prototype developed by the lead investigator; basic elements for the system were
developed, consisting of plugged-in models and data sources with corresponding
agents and a workflow engine allowing user workflow control. The prototype was
successfully demonstrated for two models, making use of datasets plugged in from
NASA, USGS and CUAHSI. For the current project, new models and datasets are
added to the framework; the ability to use high performance computing resources
is also incorporated. The team will use the CUAHSI HydroShare System to
distribute CyberWater software and its associate model agents, including
instructions on how to establish a local CyberWater environment, models and
model agents. The project will enable substantial scientific advances for water
related issues, and the solution can be applied to other research disciplines.

This award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by
the NSF Directorate for Geosciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.