* 1835144
* Elements: Software: NSCI: Efficient GPU Enabled QM/MM Calculations: AMBER Coupled with QUICK
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Kenneth Merz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The over-arching goal of this project is to develop a software
cyberinfrastructure aimed at solving important molecular-level problems in
catalysis, drug design, and energy conversion. The PI and his collaborators will
develop open source software that will enhance the ability to tackle chemical
and biological problems using a sustainable model. The PI and his collaborators
are collaborating with NVIDIA on this project to help accelerate the development
efforts. Finally, the projects undertaken here will train students in formal
theory, computer programming, computational chemistry and biology, and
manuscript preparation/publication further enhancing the technical workforce in
the USA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combined quantum mechanical/molecular mechanical
(QM/MM) models have enabled significant advances in the understanding of
chemical reactivity and intermolecular interactions. This approach allows
regions of a system where bonds are to be broken and formed to be modeled using
accurate QM methods, while the surrounding environment is treated using
classical models. The most widely used QM models in QM/MM studies are generally
semiempirical, but the most accurate employ density functional theory (DFT),
Hartree-Fock (HF) or post HF methods. The shortcoming when using the more
accurate methods is the computational expense, which limits the extent of QM/MM
molecular dynamics simulations. The performance of QM methods has been greatly
improved over the years through algorithmic and hardware improvements. This
project will focus on both: for the former the PI will add the ability to handle
long-range interactions in QM/MM calculations, add GPU enabled correlated
methods and create an electron repulsion interaction (ERI) engine for general
use, while for the latter the PI will integrate the GPU enabled Quantum
Interaction Computational Kernel (QUICK) program with the Sander and PMEMD
molecular dynamics (MD) engines from the AMBER suite of programs. AMBER is one
of the most popular simulations packages and has been supported and sustained by
the AMBER developer community for approximately 30 years. The developments
proposed here will be fully available to the community via AMBERTools, which is
released using an open source model (see http://ambermd.org/AmberTools.php).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science
&amp; Engineering and the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate of
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.