* 1835256
* Element: Software: Data-Driven Auto-Adaptive Classification of Cryospheric Signatures as Informants for Ice-Dynamic Models
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Ute Herzfeld, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Seung-Jong Park
* 12/31/2023
* USD 593,624.00

The objective of this project is to develop and automatize a connection between
Earth observation data and numerical models of Earth system processes. Both
collection of Earth observation data from satellites and modeling of physical
processes have seen unprecedented advances in recent years. However, data-
derived information is not used to inform modeling in a systematic and automated
fashion. This creates a bottleneck that is growing with the data revolution. The
award supports the development of a software cyberinfrastructure aimed at
reducing this bottleneck by automating classification and parameterization. The
proposed cyberinfrastructure will be implemented in a general and transportable
way, but its functionality will be demonstrated by addressing a concrete open
problem in glaciology: the acceleration during a glacier surge, which is
characterized by an increase to 100-200 times the flow normal velocity. Glacial
accelerations are important, because they constitute the largest uncertainty in
sea-level-rise assessment. The team, from University of Colorado will combine
their expertise of field work and data collection with their background in
software development to generate a high-quality application that will be made
available under an open source license to the broader scientific community. The
project will engage graduate and undergraduate students in the software
development, thus contributing to the development of future generations of
scientists and cyberinfrastructure professionals. The results will also be used
to inform activities in K-12 schools and other outreach
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed data-driven auto-adaptive
classification system is expected to provide a tool to the Earth Sciences
community that allows it to employ the unprecedented detail in satellite image
and SAR data (WordView, Sentinel-1 and Sentinel-2) necessary to extract
information on surface properties and processes that were previously
indiscernible. In that the classification will automatically adapt to changing
conditions in time and space, it will provide a consistent parameterization of
spatial processes that can be used to drive numerical simulations of Earth
system processes. Thus, a direct connection will be established between data
analysis and modeling. In a pilot study, the data-modeling connection will be
demonstrated through classification of crevasse patterns, which result from
deformation, and optimization of the basal sliding parameter in a three-
dimensional model of a glacier surge. Hence the pilot study will advance
understanding of ice dynamics. A second application is a sea-ice classification
system, aimed to aid in mapping and understanding the changing Arctic sea-ice
cover. The planned automated connection between data-driven automated
classification and optimization of model parameters is expected to lay the
foundation for a transformation of the data-modeling world in Earth sciences,
atmospheric and polar sciences. The project will also advance machine learning
and spatial statistics through realization of a science-driven approach to
computer science and cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award by the
NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC) is jointly supported by the
Cross-Cutting Program within the NSF Directorate for Geosciences, The OAC
Cyberinfrastructure for Emerging Science and Engineering Research (CESER)
program and the EarthCube Program jointly sponsored by the NSF Directorate for
Geosciences and the OAC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.