* 1836522
* Developing the Environmental Literacy Concept Inventory
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Julie Sexton, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,955.00

Living things, from bacteria to humans, are all affected by their environment,
and changes in this environment can have unexpected consequences, both positive
and negative. Faculty report having difficulty teaching how environmental
changes can affect living things, often because students do not understand how
such changes intersect with their own lives. Education about interactions
between the environment and living systems has the potential to help students
relate environmental change to their own lives and foster an environmentally
literate STEM workforce. However, these education efforts are limited because no
tool currently exists to measure student knowledge of environmental impacts on
living things. To improve the effectiveness of instruction in environmental
literacy, biology educators need a valid and reliable way to measure student
understanding in this area. Concept inventories are sets of multiple choice
questions that evaluate students' conceptual knowledge about a topic and help to
measure how much students understand about it. These inventories can identify
what aspects of a topic are difficult for students, and track student learning
over time. Concept inventories can also be used to test the effectiveness of
various teaching strategies. This project will develop and test a concept
inventory focused on environmental literacy in biology, with the overall goal of
enhancing undergraduate environmental education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
purpose of the environmental literacy concept inventory is to provide educators
with a tool to measure student understanding of environmental impacts on biotic
systems. The project will conduct a qualitative study and collect interview data
to identify undergraduate student and faculty understanding of the biological
impacts of environmental change. This information will be used to create an
environmental literacy concept inventory. The project will use the inventory
with a sample of students in biology classes across the country and then use
those results to improve the inventory. The project will then conduct a pre- and
post-test quantitative study using the revised inventory to identify students'
knowledge of environmental impacts on biotic systems. Project activities are
aimed at developing a valid and reliable assessment tool, as well as producing
research data on students' understanding of environmental impacts on biotic
systems. The inventory and data will guide faculty efforts to improve
undergraduate students' environmental literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.