* 1836712
* FMitF: Verifying Concurrent System Software with Cspec
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* M. Frans Kaashoek, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 10/31/2022
* USD 750,000.00

Most computer systems involve concurrency---multiple threads, cores, or
computers executing at the same time and interacting with one another.
Developing concurrent software is error-prone, because the concurrent threads
can interact in many unexpected ways, and it is easy for developers to overlook
subtle corner-case interactions. This project will tackle this problem through
the use of machine-checked proofs for concurrent software: that is, it will
focus on helping developers to provide a mathematical proof that the software
will execute according to its specification, for any possible interaction among
the concurrent threads. As a driving example, this project will develop a
verified concurrent multicore file system. This project's novelty lies in its
approach for specifying and proving concurrent software that reduces the number
of thread interactions that the developer must reason about, while still
providing a full proof of correctness. The expected impact of this project will
be a set of ideas, techniques, and tools for specifying and proving concurrent
systems software. Since concurrent software plays such a critical role in
computer systems, being able to verify correctness of key software components
will improve reliability and security of many systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific research contributions of this project will center around CSPEC, a
framework for formal verification of concurrent software, which will help
developers ensure that no corner cases are missed. The key challenge faced by
CSPEC is to reduce the number of interactions, or interleavings, that developers
must consider in their proofs. CSPEC addresses this challenge using so-called
mover types to reorder commutative operations. Mover types enable developers to
reason about largely sequential executions rather than all possible
interleavings. CSPEC also provides a library of proof patterns for common styles
of concurrency, including retry loops, state partitioning, and cooperative
enforcement of rules between threads or processes. In the process of developing
a verified concurrent file system on top of CSPEC, the investigators will
address additional research challenges, such as formulating a specification for
a POSIX file system under concurrency, integrating reasoning about crash safety
and concurrency, managing the complexity of proving a sophisticated concurrent
file system, and generating efficient concurrent code to achieve high
performance while preserving correctness. As part of this project, the research
team will also develop a course focused on formal reasoning about computer
systems, which includes concurrency, reliability, and fault-
tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.