* 1836721
* AccessATE: Making Community College Technician Education More Accessible for Everyone
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Rory Cooper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,477,761.00

Research shows that including Universal Design concepts and accessibility
standards makes learning resources more usable by those with disabilities and
others, including non-native language speakers, low-literacy students, and
seniors. Including University Design concepts at the beginning of the
development process can increase the effectiveness of websites, curriculum,
documents, and other resources. The Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
program supports projects and centers that develop curricular materials,
professional development materials, summer camps, and other resources for
educating the skilled technical workforce. ATE Central archives materials
developed by the ATE community and provides a open digital portal for finding
and downloading these resources. Having well-designed, accessible resources in
the ATE Central archive will enable those who adapt and adopt these materials to
reach the broadest possible audience thus broadening the reach of STEM education
and opportunities for STEM employment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AccessATE
project will help ATE grantees (and other STEM educators) understand the need
for accessibility, particularly as it relates to the deliverables of their ATE
projects and centers. It will provide them with support and solutions to meet
these accessibility needs and challenges. Project deliverables will include: the
AccessATE website, which will provide a platform and central data exchange
point; an Accessibility Organization Directory; an Accessibility Tool Directory
with a checklist to provide developers with points to consider and tasks to
perform to ensure compliance of materials developed; and resources for
accessible media creation and for supporting faculty in working with industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.