* 1836619
* Inclusion across the Nation of Communities of Learners of Underrepresented Discoverers in Engineering and Science
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Jean Fox Tree, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2023
* USD 96,325.00

African-American, Latinx, and Native American scholars are underrepresented in
the psychological sciences. The SPARK Society has been created to overcome two
of the root causes of this underrepresentation: an insufficient pipeline and a
lack of role models. Members of these underrepresented groups who do enter the
field also may have reduced access to effective mentorship. The result is that
graduate students and junior faculty who are African-American, Latinx, or Native
American may be less successful moving through the complex and often obscure
academic track. Through satellite conference panels and workshops, online
forums, social media outreach, and a state-of-the-art online presence, the SPARK
Society will facilitate mentorship and support of scholars from these
underrepresented groups. Society goals will be achieved (1) by fostering an
environment that welcomes and nurtures junior African-American, Latinx, and
Native American scholars, (2) by contributing to the professional development of
these scholars throughout their career, (3) by creating a network that will
provide contacts and connections to other scholars from underrepresented groups
in psychological science, and (4) by implementing an innovative model of
mentorship, whereby faculty members of the society will invite and mentor
undergraduate students who attend institutions located in the vicinity of
conference locations. This novel approach to mentorship brings mentorship to
students, instead of students' having to identify mentorship needs
independently. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SPARK Society will establish panel
discussions, in-person mentoring sessions, and group networking meetings in the
context of existing conferences for psychological scientists. Satellite meetings
are planned in association with the Psychonomic Society meeting in 2019, 2020,
and 2021. Interaction with universities and colleges located in the vicinity of
each conference location will be facilitated through the SPARK Society's
Community Fellow. This fellow will travel to conference locations several months
in advance to establish procedures and mechanisms by which undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups will be identified and invited to
participate in the SPARK Society meeting and the meeting of the Psychonomic
Society. Undergraduate students will be introduced to the growing network of
scholars from underrepresented groups in the psychological sciences and to the
nature of research. Invited undergraduate students will be encouraged to
participate in general conference activities and to attend mentoring sessions
designed to introduce them to the field and potential role models. Senior and
junior scholars will network in the context of SPARK meetings to establish long-
term mentorship relationships. The SPARK society has been created to provide a
much-needed forum for underrepresented minority scholars across all levels
(undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, faculty) to connect with each other and
share knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.