* 1836944
* 2018 Geochemistry of Minerals GRC/GRS: Waterville Valley, NH, August 4-5, 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Adam Simon, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award will support the 25th Gordon Research Conference (GRC) in the field
of mineral resources geochemistry, and the first ever Gordon Research Seminar
(GRS) that targets early-career scientists. Funding will significantly reduce
the cost of attendance for early-career scientists, defined here as students,
and post-docs and tenure-track and tenured faculty within five years of having
earned their doctoral degree, and for under-represented minorities. National and
international researchers in the field of mineral resources will gather to
discuss issues concerning the geochemistry of metal transportation and
deposition in the natural environment. The format of this meeting provides an
outstanding opportunity to mentor future generations of scientists who will be
responsible for ensuring the sustainable supply of resources, including critical
metals, for society. Participating early-career scientists will engage with
representatives from academia and various government agencies and laboratories,
as well as from the mining and geothermal industries, who bring to the group
their experience and expertise concerning immediate problems requiring practical
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRC and GRS meetings on Geochemistry of
Mineral Deposits will cover a broad range of topics across all scales, from
nano-particles to crustal. The GRC will open with a discussion of how ore
deposits relate to the evolution of the Earth's hydrosphere and lithosphere.
Morning sessions include detailed appraisals of mineralizing processes in all
key ore-forming environments on Planet Earth, its oceans and basins, metamorphic
and magmatic environments, and areas of active deformation. Evening sessions
will focus on the timing and duration of mineralizing processes, how weathering
can enhance, obscure or destroy ore deposits, the latest advances in geochemical
exploration for ore deposits, and predictions of future directions in ore
deposit geochemistry research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.