* 1836894
* I-Corps:  Radiofrequency Ablation using Wirelessly Powered Catheter and Generator
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Tsz Ho Tse, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project centers around
cancer treatment using wireless radiofrequency. Radiofrequency ablation is a
minimally invasive procedure where surgeons burn tissue inside the body using
electricity. Ablation treatment has been applied in several medical disciplines
including oncology, cardiology, dermatology, pain management, etc.According to
the National Cancer Institute, there were more than 1.6 million new cases of
cancer in 2017 and approximately 600,000 cancer patients died. Many of these
cancer patients can be treated with ablation therapy. A significant amount of
funding is invested in cancer care, with $125 billion spent in 2010 alone; this
number is estimated to reach $156 billion in 2020. Other diseases have similar
numbers of affected patents and high amounts of care expenditures as well. This
I-Corps program will provide opportunities for the team to explore various
avenues for the commercialization of their wireless radiofrequency ablation
technology that has broad application in many treatment
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is the first wireless
radiofrequency ablation device designed to streamline and simplify the current
ablation procedure. Using the principle of magnetic resonance, a wirelessly
powered radiofrequency ablation device simply includes an ablation generator and
a needle. The ablation generator serves as a transmitting circuit that
wirelessly sends power to the needle's receiving coil. The receiving coil is
connected to the electrodes at the needle tip that ablates tumor tissue in
contact. Existing ablation methods have multiple wires tethered to the ablation
equipment that limit the surgeon's dexterity to position the ablation needles
during the procedure. The weight and dragging of the wires could increase
patient setup time and cause potential tissue laceration. Also, a limited number
of ablation needles can be used simultaneously, making it time consuming to
ablate large tumors. This project's wireless ablation technology requires no
wires and allows an unlimited number of ablation needles during the procedure.
An initial prototype has been developed to prove the concept of wireless
ablation and tests have been performed to prove the concept of the proposed
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.