* 1836617
* Studying Equity in Undergraduate Physics Labs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Natasha Holmes, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 335,230.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by studying how fairness in group interactions during
laboratory classes affects students' decisions to persist in physics. Despite
extensive efforts to improve science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
education, many students who declare a STEM major early in their college years
do not persist to graduation. Although the many variables that affect student
persistence are complex and intertwined, an important observation is that
students do not leave STEM simply due to poor grades. This study, in the
Exploration and Design tier of the Engaged Student Learning track, will evaluate
how lab experiences affect student perspectives of what it means to do physics
and whether they will continue to do it. The work will focus on lab courses
where students conduct experiments together, requiring coordinated decision-
making between the group members. The project will gather data about student
experiences though structured observations of students in labs, paired with
interviews of their experiences. By linking direct observations with interviews,
this project provides a rare opportunity to connect persistence to actual in-
class activities. The significance of this work is increased by the observation
that inequities in group interactions may more negatively impact the persistence
of some groups of students, such as women and minority students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study aims to answer two research questions:
1) What are the characteristics of equitable lab groups and lab activities? 2)
How do students' lab experiences (equitable or not) affect their perspectives of
what it means to do physics and whether they will persist in physics studies?
Students' experiences in group work will be evaluated through observations of
talk time and turn taking, bids for inclusion and exclusion, assuming leadership
roles, equipment handling, and ownership of ideas. Targeted interviews and
surveys will probe students' views about what it means to do physics, who can do
it, and whether they plan to continue to do it, while also drawing connections
to their group work experiences in the lab. A significant focus will be on
evaluating interactions between common predictors of persistence (students'
self-efficacy, sense of belonging, science identity, and sense of agency) and
their experiences in lab. The goal of this work is to generate a set of
implications for how lab instruction can affect student persistence in STEM and
recommendations for improvements to physics labs. Its research methodology will
enable the investigators to probe how lab experiences affect different groups of
students, including groups that have been historically underrepresented in
physics. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.