* 1836423
* NNA: RAPID: Atmospheric Measurements from Unmanned Aircraft during SODA - Deployment of miniFlux and Initial Data Analysis
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Dale Lawrence, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Mercer
* 07/31/2019
* USD 169,894.00

Understanding the temperature structure of the upper ocean in the Arctic is very
important for properly simulating the formation and melt of sea ice in climate
and weather models. The presence (or absence) is important for a variety of
activities, including shipping, energy exploration and hunting by native
populations. Therefore, forecasting the presence of ice at shorter timescales is
critically needed. Sea ice additionally has a controlling influence on climate
by acting as a bright surface capable of reflecting sunlight back to space,
thereby highlighting a need to accurately forecast it on decadal time scales. A
significant source of errors in forecasts at all scales is the ability to
predict to what extent mixing of the upper ocean occurs and how this mixing
helps to eliminate gradients in temperature and salinity that might change the
rate of ice formation or melt. An important item to understand is to what extent
atmospheric winds, which we generally forecast relatively well, contribute to
this upper-oceanic mixing through the transfer of energy between the atmosphere
and ocean. This project will support the collection of key measurements
necessary to help inform the improvement of weather and climate models to
support prediction of sea ice at a variety of time scales.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, an unmanned aircraft system will be
deployed to provide measurements of atmospheric temperature, winds and humidity.
This information will be used together with information from surface buoys and
ice imagery to understand atmosphere-ocean energy transfer during the fall
freeze-up period. Specifically, this work will help to address questions related
to the role of the presence of sea ice in energy transfer and how that role is
simulated in numerical models, the extent to which mechanisms supporting
transfer vary at small spatial scales and how those are handled in today?s state
of the art modeling tools, and the importance of vertical resolution of models
in accurately capturing this energy transfer. Measurements will be compared to
high-resolution models that couple the atmosphere, ice and ocean together into
single simulations. Flights will take place from northern Alaska in September
and October of 2018 and will interface with a broader effort (the Stratified
Ocean Dynamics of the Arctic, or SODA, project) to understand the upper ocean in
this part of the world. Additionally, this work will interface with the ongoing
Year of Polar Prediction, providing extra connections to the modeling
communities who can benefit from these measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.