* 1836697
* EAGER: BRAIDING: Majorana modes in monolayer topological insulator WTe2
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* David Cobden, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Finding alternative paths to quantum computing is
paramount at this time, and current approaches face many hurdles. The biggest is
decoherence of the qubits, meaning that the quantum information content decays
exponentially with time. In principle, decoherence can be avoided using
"topological protection". The only realistic known scheme for topological
protection is based on creating the qubits from so-called Majorana modes, which
are peculiar states that occur at the ends of certain types of quantum wires.
One way to make Majoranas is using the special quantum wire that exists at the
edge of a topological insulator. The PI, an experimentalist, recently discovered
the first natural monolayer two-dimensional (2D) topological insulator,
suggesting the possibility to create and manipulate Majoranas in 2D materials.
The co-PI is a theorist and expert on topological phenomena; in this project
they collaborate to find the simplest way to create and detect Majoranas in this
system. The work supports graduate students in topical interdisciplinary work
where theory and experiment go hand in hand, and which could conceivably give
birth to the next information revolution. The project forms a bridge between the
University of Washington, which has a leading research effort in 2D materials,
and local industry (including Microsoft) which is investing heavily in
applications of quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This project
aims to establish the viability of the 2D materials platform for creating
Majorana zero modes that could be used for topological quantum processing. The
team employs monolayer WTe2 as a 2D topological insulator, combined with a 2D
superconductor (NbSe2 or FeSe) and a 2D magnet (CrI3 or CrBr3). These materials
are stacked into a van der Waals heterostructure along with electrical contacts
and tunnel barriers. At the point where the three materials meet a Majorana mode
may appear at low temperatures and can be probed by tunneling measurements. This
2D platform offers advantages compared with other Majorana systems including
that no magnetic field is required to produce the helical mode, and the
possibility to avoid delicate tuning of the chemical potential. The complexity
of the many-electron and topological physics involved, and the novelty of the
system, calls for close cooperation between experiment and theory. Specific
goals are to induce and understand a superconducting proximity gap in the
helical edge of WTe2, and to design and test the simplest 2D possible
heterostructure devices in which Majoranas may occur and be
detected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.