* 1836715
* Collaborative Research: ENTeR: Enabling NeTwork Research and the Evolution of a Next Generation Midscale Research Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ilya Baldin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,100,695.00

Over the past decade the Global Environment for Networking Innovations (GENI)
has supported a wide range of networking and computing systems research into
future internet architectures, Software Defined Networking (SDN), wireless and
mobile networks, network hardware and software approaches, network applications,
network monitoring, network security, future clouds, distributed computing and
edge clouds, and smart cities. GENI has been credited with key contributions
including developing a federated approach for provisioning, accessing, and
programming distributed cyberinfrastructure through standard abstractions, APIs,
and security policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimentation continues today,
executed by a growing number of GENI users who are using it both as a research
and an educational tool. Recent GENI experiments include work on evaluating
future exascale systems, securing scientific workflows, defining and testing
novel Software Define eXchange (SDX) architectures, network security research,
and routing and transport protocol evaluations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal, Enabling NeTwork Research and the Evolution of a Next Generation
Midscale Research Infrastructure (ENTeR) seeks to update, adapt, operate and
maintain the existing GENI infrastructure for a two year time period in order to
support ongoing at-scale network research experiments. At the same time, the
project will engage in planning for next generation experimental research
infrastructure. ENTeR will facilitate the transition from GENI to a new platform
capable of supporting a much larger experimental research community. The ENTeR
team's primary focus will be to ensure that the critical portions of the GENI
infrastructure needed by the majority of researchers remain available and
relevant. GENI will expand its role as an interconnect fabric between various
elements of national experimental cyber infrastructure like NSF Future Clouds
(i.e., Chameleon Cloud and CloudLab) and the Platforms for Advanced Wireless
Resesearch (PAWR), linking them to campus networks and offering a rich set of
new experimental capabilities. This project will provide opportunities for
students to work on live distributed infrastructure, troubleshoot real problems,
and develop software solutions that will be used by a large community of
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.