* 1836687
* EAGER: BRAIDING: Braiding Majorana bound states in two-dimensional epitaxial semiconductor-superconductor structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Javad Shabani, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Physical properties of a semiconductor are modified when
it is placed in proximity to a superconducting material. Interfacing
semiconductors with superconductors in a controlled way allows to control such
novel properties. When the conditions at the interface are right, new types of
behavior may emerge. For example, emergent states known as Majorana zero modes
can form at this interface, and manifest as a specific measurement feature
called zero-bias peak. Such unique new states do not follow the usual quantum
statistics governing the behavior of electrons or atoms, but rather conform to
so-called non-Abelian statistics. Recently, impressive experimental progress in
fabricating one-dimensional (1D) structures has led to indirect detection of
such non-Abelian states relying on zero-bias peak. This work will enable using
the non-Abelian states in future quantum
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: This project takes a new
path to create and manipulate topological excitations on a two-dimensional (2D)
epitaxial platform. It combines proximity-induced superconductivity in a 2D
electron gas (2DEG) with magnetic textures originating from rotation of the
magnetic field and/or fringing fields of nano-magnets. These magnetic textures
engineer an effective Hamiltonian in the 2DEG that supports the creation of
Majorana zero modes. The 2D geometry overcomes obstacles of one-dimensional
Majorana zero modes allowing realization of ring, cross and T-junctions for
braiding and fusing, opening a new path to topological quantum computing. The
results of our fundamental research will provide important experimental advances
to establish a new scalable platform to study topological
excitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.