* 1836555
* Symposium: Modeling and Simulation of Additive Manufacturing Materials, Processes and Mechanics at Materials Science &amp; Technology 2018 (MS&amp;T18); Columbus, Ohio; 14-18 Octob
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Jing Zhang, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 9,500.00

This grant provides support for selected students, postdoctoral researchers, and
young investigators studying at US institutions as well as two invited
researchers to participate in the Symposium on Additive Manufacturing (AM) -
Modeling and Simulation of AM Materials, Processes, and Mechanics at Materials
Science &amp; Technology 2018 (MS&amp;T18) in Columbus, Ohio, 14-18 October
2018. This area is a burgeoning area important to the national prosperity.
MS&amp;T18 will bring together a broad range of technical sessions and expertise
through the collaborative efforts of six major, international materials
organizations: The American Ceramic Society (ACerS), Association for Iron &amp;
Steel Technology (AIST), ASM International, Metallurgy and Materials Society of
CIM (MetSoc), NACE International, and The Minerals, Metals &amp; Materials
Society (TMS). In particular, this symposium is expected to have more than 40
presentations, one third of which will be given by students. Participants will
be exposed to research at the frontiers of AM including technical presentations
by leading international experts in the field. Attendees will also have ample
opportunities for networking with other researchers from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The symposium will showcase the latest developments
in AM modeling and simulation and help illuminate some of the challenges in
predictive theoretical and computational approaches that still hinder the
widespread adoption of AM. Example topics covered include modeling and
simulation of AM processes to understand the process-structure-property
relationship; modeling of morphology evolution, phase transformation, and defect
formation; and modeling of residual stress, distortion, and plasticity/damage in
AM parts. As part of the very popular and well-attended group of AM symposia at
MS&amp;T, it is expected to draw several hundred attendees throughout the week.
It remains a vital forum that brings together top researchers from around the
world and numerous graduate and undergraduate students to discuss their
research, to exchange ideas, to network and to develop collaborative
relationships centered on materials research in AM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.