* 1836752
* ICE-T: RC: Horizontal Resource Management in Distributed Edge Clouds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 316,000.00

The latency, bandwidth, and mobility needs of the next-generation Internet of
Things (IoT), smart wearables, and augmented reality applications and devices
makes traditional cloud platforms ill-suited to their needs. Edge cloud
computing, where computational and storage resources are deployed at the edge of
the network and offered through a cloud model, has emerged as a promising
alternative to address the needs of these emerging
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines network-aware
horizontal resource management in edge clouds and will focus on three
synergistic topics. First, the team will design network-aware orchestration
algorithms for edge clouds, including new edge cloud migration technique that
combines multi-path transport and virtual machine migration to provide network-
transparent low-latency access in the face of user and device mobility. Second,
the team will study network-aware placement in distributed edge clouds that
incorporates the application's latency and bandwidth needs while being aware of
interacting distributed edge and virtualized network functions. Third, the
project research will address the fundamental issue of the control plane
architecture for massively distributed edge clouds and will study both
decentralized and hierarchical control plane architectures for future edge
clouds. The project team will study the tradeoffs and benefits of both
architectures through the lens of orchestration algorithms such as geo-elastic
scaling algorithms as well as edge migration and network-aware placement. Our
research will also involve prototype implementation and large-scale
experimentation on multiple experimental research
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will extend a collaboration between
the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, and Umea University,
Sweden.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.