* 1836402
* NSF Student Travel for 2018 USENIX Research Conferences: NSDI 2018, USENIX ATC 2018, USENIX Security Symposium 2018, and OSDI 2018
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Camille Mulligan, USENIX Association
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 05/31/2019
* USD 90,000.00

USENIX conferences gathers researchers from across the academic, government, and
industry communities to foster cross-disciplinary approaches and to address
shared research challenges. This cross-disciplinary emphasis makes it well-
suited as a target for student participation, and the important topics addressed
in these conferences encourage student research and collaboration in critical
areas of advanced computing. The support requested in this proposal will enable
the participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend the
conference, and extends the impact of research presented to a broad audience of
young researchers from across the country.

To help increase the representation and participation of these students, this
proposal requests funding to assist approximately 20-25 US-based graduate
students to attend each of the following events: 15th USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 2018).

USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC 2018).

USENIX Security Symposium (Security 2018).

13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI
2018).

The knowledge shared and advanced at these conferences has practical and
meaningful applications to a broad variety of things used in daily life such as
household appliances, cars, cell phones, airplanes and public transit, as well
as to the ethical, cultural, and social ramifications of computing technology

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.