* 1836905
* Collaborative Research: Real-time Investigations of Anisotropic Nanoparticle Aggregation and Consequences for Deposition in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Lei Wu, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 12/31/2023
* USD 239,255.00

Nanoparticles are prevalent in nature and widely produced in a variety of shapes
and sizes in ever-increasing quantities. These nanoparticles often aggregate in
water, and thus they typically transport and deposit in environmental media in
the form of aggregates instead of individual nanoparticles. However, how the
structure of nanoparticle aggregates influence nanoparticles' movement in the
environment is not well understood. The overall objective of this project is to
better understand the interactions of nanoparticulate aggregates with
environmental media and how these interactions can be governed by the shape and
size of the individual nanoparticles. Findings from this work can benefit the
design and optimization of a broad range of engineered processes, such as
filter-based water treatment, groundwater remediation, and drug delivery. This
project will also benefit K-12 education through outreach activities involving
videos and pictures of nanomaterials. Additional outreach programs include 1)
the Summer Coding Camp, at Ohio University to introduce middle school girls to
the STEM fields, and 2) various science activities offered by Nebraska Center
for Materials and Nanosciences at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to broaden
the exposure of K-12 students to materials science and engineering, nanoscience,
and nanotechnology. In addition, the PIs will leverage the existing REU programs
at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln to train Ohio university undergraduate
students during summers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past, nanoparticle
aggregation and deposition were often studied separately, with limited research
linking mobility of nanoparticles in environmental media to the structure of
nanoparticle aggregates. However, new evidence suggests that anisotropic
nanoparticles, the most common form of nanoparticles in the environment, often
form non-compact aggregates. The formation of these non-compact aggregates
cannot be explained by classic colloidal aggregation theories. Moreover, non-
compact aggregates undergo unusual deposition and modify hydrodynamics in
environmental porous media, which is not described by the classical filtration
theory. Acquisition and integration of quantitative data from all steps involved
in nanoparticle aggregation and deposition is critically needed. The research
objectives of this project include: 1) Quantifying the anisotropic diffusion
dynamics of nanoparticles with various aspect ratios in water; 2) Elucidating
the role of the shape of primary nanoparticles on the formation kinetics and
morphological structure of aggregates; and 3) Evaluating the impact of aggregate
structure on the transport and deposition of aggregates in environmental porous
media. Hematite nanoparticles with different aspect ratios (i.e., nanosphere,
nanorod, nanodisk) will be synthesized in the study. Advanced techniques will be
employed to visualize and quantify nanoparticle diffusion, aggregation,
transport, and deposition in environmental matrices. Furthermore, the
experimental data will be used to update classical filtration theory for
predicting nanoparticle behaviors in porous media. The expected intellectual
outcomes from this work will include development of a series of quantitative
metrics from measurements of anisotropic diffusion, aggregate formation, and
aggregate deposition and flow dynamics in porous media. These quantitative
characterizations will allow us to elucidate the mechanisms which control
anisotropic nanoparticle aggregation and deposition in environmental porous
media. This will, in turn, improve the utility of colloidal science principles
in understanding and predicting nanoparticle behaviors, such as colloid Brownian
motion theory, colloid aggregation theory, and the classical filtration
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.