* 1836650
* S2I2: Institute for Research and Innovation in Software for High Energy Physics (IRIS-HEP)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Gordon Watts, Princeton University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 25,220,000.00

The quest to understand the fundamental building blocks of nature and their
interactions is one of the oldest and most ambitious of human scientific
endeavors. In Elementary Particles Physics, the most successful theory to date
is known as the "Standard Model" of particle physics. Facilities such as CERN's
Large Hadron Collider (LHC) represent a huge step forward in this quest as
evidenced by the discovery of the Higgs boson. The next phase of this global
scientific project will be the High-Luminosity LHC (HL-LHC), which will collect
data starting circa 2026 and continue into the 2030's. The primary science goal
at the HL-LHC is to search for physics beyond the Standard Model. In the HL-LHC
era, the ATLAS and CMS experiments will record 10 times as much data from 100
times as many collisions as were used to discover the Higgs boson. As such,
significant R&amp;D advances must be achieved in the software for acquiring,
managing, processing and analyzing HL-LHC data to realize the scientific
potential of the upgraded accelerator and detectors and the planned physics
program. In this context, the Institute for Research and Innovation in Software
for High Energy Physics (IRIS-HEP) will play a leading role to meet the software
and computing challenges of the HL-LHC. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Institute for
Research and Innovation in Software for High Energy Physics (IRIS-HEP) addresses
key elements of the international "Roadmap for HEP Software and Computing
R&amp;D for the 2020s" and implements the "Strategic Plan for a Scientific
Software Innovation Institute (S2I2) for High Energy Physics" submitted to the
NSF in December 2017. IRIS-HEP will advance R&amp;D in three high-impact areas:
(1) development of innovative algorithms for data reconstruction and triggering;
(2) development of highly performant analysis systems that reduce `time-to-
insight' and maximize the HL-LHC physics potential; and (3) development of data
organization, management and access (DOMA) systems for the community's upcoming
Exabyte era. IRIS-HEP will sustain investments in today's distributed high-
throughput computing (DHTC) and build an integration path to deliver its R&amp;D
activities into the distributed production infrastructure. As an intellectual
hub, IRIS-HEP will lead efforts to (1) build convergence research between HEP
and the Cyberinfrastructure, Data Science and Computer Science communities for
novel approaches to address the compelling software and computing challenges of
HL-LHC era HEP experiments, (2) engage broadly with researchers and students
from U.S. Universities and labs emphasizing professional development and
training, and (3) sustain HEP software and underlying knowledge related to the
algorithms and their implementations over the two decades required. In addition
to enabling the best possible HL-LHC science, IRIS-HEP will bring together the
larger Cyberinfrastructure and HEP communities to address the complex issues at
the intersection of Exascale high-throughput computing and Exabyte-scale
datasets in ways broadly relevant to many research domains with emerging data-
intensive needs. The education and training provided by the Institute in the
form of summer schools and a fellows program will contribute to a highly
qualified STEM workforce as most students and even most post-docs move into the
private sector taking their skills with them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
advances the objectives of the National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI)
and the objectives of "Harnessing the Data Revolution", one of the 10 Big Ideas
for Future NSF Investments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by
the Office of Advanced Infrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering and the Division of Physics in the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.