* 1836724
* FMitF: A Framework for Synthesis of Efficient, Reliable, and Secure Operating System Components
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Emina Torlak, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 09/30/2023
* USD 980,043.00

The operating system is a critical part of every computing device, from mobile
phones to cloud servers. It consists of core software components, such as the
kernel and the file system, that mediate the interaction between user
applications and the underlying hardware. Bugs in these components have wide-
ranging impact on systems in use every day, from causing crashes and slowdowns
to allowing attackers to take over the entire system. This project develops
Synix, a transformative new approach to building operating system components
that eliminates entire classes of such bugs. Synix is based on automated program
synthesis, and it is the first effort to synthesize a broad range of key
operating system components, providing formal guarantees of efficiency,
reliability, and security. By extending the scalability and reach of program
synthesis to the domain of operating systems, Synix advances the state-of-the-
art in formal methods and in the design of software components that underpin our
computing infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Synix takes the form of a novel
framework for synthesis-aided development of efficient, reliable, and secure
operating system components. The PIs prior work on push-button verification of
kernels and file systems has demonstrated that it is feasible to verify the
safety and security of these components fully automatically and with low
specification burden. The enabling idea behind push-button verification is to
design component interfaces to be finite so that the semantics of each interface
procedure is expressible as a set of traces of bounded length. The main insight
behind Synix is that finite interfaces are also an ideal target for syntax-
guided synthesis. The research goal of this project is thus to develop new
techniques for synthesizing efficient implementations of three classes of core
operating system components with finite interfaces: (1) a just-in-time compiler
for a given in-kernel interpreter, (2) a crash-safe file system for a given
storage interface, and (3) a security monitor for a given application-level
isolation policy. The driving idea underpinning the proposed solutions is to use
self hosting, write-before relations, and narrow finite interfaces to decompose
the target synthesis problems into more tractable synthesis tasks. The practical
and educational goals of this project are to apply Synix to synthesize real
operating system configurations, thus facilitating adoption; release the
resulting tools as open-source software; actively support the tools users; and
disseminate key results through papers, lectures, and
tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.