* 1836899
* Preparing Graduate Students for Careers in Teaching Statistics and Data Science
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Beth Chance, American Statistical Association
* Standard Grant
* Gabor Szekely
* 07/31/2019
* USD 19,545.00

The one-day workshop, "Preparing Graduate Students for Careers in Teaching
Statistics and Data Science", will be held Saturday, July 28, 2018 in
conjunction with the Joint Statistical Meetings in Vancouver, British Columbia.
The workshop will provide graduate students and post-doctoral researchers with
the tools necessary to develop innovative and pedagogically-sound learning
experiences for their students, both inside and outside the classroom, and to
implement formative and summative assessment to guide instructional practice.
The ultimate objective of this workshop is to increase the proportion of
successful instructors who have the skills, capacity, and inclination to take on
the challenges of complex data-oriented teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
guidelines provide research-based recommendations for the pedagogy and
assessment in introductory statistics courses. Ongoing efforts focus attention
on modernizing the content and extending these ideas throughout the
undergraduate curriculum. There has also been tremendous activity in developing
materials for bringing principles of data science into stand-alone courses for
broad student audiences, as well as using data-centric approaches in many types
of statistics courses. The goal of this workshop is to equip future educators
with concrete information ranging from recommended practices in teaching
statistics and data science, to providing repositories of teaching and data
resources, and creating the infrastructure knowledge necessary to seamlessly
incorporate computing into the curriculum. Discussions will include decisions
involved in developing curriculum, creating an assessment plan, and choosing
technology tools. Workshop attendees will work through several examples and gain
first-hand experience with active learning, use of real data, and technology
tools such as RStudio and RMarkdown. More information can be found at the
workshop website
https://sites.google.com/view/preparetoteach/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.