* 1836996
* International Symposium on Aviation Psychology: May 7-10, 2019 in Dayton, Ohio
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Pamela Tsang, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2019
* USD 27,142.00

The 20th International Symposium on Aviation Psychology (ISAP) will be held May
7-10, 2019 in Dayton, Ohio. ISAP is a forum to present the latest research on
human performance problems and opportunities within aviation, envision design
solutions that best use human capabilities in safe and efficient aviation
systems, and bring together scientists and operators to bridge the gap between
research and application. The symposium encourages researchers to focus basic
research on applied needs. The knowledge generated would not be limited to
aviation applications. For example, principles of perceptual representations
that could guide cockpit display designs should also apply to displays for
spaceships, automobiles, nuclear power plants, and other interactive control
displays.

The symposium covers basic research issues on cognition, perception, and
neuroscience. These topics are studied in the context of cognitive systems,
human-system integration, display and visualization, training and simulation,
automated and autonomous systems, personnel selection, and sociotechnical system
effectiveness, as applied to aviation systems on the ground, in the sky, and in
space. One common approach to reduce the often significant time lag between
discovery and application is to allow practical needs to inform basic research
priorities. In contrast, the philosophy of ISAP is that meaningful dialogues
between researchers and practitioners are key to advancing knowledge and putting
knowledge to practical use. In two companion ISAP plenary panel sessions,
practitioners (e.g., pilots, air traffic controllers, maintenance personnel)
present the critical safety issues that they face and researchers present the
latest scientific and technological approaches to achieving solutions. These
sessions are in addition to three invited plenary speakers purposely selected
from different scientific disciplines and pertinent aviation domains. Over the
course of the symposium, researchers will have the opportunity to present their
latest scientific, engineering, or methodological work in either a spoken or a
poster session. ISAP also places a special emphasis on fostering student
involvement by conducting a Best Student Paper Competition.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.