* 1836525
* Collaborative Research: Molecular engineering of Methylation-Specific Binding Agents for DNA Purification
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Kaushal Rege, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 09/30/2023
* USD 249,887.00

DNA is a key building block of life and abnormal mutations or chemical
modifications in DNA are associated with several diseases including cancer,
diabetes, Alzheimer?s disease and rheumatoid arthritis. Recent advances in
science and engineering have led to the emergence of exciting possibilities for
DNA as therapeutics and diagnostics, particularly for cancer. However,
biomanufacturing of DNA-based therapeutics and development of disease
diagnostics that exploit chemical modifications in DNA are still in their
infancy. Specifically, cost-effective materials that can enrich modified DNA at
small and large scales, which are important for diagnostic and therapeutic
applications, respectively, are lacking. The proposed research brings together
state-of-the-art advances in computational chemistry, molecular engineering, and
biotechnology in order to generate new functional materials for selectively
binding and enriching modified DNA, leading to novel, cost-effective processes
for disease diagnostics and biomanufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative research project addresses a key gap in bioseparations involving
methylated DNA by first generating a computational (in silico) library of
ligands derived from chemotherapeutics that have inherent affinity to sites of
DNA methylation. Novel computational representation of the electronic structure
of DNA using DNA pixels, in concert with state-of-the-art methods for studying
orientations of interacting molecules, will be employed to identify ligands that
selectively bind methylated DNA over unmethylated analogs. These ligands will be
conjugated onto microbeads in order to experimentally evaluate their efficacy
for binding, enrichment, and elution of methylated vs. unmethylated DNA. Binding
data of methylated and unmethylated DNA will be further used to develop
computational structure-activity relationship models in order to elucidate
physicochemical phenomena that govern ligand selectivity. These novel materials
will be employed to enrich plasmid DNA for therapeutic applications and
methylated genomic DNA from bladder cancer cells for diagnostic applications.
The proposed small-molecule ligands are anticipated to be more stable and less
expensive compared to protein-based ligands, which makes this approach
attractive for bioseparations, biomanufacturing, diagnostics, and therapeutics.
In addition to the training of two doctoral graduate students, we will mentor
undergraduate students via the Fulton Undergraduate Research Initiative and high
school students via the SCience and ENgineering Experience on research projects
at Arizona State University. We will coordinate outreach to high schools via the
Rensselaer Chemistry Society and will collaborate with the Education Through
eXploration Center at ASU in order to develop online active learning modules for
broader online dissemination and outreach to high-school students
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.