* 1836908
* EAGER: BRAIDING: Demonstration of Topological Qubits Using Non-Abelian Anyons in the Fractional Quantum Hall Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Woowon Kang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,998.00

Nontechnical Abstract: There is a demand for a fault-tolerant implementation of
quantum information processing that is immune from mistakes that occur during
the course of computation. Such an information processor may be built using
topological materials as a computing platform. The goal of this project is to
demonstrate such a computing platform using states that have been predicted in
certain semiconductor devices that realize a unique form of a quantum phenomenon
called fractional quantum Hall effect, leading to topological qubit. A
successful development of topological qubit can help revolutionize the field of
quantum computation and produce a significant speed up of certain types of
computations such as an efficient database search and simulation of quantum
systems. The research project will help train a new generation of students on
the concepts and techniques of an emerging frontier of quantum science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: Topological quantum computing is a
potentially enabling technology that has emerged from study of condensed matter
physics in recent years. The fractional quantum Hall effect (FQHE), realized in
high quality semiconductor structures at low temperatures and high magnetic
fields, is a promising template for realization of topological qubit. Quantum
information in a topological qubit is stored in non-Abelian anyons which have
been predicted for the FQHE states that occurs at 5/2 filling factor.
Demonstration of topological qubits based on braiding of non-Abelian anyons of
the 5/2 FQHE state is proposed. The goal is to advance the experimental
techniques for detection and measurement of low energy excitations that lies at
the heart of this emerging paradigm. A successful measurement of the statistical
phase angle of anyonic excitations of the FQHE liquids in electronic Fabry-Perot
interferometers fabricated from high mobility GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures will
set the stage for the demonstration of topological qubit. A successful
demonstration of the logical gates will establish the protected topological
qubit in these systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.