* 1836370
* The Large-Scale Solar Magnetic Field During the Transition to Solar Cycle 25
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Philip Scherrer, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 372,423.00

Long-term measurement of the large-scale magnetic field of the Sun is essential
for understanding the solar activity, both at the Sun and throughout the
heliosphere, as well as for gaining insight into the activity cycles of other
stars that may affect habitability of exoplanets. Furthermore, because of
society's increasing reliance on technology that is susceptible to changing
conditions in space, knowledge of the space climate and predictive understanding
of the next Solar Cycle are crucial. The main purpose of this five-year project
is to enable continued accurate measurements of the large-scale magnetic field
of the Sun during the transition from Solar Cycle 24 to Solar Cycle 25 using the
Wilcox Solar Observatory (WSO) instrument. Observing this transition in the
solar activity is particularly important, because solar physicists were unable
to predict many of the unusual characteristics of Solar Cycle 24: its delayed
start, historically weak level of activity, diminished solar wind strength,
increased cosmic-ray intensity, and strong north-south asymmetry. Consequently,
extending WSO's consistent 43-year time-series of measurements into the next
Solar Cycle is critical for understanding the long-term magnetic activity cycle
of the Sun and other Sun-like stars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During this five-year
project, the team at Stanford University will: (i) collect, process, and
evaluate the WSO observations of the Sun's photosphere; (ii) extend the
reliable, consistent, nearly four-solar-cycle-long time-series of useful data
products; and, (iii) make the data even more conveniently available to the broad
scientific community. Furthermore, the WSO will continue to contribute to STEM
education in the U.S., work force development, and public outreach. Observations
at the WSO are collected by a resident observer, who is a graduate student in
solar physics at Stanford University. Numerous summer students contribute to the
data analysis and software development at the Observatory. Improved Solar Cycle
predictions are crucial for advancing the national Space Weather efforts, and
improved understanding of the Solar Cycle is relevant to advancing knowledge on
the activity cycles on other Sun-like stars, which can affect our assessment of
exoplanet habitability. The research and EPO agenda of this project supports the
Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and
interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.