* 1836770
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: The Relationship between Agriculture and Population Distribution
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Wolfgang Alders, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2020
* USD 25,200.00

Wolfgang Alders, of the University of California, Berkeley, will undertake
research to study settlement patterns among Swahili communities prior to and
during the development of the plantation economy in Zanzibar, from AD 1500-1850.
The mid-19th-century plantation system in Zanzibar is described as an imported
social landscape run predominately by Omani landowners, and worked by enslaved
people drawn from many parts of East Africa. However, it is also clear that the
plantation system was built on top of at least a millennium of settlement by
indigenous Swahili coastal people on Zanzibar, which is largely undocumented
outside the coastal rim prior to the 19th century. As such, the project
contributes to the archaeology of the colonial early modern period in an African
context, and breaks new ground by investigating the junctures between
understandings of Zanzibar's 19th-century plantation societies and the long-term
archaeology of Swahili communities. The research will build on work in coastal
East African archaeology to consider the ways that rural Swahili people were
entangled in both local and global social and political processes in the western
Indian Ocean. The research will advance the academic and intellectual
development of a graduate student. It will also contribute to understanding from
a worldwide perspective of how traditional communities are integrated into
broader international networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will survey
landscapes across the western and eastern landscapes of north-central Zanzibar
(Unguja) Island, Tanzania. The western part of Zanzibar is an ideal place for
elucidating the courses of settlement in relation to the development of
plantation economies, since these regions lie within the most fertile
agricultural parts of the island. The eastern regions play an important role for
comparative survey data, since they are rockier, less suitable for agriculture,
and were possibly an area of refuge for people dispossessed from the prime
plantation land. Judgmental surveys starting from above-ground 19th-century
plantation sites will be used to inform probabilistic shovel test-pit surveys
across the larger region. This evidence will be used to chart long-term Swahili
settlement in the rural countryside from AD 1500-1850, and to elucidate how
settlement related to social and ecological histories at different
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.