* 1836768
* Assessment of predictions of hydrologic function based on aquatic DNA fragments
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Byron Crump, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 425,000.00

For the safety and security of the public, it is important to be able to
estimate how much water flows through rivers and streams at locations where no
gauges of flow exist. In these places, the collection of some other type of
information can be remarkably useful in understanding flow patterns. This
project investigates how fragments of biological material can be used in
predicting river and stream flows. The biological material investigated in this
project is the deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) of microbes found within water
samples. This material can be collected and analyzed quickly, easily, and
inexpensively. By using advanced biological techniques, the DNA found in streams
can be translated into the relative abundance of different types of microbes.
This project is based on the understanding that different environmental
conditions, including flow patterns in rivers, cause different populations of
microbes to become more or less abundant. This project supports an
interdisciplinary group of faculty and students to develop new tools that relate
stream and river microbes to hydrologic flow patterns. The project partners with
a local organization focused on connecting under-represented communities with
science professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
collection and sequencing of streamwater DNA at a suite of long-term gauging
stations spanning a range ecohydrologic conditions across the Pacific Northwest.
Using 16s rRNA amplicon sequencing, the relative abundance of different
microbial community members is quantified at each location, and patterns in
community composition is related to river flows with machine learning
techniques. These methods are then extended to regional and national level
datasets of streamwater microbiome composition to determine the macroscale
hydrologic information contained within streamwater DNA at different scales. For
the duration of this project, a team consisting of high-school, undergraduate,
and graduate students is engaged in advanced biological, hydrologic, and machine
learning techniques to investigate connections between streamwater DNA and
watershed function. Both hydrologic and microbial tools and techniques developed
through this project will be disseminated to the wider community in a variety of
forms, including traditional scholarly outlets and as open-source interactive
electronic text for general education about hydrology. This project includes
training in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) for
students from high school to the PhD level. The project partners with a local
organization focused on connecting under-represented communities with STEM
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.