* 1836351
* EAGER: G4-TIRFM, a platform for massively parallel analysis of non-canonical DNA structures
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Maria Spies, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2022
* USD 355,390.00

Not all DNA has the familiar double-helix shape. Some regions of DNA rich in one
of the four building blocks, guanine, form a different, four stranded kind of
structure, called G-quadruplex (G4). Th the human genome, there are more than
700,000 G4-forming regions, and about 10,000 of them were shown to form G4s in
cells. Some G4s interfere with DNA replication, DNA repair and RNA
transcription. This project will combine the state of the art DNA sequencing
technology with fluorescent microscopy to attach all G4 regions in human genome
to the solid sorface and study their interactions with other molecules. The
project will provide research experience for the undergraduates and high school
students recruited through several outreach mechanisms at the University of
Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;G-quadruplexes play important roles in
regulating DNA replication, DNA repair and RNA transcription. This project will
provide a technology platform for the parallel analysis and comparison of
thousands of potential structures that can form within the G-rich sequences.
Human G4 chromatin will be immunoprecipitated using specific antibodies and
sequenced using an Illumina MiSeq next generation sequencing flow cells. Instead
of disposing the flow cell after sequencing, it will be employed in a non-
conventional way: ssDNA that has been clonally amplifed in the sequencing
process will be allowed to refold into G4 structures, and modified TIRF
microscope will be used to visualize and quantify clusters of folded G4 DNA.
Visualization of G4 will be repeated after treatments with DNA polymerases,
polymerase/helicase combinations and other G4 binders. To increase the diversity
in and excitement about STEM research, the team will continue their involvement
with the institutional outreach programs to provide research opportunities to
undergraduate and high school students, as well as faculty and students from
Iowa undergraduate institutions that do not offer doctoral
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.