* 1836967
* CAREER: Investigation of Nanoscale Radiative Heat Transfer for Enhanced Thermal Infrared Energy Conversion and Cooling
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Yi Zheng, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 09/30/2019
* USD 503,293.00

The fascinating nature of nanoengineered materials has opened the door to novel
approaches for conducting research in the field of nanoscale energy conversion
and cooling technology. This project creates new fundamental knowledge about
nanoscale radiative heat transfer, needed to solve pressing problems in energy
harnessing, conversion and cooling. The ability to manipulate, suppress and tune
the radiative properties of nanoscale objects becomes essential in diverse areas
like solar and thermophotovoltaic energy conversion, waste heat recovery, and
potential energy savings by radiative cooling. The characterization of low-cost,
highly effective thermal nanomaterials is necessary for basic scientific thermal
research and industrial production. Given the potential of these technologies,
there is a need to attract talent and generate interest in young minds. The
project establishes, supports, and nurtures an environment that encourages
nanoengineering entrepreneurship and leadership and exposes high school students
to small scale heat transfer technologies to get hands-on experience about
nanomaterials and solve real-world societal and global energy challenges. Hands-
on NanoEngineering workshops are to be conducted in partnership with local high
schools to increase the quantity and quality of students, especially minorities
and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to conduct a comprehensive
study relevant to nanoscale radiative thermal transport due to photonic
metamaterials in both far-field and near-field regimes. The objective of this
project is to better understand the physics of radiative thermal transport at
the nanometer scale, focusing mainly on thermal, optical and unique combinations
of these properties of nanostructured materials. It includes three research
tasks: (1) explore novel nanomaterials using computational methods and advanced
spectroscopy techniques, (2) manipulate thermal radiative wavelength selectivity
in near-field and far-field regimes, and (3) demonstrate photonic metamaterials-
based thermophotovoltaic energy conversion and radiative cooling. The knowledge
gap will be closed between nanoscale thermal transport and radiative wavelength
selectivity which attributes to the enhanced thermal infrared energy harvesting,
conversion, and photon-based cooling, both necessitate exploring
interdisciplinary engineering discoveries and approaches when these technologies
in the areas of thermal transport processes and nanoengineering are combined to
function as an integrative energy system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.