* 1836680
* 2019 Gordon Research Seminar and Gordon Research Conference on Plant Lipids: Structure, Metabolism &amp; Function, Galveston, Texas, Jan 29 - Feb 3,2019
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Susanne Hoffmann-Benning, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 14,700.00

The priority goals of the United Nations include "End hunger, achieve food
security, improve nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture". Lipids are
oil and fat-soluble molecules that play an important role in plant and animal
development and serve as signals for changing environmental conditions. In
addition, many lipids are important nutritional or medicinal compounds or
industrial precursors. As a result, understanding synthesis, structure and
function of plant lipids will serve not only the scientific understanding of
plant developmental processes but will also translate into tangible improvements
of food sustainability and quality:&lt;br/&gt;- Understanding how lipids affect
plant growth and seed and fruit development will lead to higher yields and more
food.&lt;br/&gt;- Understanding how lipids affect plant survival in changing
environments (cold, freezing, drought, nutrient-deficient soil, insect feeding
etc.) will reduce crop losses.&lt;br/&gt;- Understanding lipid biosynthesis will
lead to our ability to improve the nutritional value of food (high vitamin A or
E; rich in omega-fatty acids).&lt;br/&gt;- Transferring that knowledge into
other species to produce medicinal lipids will improve human health.&lt;br/&gt;-
Transferring that knowledge into the synthesis of industrial lipids in bacteria
or algae will lead to low-cost, low-impact production of important
compounds.&lt;br/&gt;As these processes are complex and encompass not only basic
understanding of plant lipids and their detection but also the translation into
agricultural systems, it is essential for plant lipid research to all meet,
exchange information, and coordinate efforts. Mentoring sessions at the
conference and the preceding Gordon Research Seminar will facilitate the
inclusion and interaction of junior scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2019
Gordon Research Conference on "Plant Lipids: Structure, Metabolism, and
Function" (1/29 - 2/3/2019 at the Hotel Galvez in Galveston, TX) will provide an
international platform to discuss and integrate new approaches to understand
plant lipids, including the complex metabolism of storage lipids and their links
to biological membranes. Detailed topics include new techniques for lipid
visualization and detection, such as newly developed optogenetics tools; novel
molecular and gene editing approaches to optimize plant lipid metabolism;
computational analysis/modeling to predict phenotypic changes and lipid-protein
interactions; and the study of lipid-interaction with other molecules. Together,
the presented findings and approaches allow us to develop new strategies to
understand and utilize the role of lipids in plant growth, environmental
signaling, cellular structure, and the production of valuable lipids for food,
health, industry, and fuel. The meeting theme "New Insights and Technologies -
Bringing Lipid Research into the Future" will combine knowledge, creativity, and
cutting-edge thinking of established and next-generation lipid researchers from
academia, scientific institutes, and industry. Significant meeting time will be
devoted to exposure to the state of the art technologies for and by early career
scientists will be included. The meeting will culminate in a final brainstorming
session that will feature three respected scientists in the field who present
and discuss big ideas to bring lipid research into the future and to the
forefront of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.