* 1836666
* RCN: DIMACS/Simons Collaboration on Lower Bounds in Complexity Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Shafrira Goldwasser, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 499,490.00

One of the main goals of theoretical computer science is to understand the
computational resources needed to solve a given computational problem. Along
with the development of new algorithms and new algorithmic techniques, this
involves discovering lower bounds on computational resource requirements. The
DIMACS/Simons Collaboration on Lower Bounds in Complexity Theory, funded by this
award, will speed up progress on some of the most vexing problems in theoretical
computer science by enabling sustained collaboration and intense focus over a
period of several years and will strengthen the research community whose work is
dedicated to proving lower bounds on computational complexity. The research
questions addressed by the project are of profound theoretical interest in and
of themselves, and are also motivated by extremely pressing practical problems:
for example, the cryptographic protocols that currently underlie the internet-
based economy all rely on the unproven computational intractability of problems
in the complexity class NP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
focus attention on lower bounds because there have been some remarkable recent
breakthroughs in proving lower bounds in Boolean circuit complexity, arithmetic
circuit complexity, and communication complexity, and on the complexity of data
structure access mechanisms. The project begins with an intensive program at the
Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing at Berkeley in the fall semester of
2018 and continues with a 2.5-year special focus led by DIMACS at Rutgers that
will expand the project to include more people and more topics. By providing
opportunities to sustain collaborations and share ideas over a span of years,
the RCN contributes to research that strives for a more complete and unified
theory of the techniques for proving lower bounds, more powerful abstractions,
and ultimately, new breakthroughs in computational lower bounds. This Research
Collaboration Network enables expansion of the Fall 2018 Simons program,
including additional long-term participants and new activities for graduate
students and early-career fellows. The DIMACS special focus includes three
workshops (Meta-Complexity, Barriers, and Derandomization; Arithmetic and
Boolean Circuit Complexity; and Information-Theoretic Methods in Complexity
Theory), a day of tutorials in conjunction with the 2019 Conference on
Computational Complexity, a focused working group on Data Structure Lower
Bounds, support for the twice-yearly New York Area Theory Day, a robust visitor
program, and summer research for undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.