* 1836426
* NNA: Remote Sensing of Arctic Sea Ice Using the Super Dual Auroral Radar Network
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Simon Shepherd, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 03/31/2023
* USD 307,265.00

Changes in Arctic sea ice have wide-ranging societal and ecological impacts. The
opening of northern shipping routes, reliability of ice roads for access to
coastal communities, and extraction of undersea resources have economic
implications for countries around the world. Indigenous peoples depend on local
marine mammal populations as a source of cultural and nutritional value, however
Arctic marine mammals are particularly vulnerable to reductions in sea ice cover
as have been occurring for more than 30 years. The presence and extent of Arctic
sea ice can also influence the transfer of heat between the ocean and
atmosphere, affecting both local and remote seasonal weather patterns. Sustained
observations of Arctic sea ice are therefore crucial for understanding current
trends and predicting future changes in the global climate system. This project
will contribute to the National Science Foundation's Arctic Observing Network by
developing new techniques for the extraction of sea ice characteristics from a
long-running data set collected by an existing network of space weather
monitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN)
is an international network of ground-based space weather radars which have
operated continuously in the Arctic and Antarctic regions for more than 30
years. These high-frequency (HF) radars use over-the-horizon (OTH) radio wave
propagation to detect ionospheric plasma structures across ranges of several
thousand kilometers. As a byproduct of this technique, the transmitted radar
signals frequently reflect from the Earth?s surface and can be observed as
ground backscatter echoes. This project will analyze historical and ongoing
SuperDARN ground backscatter data for extraction of Arctic sea ice parameters,
and comparisons will be made to sea ice measurements obtained from space-based
microwave remote sensors. An operational sea ice data product derived from the
SuperDARN HF radar observations will be delivered to the National Science
Foundation's Arctic Data Center for long-term preservation and accessibility by
the broader Arctic research community. Improvements in the detection and
geolocation of SuperDARN ground backscatter echoes will not only benefit future
studies of land/sea surface features in radar observations but also increase the
quality of global space weather maps of ionospheric plasma convection. This
proposal aligns with one of the National Science Foundation?s 10 Big Ideas for
Navigating the New Arctic by leveraging a large data set from an existing
observational technology and network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
cofunded by the Arctic Sciences section, Office of Polar Programs, the Office of
International Science &amp; Engineering and the Geospace section, Division of
Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.