* 1836017
* EAGER:  Rapid domestication of new grass crops
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Sarah Hake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Most of the major cereal crops in the world were domesticated nearly ten
thousand years ago and very few have been developed since then. To cope with a
burgeoning population and increasingly frequent and extreme climate events, new,
resilient, high-yielding grains are needed. While it is possible to identify
new, adaptive traits and breed them into pre-existing crops, this often takes
over a decade and is highly dependent on the availability of improvement
techniques. As an alternative to preparing our current staple crops for future
environmental resilience, it may be more beneficial to domesticate, improve, and
develop breeding techniques for underutilized grains that are already resistant
to drastic environmental change, such as teff (Eragrostis tef) and other members
of the Eragrostis family. Teff is the only known crop plant that is able to
withstand high temperatures, arid conditions, and both drought and flooding.
Despite the fact that millions of Eastern Africans consume teff every day, the
plant has not undergone extensive breeding; even modest genetic improvements
will increase yield dramatically. To improve and/or domesticate members of the
Eragrostis family rapidly, new techniques will be employed to introduce changes
into teff versions of genes that have been shown to be important in the
domestication of other cereals. This approach would thus mimic the beneficial
agronomic traits that arose naturally and were selected for in other cereal
crops by ancient farmers thousands of years ago. The information gained from
this study will then be applied to domesticate weeping lovegrass (Eragrostis
curvula), an edible, perennial teff relative that has the remarkable ability to
produce seeds in the absence of fertilization. Teff is the only known, C4 crop
able to withstand high temperatures and both drought and flooding. However, teff
has several negative agronomic traits, including highly indeterminate spikelets,
small seeds, extensive tillering, and thin stems susceptible to lodging, traits
that need to be modified before teff can be adopted globally as a serious
alternative crop. These issues will be addressed using CAS9 nickase/deaminase
fusions to introduce SNPs into the negative regulatory elements of several known
domestication/yield genes. This project will jump-start the domestication
process by creating dominant, advantageous phenotypes mimicking the agronomic
traits selected for by ancient farmers. As a test of this approach to speeding
the domestication process, successful guide RNAs identified in teff will then be
used to attempt to domesticate Eragrostis curvula (weeping lovegrass), a
resilient perennial plant that undergoes apomixis and has been used as a famine
food in Africa.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.