* 1836552
* QLC: EAGER: Harnessing molecular conformational dynamics for electromechanical qubits
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Geoffrey Hutchison, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 156,194.00

The basic unit of information in a conventional computer is the bit. It can
exist in one of two states, which are often called 'on' and 'off' states, or
ones and zeros. Quantum computers are different. The basic unit of information
in a quantum computer is the qubit. However, unlike the bit in conventional
computers, qubits can exist in many different states, which gives rise to the
possibility of building powerful computers that can revolutionize science and
technology. However, creating qubits is challenging and oftentimes they persist
only at very low temperatures. Thus, realizing the transformative potential of
quantum computing requires qubits that are simultaneously stable at room
temperature and can be precisely manipulated and measured. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professors Daniel Lambrecht and Geoffrey Hutchison at the University
of Pittsburgh are studying a new type of molecular qubit that could operate at
much warmer temperatures and with much longer lifetimes when compared to current
systems. The project's discoveries could facilitate a 'quantum leap' toward room
temperature quantum computing that could have broad implications for materials
design, drug discovery, machine learning, secure communications, and more. This
work creates research and training opportunities for students at multiple
levels, including high school, undergraduate, and graduate. Importantly, this
work trains students at the interdisciplinary intersection of chemistry and
quantum information science, as is crucially needed for a STEM workforce that
can fully utilize the power of quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project employs theory and computation in tandem with experimental validation to
study the electric-field gated inversion of bowl-shaped molecules such as
"buckybowl" corannulenes and sumanenes as realizations of molecular
electromechanical qubits. These "nanobowl qubits" have the potential to overcome
limitations of current generation electromechanical qubits, specifically the
requirement for ultra-low (mK) cryogenic operation and decoherence due to
internal defects or qubit-bath interactions. Specifically, they: (i) offer
greater than 100x increased temperatures for the quantum-to-classical
transition, as compared e.g. to current generation suspended carbon nanotubes,
(ii) reduce qubit-environment dipolar interactions and thereby enhance coherence
lifetimes by more than 10x compared to current types of electromechanical
qubits, and (iii) can be operated at electric field strengths realistically
achievable in nanoelectronics. These characteristics address the main drawbacks
of current electromechanical qubits. Research questions include: 1) Does the
high zero-point energy of the nanobowl inversion mode facilitate significantly
higher temperature operation? 2) How strong is the predicted entanglement
between nanobowl qubits and what is their decoherence lifetime? Addressing these
questions is giving rise to a proof of principle exploration of nanobowls as
electromechanical qubits that are potentially orders of magnitude better than
the current generation. A theory/experiment feedback loop is used to validate
computational predictions and refine computational approaches, if
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.