* 1836404
* Selective Nucleation, Polyproteins, and HIV-1
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Joseph Rudnick, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education to advance understanding of the physics of proteins that
are key for the assembly of virus-like particles. The search for new antiviral
drugs that are effective against the human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV), which
causes AIDS, focuses on ways of obstructing viral proteins that have no
counterparts in normal cells. This strategy will likely minimize negative side
effects. The key structural protein of HIV, known as "Gag", is an HIV protein
with no counterpart in normal cells and is one of the targets for this search.
Despite many years of intense research, key aspects of the way Gag functions are
not understood. Gag is not only a structural protein, it also coordinates the
assembly process of the HIV virus, starting with a search for HIV genetic
material inside infected host cells. The large life-science literature on this
topic shows that the biophysical principles of HIV assembly initiation are
fundamentally different from those of "standard" viruses. Experimental studies
also leave no doubt that physical interactions among Gag proteins play a key
role during the selection of the HIV genetic material, yet experimental studies
of Gag-Gag interactions at the level of individual proteins are very seriously
hampered by the problem of protein-protein aggregation. Gag itself is more
complex than proteins of analogous function in many other viruses, suggesting
that the study of Gag may lead to new physical principles and insights into
viral assembly. The team will carry out computer simulations of the interaction
of the Gag protein with HIV genetic materials on the largest super-computers
currently available. By developing a large-scale numerical simulation model of
the interaction of just two or three Gag proteins with each other and with HIV
genetic material, the aggregation problem is circumvented. The detailed
statistical physics analysis of the dynamics and interactions of the Gag
proteins, as obtained from numerical simulations, provides science with a direct
route to explore the HIV genetic selection mechanism.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research program will be a training ground for young physical scientists
interested in working in biological physics that has important applications for
public health. A sound understanding of the fundamental limitations imposed by
physics on viruses in general will help young scientists with careers in the
pharmaceutical industry. A collaborative program with a community college and
Cal State University, both of which serve under-represented minority students in
the LA area, will provide students with the opportunity to obtain research
experience that would further their career.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational research and
education to advance understanding of the physics of proteins that are key to
the assembly of virus like particles. The team aims to carry out combined
molecular dynamics (MD) and statistical mechanics studies of the very large
poly-protein Gag, the main capsid protein of HIV-1. Gag is the main component of
the capsid that surrounds the RNA genome molecule after formation of the virus.
Originally the poly-protein was thought to play only a structural role with the
different parts of Gag acting independently. More recent imaging experiments
have revealed that Gag functions as an integrated unit with complex functional
abilities. Its ability to select a small number of viral RNA from a large number
of RNA molecules inside an infected cell, appears to rely on cooperative
interactions between the domain components of Gag. Despite the large literature
on the Gag protein, a physics-based model that can address the many puzzles
surrounding Gag is lacking. For example, Gag can select viral RNA efficiently
without a measurable free energy difference between a virus that packs viral RNA
versus a virus that packs non-viral RNA. The PI aims to address this and other
challenges, and investigate a statistical mechanical framework in the form of
the selective nucleation hypothesis. In the selective nucleation hypothesis,
long-range cooperative interactions that involve binding of RNA to Gag modulates
the activation free energy barrier for the nucleation and growth of Gag
clusters. The team plans to use MD simulations of Gag and Gag-Gag interactions
to inform statistical physics models of nucleation and growth. The team will
test hypotheses about the physics of Gag against the outcomes of MD simulations
and against experiments to be carried out at The Ohio State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The selective nucleation hypothesis depends on
the sensitivity of the formation rate of the critical nucleus of a first-order
transition to small changes in the activation free energy barrier in order to
carry out a selection process. The statistical physics of this hypothesis is
akin to that of kinetic proofreading as encountered in protein transcription and
synthesis. If this hypothesis can be confirmed, then kinetic proofreading would
be a unifying principle relating viral assembly to protein transcription and
synthesis. Confirmation of a second hypothesis, namely that entropic allosteric
signal transmission could be the principle that allows long-distance
communication between the sub-components of Gag, would lead to its extension to
other poly-proteins as well as to the operation of other small clusters of
weakly coupled proteins, such as transcription initiation complexes. Showing
that the combination of large-scale MD simulations with the principles of
statistical physics can provide important insights into how a macromolecular
complex as large as Gag functions could help stimulate the extension of
biological physics to structurally complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program will be a training ground for young physical scientists
interested in working in biological physics that has important applications for
public health. A sound understanding of the fundamental limitations imposed by
physics on viruses in general will help young scientists with careers in the
pharmaceutical industry. A collaborative program with a community college and
Cal State University, both of which serve under-represented minority students in
the LA area, will provide students with the opportunity to obtain research
experience that would further their career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.