* 1836387
* EAGER:  How genetic variation in riparian trees influences stream succession and ecosystem function
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Carri LeRoy, Evergreen State College
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2023
* USD 224,891.00

Rivers are generally very old waterways that have been carving through canyons
and valleys for thousands of years. Because new streams and rivers are rare,
little is known about how they form. One place we can learn about this process
is within volcanic landscapes. After catastrophic volcanic eruptions, water from
springs and snowmelt carve fresh stream channels. The trees that line the newly
formed rivers and streams then provide shade, shelter, and crucial inputs of
leaves and nutrients into these aquatic systems. These trees also help shape the
rivers themselves by stabilizing banks, creating meanders, and slowing erosion.
This project examines willows that have colonized along streams that formed
after the eruption of Mount St. Helens. Researchers will study the influence of
genetic variation in these trees on the development, ecosystem structure, and
successional processes of the associated stream communities. Understanding the
impact that the genetics of trees plays in the development of river systems has
the potential to transform our understanding of how aquatic ecosystems are
structured. This research is also important for the management and conservation
of rivers because it explores the critical roles trees play in the formation of
river systems following disturbances. This project will also provide outreach
that engages the public and middle school students and promotes the
participation of girls in STEM. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study explores the
novel role the genetics of colonizing trees may play in structuring stream
networks; extending genes-to-ecosystems research into evolutionary
geomorphology. Using established common gardens and four headwater streams at
Mount St. Helens, this study will examine how male and female willow trees
differ in terms of litter quality, herbivory-induced leaf chemical changes, and
their subsequent influence on in-stream litter-dependent microbes,
macroinvertebrates, and leaf litter decomposition. Plants that have been tagged
as male or female and clones will be genotyped to determine genetic relatedness,
using established primers for determining willow genotypes. CHN composition and
condensed tannins will be measured for each willow genotype sampled from the
common gardens and litterbags will be incubated in the streams to quantify the
impact of genetic and chemical differences on riverine biotic
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.