* 1836767
* Use of Diamond-Like Carbon Coatings to Reduce Leachables From Biomedical Metal Alloys and Polymeric Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Roger Narayan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

The Food &amp; Drug Administration (FDA) requires that manufacturers assure the
safety of medical devices or products that contact body tissues/fluids.
Therefore, it is vital to minimize the release of chemical species, commonly
known as leachables and extractables, from medical devices. The presence of
these species may be due not only to the chemical composition of the materials,
but also from manufacturing processes. Leachables and extractables from medical
device biomaterials may have a significant impact on biocompatibility and may
pose significant risks to patient health. This project will minimize the release
of leachables from several classes of common biomaterials, including (a)
polyvinylchloride (used in intravenous tubing and blood storage bags), (b)
additively manufactured polyetheretherketone (used in bone implants), and (c)
nickel-titanium shape memory alloy (used in cardiovascular stents for vessel
patency), by depositing hydrogenated diamond-like carbon (DLC) coatings on the
surfaces of these materials. DLC is a material made up entirely of carbon atoms,
it can serve as a cell-friendly permeation barrier that prevents the release of
leachables. This inexpensive technology has been utilized to prevent oxygen
permeation in the bottled beverage industry. A DLC coating that would be
chemically-amenable on polymers or metal alloys used in medical devices would
reduce leachable-associated health risks across many classes of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has three aims. Aim 1:
Deposition of DLC coatings on model biomaterials using plasma enhanced physical
vapor deposition and physico-chemical characterization of the coatings. Scanning
electron microscopy will be used to confirm the absence of pinholes in the
coating, to confirm the coating thickness, and to evaluate the surface
morphology. Aim 2: Chemical characterization and toxicological risk assessment
of extractables and leachables from uncoated and DLC-coated biomaterials under
physiologic and worst-case conditions. The milestone for this deliverable will
be a comparison of the release of extractables and leachables from the DLC
coated materials compared to uncoated materials. A toxicologic hazard
identification assessment will be conducted to determine if any of the materials
pose a toxicological risk. Aim 3: Biocompatibility testing of
extractables/leachables from coated and uncoated/DLC-coated biomaterials using
in vitro assays. The extractables and leachables from both uncoated and DLC-
coated biomaterials will be used to treat mammalian cells in vitro for
assessment of cell viability, reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, and pro-
inflammatory cell markers. The goal is to confirm if DLC coatings reduce
extractables/leachables from biomaterials that are commonly used in medical
devices. If the proposed project is successful, the medical device industry will
have a material (DLC) for application to a wide variety of metals and
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.