* 1836104
* IEEE Nano Materials &amp; Devices Conference - NMDC-2018 To Be Held In Portland OR, October 14-17, 2018.
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2018,01/31/2019
* James Morris, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed project will provide support to young student and scientist
participation, in a conference to be held in the Embassy Suites Downtown,
Portland OR, USA, during October 14-17, 2018. The "13th IEEE Nano Materials
&amp; Devices Conference (NMDC 2018)" will focus on the development of
nanomaterials and nanodevices for space, electronic, magnetic, sensor, photonic
systems and biomedical applications. The Symposium will host world-renowned
scientists in academia and national labs, industry workers, entrepreneurs, and
funding agency leaders in the general area of nanotechnology. Student
Fellowships will support domestic student presenters to attend the meeting. The
program provides the opportunity for scientific exchanges and discussions. There
will be a vigorous exchange of new ideas on materials and devices that will
benefit enormously students and young scholars in their pursuit of high-quality
research. There will be conference proceedings available to the public through
the archival IEEE Xplore. Selected papers will also be invited for publication
in the IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology, the IEEE Nanotechnology Magazine and
possibly other journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.