* 1836913
* EAGER: Analog Quantum Simulation of Dissipative Quantum Dynamics in  Condensed-Phase Chemical Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Jianshu Cao, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 07/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Jianshu Cao from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported by a QLC
EAGER award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program
to investigate the quantum mechanical details of chemical reactions in liquids
or solids using a technique called "analogue quantum simulation." Understanding
reactions in condensed phases is a grand challenge of theoretical and
computational chemistry. However, as the number of atoms in the system increases
the exact description quickly becomes too large for even the fastest digital
computers. To circumvent this problem Feynman proposed an alternative approach
using a highly controllable quantum device to simulate another quantum
mechanical system. Analogue quantum simulation has caught on in the rapid
development of quantum technologies and it is now possible to use these devices
to study chemical systems of moderate size., Jianshu Cao is developing
approaches to use analogue quantum simulations to study reactions where the
interaction with their surroundings affects how the systems change with time.
Reactions of this type arise in natural and artificial photosynthetic systems
and are critically important for efforts to develop improved solar-energy
devices. At the same time, Jianshu Cao devotes significant efforts to training
students and postdoctoral associates in his group, applying the analogue quantum
simulation platform to design artificial molecular devices, and encouraging the
community to adopt novel quantum technologies to address challenging problems of
current interest in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ever-
advancing quantum computing technology has inspired this research project and
provides a new direction for both conceptual and methodological developments.
Specifically, the research plan that Jianshu Cao and his group will follow
composed of two components: (I) To perform analogue simulations of chemical
dynamics, technical developments are required to accommodate dynamical features
unique to chemical systems, including anharmonic potential surfaces, non-
adiabatic couplings, and equilibrium/non-equilibrium quantum baths. Jianshu Cao
is pursuing new configurations of analogue devices by tuning the analogue
simulator to the relevant operating regime that corresponds to chemical systems
of interest. (II) With the analogue quantum platform, Jianshu Cao and his group
are studying three outstanding unsolved problems in physical chemistry: intra-
molecular vibrational redistribution in solutions; nano-scale heat transfer in
non-linear systems; and dissipative vibronic dynamics in photoisomerization.
Building on the prior work, they are formulating theoretical solutions to
develop an intuitive understanding of the underlying physics, to guide the
design of analogue computing devices, and to predict the possible outcome of the
analogue simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.