* 1836657
* Conference Proposal: Developing a National Research Agenda for Academic Support in STEM Higher Education
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Marina Micari, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Nixon
* 10/31/2019
* USD 52,116.00

Access to scientific inquiry and STEM careers is an important goal for our
nation. This project will help to improve undergraduate STEM education by
strengthening the infrastructure for scholarly research into the provision of
academic support (e.g., tutoring; academic coaching) for STEM undergraduates.
Academic support is commonplace in U.S. colleges and universities, and it forms
a critical component of the STEM learning environment for millions of students
each year. Yet, despite the high level of interest in investigating student
learning in STEM in higher education, there has been remarkably little research
about academic-support services. A robust, research-based understanding of
academic support will support improvements in academic support services and
better alignment between evidence-based classroom practices and out-of-classroom
STEM educational experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will organize
and offer a conference designed to establish a national research agenda for STEM
academic support at the college level. The conference will bring together
academic support professionals, higher education scholars, higher education
administrators, STEM faculty, STEM education researchers, and students to
develop a research agenda for academic support that involves scholars and
practitioners, addresses real and pressing questions, and sets a path toward
better-informed and more systematic decision-making around academic-support
programming in U.S. colleges and universities. The day-and-a-half-long program
will: (a) seek to identify pressing research questions about STEM academic
support; (b) develop new knowledge to support this research; (c) encourage
collaboration among practitioners and scholars; and (d) enable participants to
create concrete plans for future work, and to continue developing their research
and research-collaboration skills, in part via a virtual collaboration platform.
A culminating white paper will help drive a national conversation about research
in STEM academic support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.