* 1836497
* QLC: EAGER: Collaborative Research: New Design for Quantum Chemistry Calculations on Emerging Quantum Computers
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* James Freericks, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 171,038.00

James Freericks of Georgetown University and Dominika Zgid of Northwestern
University are supported by an Eager award from the Chemical Theory, Models and
Computational program in the Division of Chemistry to develop approaches to
solve quantum chemistry problems on quantum computers. Computers are often
employed to make predictions of different scientific phenomena. In quantum
chemistry, they are employed to determine the total energy of a molecule, how
the molecule vibrates and rotates, how it interacts with light, and how it
changes in a chemical reaction. Some quantum chemistry problems are too
difficult to be solved with even the most powerful supercomputer. Fortunately, a
new age in computing is dawning. Completely new types of computers, called
quantum computers, are now being made as early prototype machines. These quantum
computers are programmed within a paradigm that uses quantum mechanics for their
operation. Hence, they are well suited to tackle solving difficult quantum
chemistry problems. Freericks, Zgid and their coworkers design strategies for
how to solve a range of different quantum chemistry problems on these quantum
computers. The project is designing algorithms from scratch which will be tested
on quantum computers when appropriate machines become available. The broader
impact of this work includes introducing undergraduates, high school students,
and citizen scientists to the field of quantum chemistry on quantum computers.
The also supports some development of chemistry topics in a quantum book
entitled Quantum Mechanics without Calculus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on using a hybrid quantum-classical approach to solving quantum
chemistry problems. The quantum computer is employed to determining the effect
of strong quantum interactions, while the conventional computer is used to
calculate how best to initialize the quantum computer and how to incorporate the
results from the quantum computer into determining the final answers. The work
employs Green's function methods to vastly improve the accuracy and efficiency
of the calculations as the quality of the quantum hardware improves to allow
moderate circuit depth. The end-product of this work will be an accurate
demonstration of the viability of quantum computers to describe complex quantum
chemical phenomena. The initial focus is on small chemical systems like the CrH
dimer, which can be simulated on a 16-qubit machine, and then will expand to
more complicated systems, such as (NiO)2 and (NiO)4, as hardware and algorithmic
developments allow. Partnerships with industry will run the lower circuit depth
algorithms on superconducting-based quantum computers, such as those available
at IBM, and on ion-trap-based quantum computers, such as those being developed
at IonQ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.