* 1836304
* Development of Multi-Channel Ultrasound Recording System for a High-Pressure, High-Temperature Rock Deformation Apparatus
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Matej Pec, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 04/30/2021
* USD 171,835.00

Movement of rocks in Earth's interior results in the build-up of stress.
Depending on a variety of factors such as temperature, pressure and stressing
rate a rock can either fail abruptly in an earthquake or deform slowly by creep.
Experimental rock deformation studies provide fundamental insights into the
processes that accommodate plate tectonic movement at different depths in the
Earth and quantify the strength and stability of tectonic plates. Development of
new capabilities open new horizons for experimental geophysics and provide tools
for studying many poorly understood phenomena such as intermediate and deep-
focus earthquakes as well as non-impulsive slow-slip events, low frequency
earthquakes and non-volcanic tremor in the laboratory at relevant pressure and
temperature conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this proposal is to
develop and integrate a multi-channel ultrasound recording system into an
existing state-of-the-art solid medium rock deformation apparatus. The apparatus
is capable of deforming large volume samples (~380 cubic mm) at pressures of up
to 2.5 GPa and temperatures of up to ~1400 degrees C and is specifically
designed to allow for the integration of an ultrasound recording system. It is
planned to use several miniature needle piezoelectric sensors in the frequency
range of 1 - 10 MHz to monitor the sample. Triggered acoustic emission data will
be recorded at sampling speeds of up to 50 Ms/s per channel and continuous data
will be recorded at sampling speeds of up to 10 Ms/s. A high-energy pulser will
be synchronized with the recording system and will generate known pulses that
will travel through the deforming sample and will be used to characterize the
microstructural evolution in-situ. The investigator will be able to locate
acoustic emissions within the sample volume and measure the evolution of p-wave
velocities. These data will give us fundamental new insights into a number of
natural phenomena ranging from seismicity, influence of stress and strain on
metamorphic reactions, to the influence of stress on melt alignment and acoustic
wave propagation to name just a few possible applications. The PecLab, where the
apparatus will be installed, is part of a Collaborative Organization for Rock
Deformation (CORD) which was formed between MIT and Brown University. The goal
of CORD is to encourage and facilitate participation in experimental rock
deformation studies by a broader spectrum of scientists within the Earth science
community. The newly developed experimental capabilities will serve the
geoscience community by enabling new, previously impossible studies to any
interested visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.