* 1836725
* ICE-T: RC: Performance Evaluation of Advanced Wireless Network Edge Infrastructure - Network Simulation &amp; Test Beds
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Sumit Roy, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 346,364.00

The open source network simulation (ns-3) tool is used widely by researchers to
evaluate the performance of computer networks. Over the past decade, user demand
for new ns-3 capabilities has centered on simulating rapidly emerging wireless
networking technologies including Wireless Fidelity (WiFi) and Long Term
Evolution (LTE) cellular systems. New capabilities are essential for exploration
of emerging 5th Generation (5G) cellular network
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to 1) extend the core
wireless capabilities of ns-3, positioning the simulator as the research tool of
choice for 5G wireless network simulations; 2) improve usability and create new
educational/training materials; and 3) better align ns-3 with experiments on
wireless network test-beds. The latter project goal is expected to contribute to
recently announced National Science Foundation-funded Platforms for Advanced
Wireless Research (PAWR) city-scale advanced wireless infrastructure testbeds.
New wireless technology coexistence scenarios for heterogeneous networks as well
as the ongoing challenge of scaling due to network densification are main
research thrusts for this effort. In addition, a key project goal is improving
usability and development of new ns-3 educational material to ease adoption of
these new modules (and ns-3 broadly) by the next generation of users. The
project extends an existing collaboration between investigators at the
University of Washington and the Centre Technologic Telecomunicacions Catalunya
(CTTC Barcelona).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.