* 1836729
* DIMENSIONS: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: The phylogenetic and functional diversity of extracellular electron transfer across all three domains of life
* BIO,DEB
* 03/31/2017,12/31/2019
* Steven Finkel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2019
* USD 166,423.00

All cells require energy. This fact is somewhat taken for granted in
biodiversity studies of plants and animals, but is at the forefront of
discovering novel microbial biodiversity. As an electrical charge flows through
energy transfer molecules in a cell, it is coupled to the production of ATP
molecules (akin to charging the battery that powers the cell) or the production
of other compounds that are critical for life function. Until recently, it was
thought that all cells require electron energy transfer molecules that are
soluble in water, so that they can be brought into the cell. However, scientists
discovered that some bacteria are able to use solid metals such as rust (iron
oxides) located outside the cell as an energy source. They do so by shuttling
electrons from the inside of the cell to the outside of the cell, via energy
transfer molecules that deliver electrical charge to metal deposits in the
environment. In other words, part of these microbes' energy production pathways
have evolved to be outside of the cell. This process, termed extracellular
electron transfer (EET), transformed how we think about cellular life and in
particular how microbes may impact the global elemental cycles that sustain life
on Earth. This research team will conduct the first wide-ranging assessment of
the diversity of EET across all three domains of life (Bacteria, Archaea and
Eukarya). The project will also broaden public understanding about microbial
life through developing interactive museum exhibits that present microbial EET
to the public. Project investigators will work with the Encyclopedia of Life to
broaden the representation of microbes in their databases and in school
curricula. The project is also uniquely poised to strengthen industry and
academic pipelines through educational curriculum that engages middle school
students in interdisciplinary EET research, and a pedagogical training and lab
exchange program that affords students and postdoctoral scholars an opportunity
to conduct interdisciplinary research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent with the
objectives of the DIMENSIONS program, this proposal aims to establish the degree
to which ribotypes and genotypes relate to function and activity. This is also a
grand challenge in environmental microbiology, and our ability to use
bioelectrochemical systems to selectively target electroactive communities
affords a unique opportunity to selectively isolate and characterize microbes
capable of extracellular electron transfer (EET). To these ends, the overarching
goal of this proposal is to comprehensively assess and relate the phylogenetic
diversity, genetic/genomic diversity, and functional diversity of microorganisms
engaged in EET across all three domains of life. The work plan includes: 1)
conducting the first broad, systematic assessment of the phylogenetic diversity
of EET-enabled microbes in natural habitats; 2) using the results of these data
to identify 20 "representative" communities for co-registered metagenomic,
metatranscriptomic, and biogeochemical characterization to target differentially
expressed transcripts associated with EET and the biogeochemical processes that
are mediated by these communities; 3) characterizing the genetic, biochemical
and biophysical attributes of cultivated but uncharacterized microbes commonly
found on electroactive surfaces; 4) integrating these results to develop a
better capacity to predict the physiologies and biogeochemical impacts of
electroactive communities in nature; and 5) archiving these data in robust
databases to allow others to relate the project's findings to their data. These
efforts will provide, for the first time, a comprehensive dataset linking
phylogenetic data (16S, 18S) with functional potential (genomics), physiological
poise (transcriptomics) and metabolic activity (geochemical measurements) that
will have many applications to beyond biodiversity science. For example, the
combined 'omics and rate measurements will allow the investigators to constrain
the extent to which EET contributes to biogeochemical cycles in nature. The
transposon mutagenesis and biophysical studies, in turn, will help researchers
understand the means by which common but poorly characterized microbes carry out
EET. While the value of each of the proposed efforts is significant, the
coordination of these activities enables true integration of these findings to
provide a comprehensive perspective on the relationships among phylogenetic,
genomic and physiological diversity.