* 1836340
* United States Representation in the International Arctic Science Committee (IASC): 2019-2023
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Larry Hinzman, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,239,102.00

The Arctic is critical to understanding the Earth system, as well as a focal
point for environmental, economic, social, demographic and political change. It
is intimately connected to the global system via ocean, land, and air masses, as
well as the people that inhabit and/or are connected economically to the Arctic
region. This is an unprecedented time in terms of rapid changes occurring in the
Arctic, and our abilities to understand, predict, and respond to those changes
are of US and international strategic interest. No single country is able to
support the level of research necessary to keep pace with the changing Arctic,
and therefore organizations like the International Arctic Science Committee
(IASC) represent vital platforms for discussing scientific issues and promoting
international, interdisciplinary, and in some cases large-scale projects in the
region. The impacts from melting sea ice on biogeochemical cycles, thawing
permafrost and resulting change to the carbon cycle, biodiversity and northward
species migration and ecosystem reorganization, and associated human
interactions and response all link the Arctic to the global system and represent
issues so important and so large that no one country can adequately address them
in isolation. Additionally, new opportunities for economic development,
fisheries, resource extraction and tourism carry a relatively high risk because
Arctic science remains relatively immature. To this end, this project provides
national support to maintain and enhance US leadership and partnerships in IASC,
as well as our planning and coordinating roles for research efforts in the
international arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Arctic Science
Committee (IASC) is a non-governmental international membership organization
that encourages and facilitates cooperation in all aspects of Arctic research,
in all countries engaged in Arctic research, and in all areas of the Arctic
region. IASC was established in 1990 and today comprises twenty-two member
countries. IASC is an international associate of the International Council for
Science (ICSU) and an observer in the Arctic Council and has connections to
numerous other international Arctic organizations. The US is one of eight Arctic
nations in the Arctic Council, with IASC playing a role in providing scientific
input to this international policy organization. IASC assists with science
development by providing scientific advice as well as coordination to support
international science development. Since the founding of IASC, the scientific,
environmental, economic and political realities of the North have changed
dramatically. New problems and challenges demand new and improved scientific
knowledge and enhanced coordination and communications. This grant provides
funds to enable the President of IASC and the US delegates to IASC to implement
the activities and execute the responsibilities of
IASC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.