* 1836965
* RAISE: Software for Making: Programmable Geometry for Mathematics Education, Classical Stringed Instrument Design, and its Material Culture
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Harry Mairson, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 03/31/2024
* USD 478,761.00

This Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering (RAISE)
project is supported by the Division of Research on Learning in the Education
and Human Resources Directorate and by the Division of Computing and
Communication Foundations in the Computer and Information Science and
Engineering Directorate. This interdisciplinary project integrates historical
insights from geometric design principles used to craft classical stringed
instruments during the Renaissance era with modern insights drawn from computer
science principles. The project applies abstract mathematical concepts toward
the making and designing of furniture, buildings, paintings, and instruments
through a specific example: the making and designing of classical stringed
instruments. The research can help instrument makers employ customized software
to facilitate a comparison of historical designs that draws on both geometrical
proofs and evidence from art history. The project's impacts include the
potential to shift in fundamental ways not only how makers think about design
and the process of making but also how computer scientists use foundational
concepts from programming languages to inform the representation of physical
objects. Furthermore, this project develops an alternate teaching method to help
students understand mathematics in creative ways and offers specific guidance to
current luthiers in areas such as designing the physical structure of a stringed
instrument to improve acoustical effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
develops a domain-specific functional programming language based on straight-
edge and compass constructions and applies it in three complementary directions.
The first direction develops software tools (compilers) to inform the
construction of classical stringed instruments based on geometric design
principles applied during the Renaissance era. The second direction develops an
analytical and computational understanding of the art history of these
instruments and explores extensions to other maker domains. The third direction
uses this domain-specific language to design an educational software tool. The
tool uses a calculative and constructive method to teach Euclidean geometry at
the pre-college level and complements the traditional algebraic, proof-based
teaching method. The representation of instrument forms by high-level
programming abstractions also facilitates their manufacture, with particular
focus on the arching of the front and back carved plates --- of considerable
acoustic significance --- through the use of computer numerically controlled
(CNC) methods. The project's novelties include the domain-specific language
itself, which is a programmable form of synthetic geometry, largely without
numbers; its application within the contemporary process of violin making and in
other maker domains; its use as a foundation for a computational art history,
providing analytical insights into the evolution of classical stringed
instrument design and its related material culture; and as a constructional,
computational approach to teaching geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.