* 1836335
* Growing into Teacher-Researchers: Using Mindsets to Frame Research for Noyce Scholars and PIs as a Component of Teacher Preparation
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Stamatis Vokos, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 11/30/2022
* USD 1,000,526.00

As STEM professionals, STEM teachers need to continue to grow their content
knowledge and research skill set. Research experiences for undergraduates and
for teachers have been shown to advance understanding of the nature of STEM
disciplines, the processes of scientific research, and to assist in retention
within the STEM disciplines and within the STEM teaching field. Moreover, STEM
teachers who participate in research experiences are better prepared to
incorporate the professional practices of scientists, engineers, and
mathematicians in their classrooms, impacting positively several thousands of
precollege students. This project, supported by the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship program, will leverage the STEM Teacher and Researcher Program
(STAR), led by California Polytechnic State University, to place a cohort of
thirty-two (total of 64) Noyce Scholars in immersive, mentored summer research
experiences at national laboratories, universities, and research &amp;
development centers, in the Summer 2018 and 2019, respectively. The Noyce
Scholars will join other STAR Fellows as they work with researchers in
conducting original research while also participating in concurrent workshops.
One type of workshop is designed to assist the Noyce STAR Fellows in
incorporating the practices of working scientists, engineers, and mathematicians
into their classroom teaching. A second project-specific workshop will provide
Noyce STAR Fellows with opportunities to become familiar with educational
research results on mindsets about intelligence and belonging. The Fellows will
examine research on how perspectives of whether intelligence is innate or
malleable can impact the ways in which individuals deal with personal and
academic challenges, as well as how such views may help or obstruct whether or
not they feel they belong in STEM disciplines. The project will also test the
effectiveness of strategies and tools in helping teacher-researchers interpret
their own struggles in research in terms of healthy mindsets for intelligence
and deepen their sense of belonging in STEM. Results from this investigation
will help to inform improvements in teacher-researcher programs and their role
in teacher preparation efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing
Noyce Scholars with research experiences in research laboratories and
professional development workshops, this project will conduct an educational
research study focused on three research questions. First: What are STAR
Fellows' prior implicit beliefs about intelligence, including their own and that
of their students? Second: To what extent does framing summer STAR workshops
with the view that belonging in the research community is largely determined by
effort, as opposed to achievement, ameliorate Fellows' sense of unproductive
struggle during the summer research experience? Third: To what extent does
framing summer STAR workshops with the view that intelligence is malleable
change the types of feedback that Fellows would provide struggling students?
Researchers have documented that problematic teacher beliefs have a negative
impact on their pedagogical choices. This project's proposed research on beliefs
about intelligence and belonging in STEM for this population of students in the
teacher professional continuum will contribute to the knowledge base on research
experiences for teachers. In addition, it will inform the design,
implementation, and evaluation of more effective research immersion programs for
teachers and students. Attention to conceptual understanding is inadequate by
itself to stem the tide of underrepresentation in STEM. Non-cognitive issues in
STEM learning and belonging, especially in the context of research experiences,
have not been addressed by educational research to the depth they deserve. This
project will contribute to filling this gap in the research
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.