* 1836682
* I-Corps: Super-Hard and Low-Friction Coatings for Automotive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Qi Fan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from
developing novel carbon film coatings that provide necessary hardness and other
chemical characteristics. Such superior coatings are expected to have a
potential market of billions of dollars. In automotive applications, coating the
engine surfaces and the piston rings with the high-performance carbon films will
improve the fuel efficiency and substantially reduce Carbon Dioxide and Nitrogen
Oxide emissions to benefit the environment. Broad applications of the low-
friction and super-hard carbon coatings on cutting tools, bearings, glass, and
electrodes will greatly reduce the manufacturing costs and the consumption of
the earth's resources.

This I-Corps project aims to determine the commercial viability of a patent-
pending magnetically enhanced cathodic arc plasma technology that is capable of
coating the inner and outer surfaces of working components, such as engine
liners and bearings. This technology overcomes the limitation of line-of-sight
in conventional physical vapor depositions. A properly designed magnetic field
efficiently confines the arc plasma. A single arc current can reach over 100
Amps to locally vaporize the target materials. The evaporated particles have
high kinetic energies, leading to excellent adhesion of the coatings to the
substrate surfaces. When a graphite target is used, the energetic carbon species
form strong bonds with a combination of multiple extreme properties: 1) a
hardness value of over 6000 Vickers (close to diamond) compared with ~200
Vickers of 304 stainless steel; 2) a low friction coefficient of ~0.1, similar
to the value of Teflon; and 3) a superior chemical inertness and resistance to
corrosion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.