* 1836234
* 2018 Gordon Research Conference Molecular Basis of Microbial One Carbon Metabolism: Dynamic One-Carbon Use on a Changing Planet, Maine, July 28 - Aug 3, 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Victoria Orphan, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 10/31/2018
* USD 14,830.00

Microbial one carbon metabolism is central in the cycling of carbon and closely
linked to the biogeochemical cycling of other major elements in the biosphere.
For the past 25 years, the Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on the Molecular
Basis of Microbial One-Carbon Metabolism has been one of the major international
forums for discussing the latest research on this globally important topic. This
proposal is requesting support to assist with U.S. student participation for the
2018 rendition of the GRC and Gordon Research Seminar. This financial support
will offset the registration and partial travel for 6 students at the 2018 GRC
conference and an additional 14 students at the 2-day student run GRS. This
monetary support is critical for ensuring representation and participation of
early career scientists who may not otherwise attend due to insufficient
funds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 GRC conference on the Molecular Basis of
Microbial One-Carbon Metabolism will serve as an important venue for exchange of
ideas and discussion of the latest findings in the field. Its format features
extensive discussions, interactive poster sessions, and informal gatherings in
the afternoons and evenings, providing an ideal setting for C1 researchers and
students across different fields and generations to exchange ideas, brainstorm,
and discuss opportunities for collaboration within the U.S. and abroad. This
meeting is inherently inter-disciplinary and attracts some of the leading
researchers in the field. Student participation in the conference is vital to
the success of the meeting and critical for continued growth and progress of the
C1 research field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.