* 1836428
* Ignition propensity of structural materials exposed to firebrand in wildland-urban interface (WUI) fires
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ya-Ting Liao, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,974.00

This project will characterize the ignition process of materials caused by
firebrand attacks, a key mechanism of wildfire spread into Wildland-Urban
Interface (WUI) communities. Firebrands are small burning pieces lofted by flame
plumes and transported by ambient winds. Although they are small, firebrands can
travel in large groups for long distances from the fire front. These firebrands
can shower unto structures in WUI communities far from the wildfire itself and
therefore pose serious threats to human lives and properties. In this project,
lab-scale experiments and computational modeling will be used to systematically
study such phenomena. By providing a better understanding of firebrand attacks,
this project will promote the development of new testing standards for building
codes and materials. This work will contribute to the effort in increasing the
safety of structures at the wildland-urban interface, such as optimal geometry
of structure for mitigating fire risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a combustible
solid subjected to external heating, ignition depends not only on the total
energy input but also on the spatial distribution of the heating. For ignition
due to firebrand attack, the distribution of firebrands and their individual
shapes, sizes, and contact areas with the target structure will determine the
distribution of heat flux on the structure surface. Environmental conditions
(e.g., background radiant heating and air flow speed) also have a significant
effect on the kinetics of the burning firebrands and the interactions between
firebrands and the target structure. The goal of this study is to obtain a
fundamental understanding of how these parameters affect the ignition propensity
of a structure material. A combination of lab-scale experiments and
computational modeling will be used. The experiment will involve firebrands
burning under the influence of air flow and external radiant heating.
Temperatures, burning durations, and heat release rates of the burning brands,
as well as the temperature of the substrate, will be analyzed. The ignition
propensity of the fuel bed will be characterized according to firebrand
attributes and environmental factors. A combustion model will also be developed
for simulating the thermo-kinetic process of each aspect of the firebrand
attack. The simulation results will provide detailed information about gases and
solids during the combustion process, thus facilitating the interpretation of
the experimental observation. The numerical simulation will also allow the
investigation of the underlying physics of these
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.