* 1836080
* QLC: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Dissecting many-body correlations in matter by quantum process tomography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Eric Bittner, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2020
* USD 43,057.00

One of the most fundamentally important problems in chemistry is to understand
how electrons behave in molecules. Chemists often exploit the interaction of
light with such electrons to deduce this information. Interaction with light may
also provide profound information on how molecules interact each other in
liquids and solids. For example, inter-molecular interactions dictate how fast
electrons lose the energy transferred to them by light, and how fast they forget
about the process of light absorption. Nevertheless, the details of how these
properties depend on electronic interactions with all other electrons in liquids
and solids is not always easily extractable using light that can be completely
described with classical physics. In this project funded by the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division,
Professors Carlos Silva of the Georgia Institute of Technology and Eric Bittner
of the University of Houston are developing techniques that take advantage of
light that obeys quantum mechanics to overcome these limitations. Specifically,
they exploit entanglement of exactly two light particles (photons) at a time.
Entanglement means that it is fundamentally impossible to distinguish between
the properties of identical particles, regardless of how far they are from each
other. The properties of the two entangled photons are measured after one of the
two interacts with electrons in molecules. This approach provides new tools for
chemists to understand the details on how electrons in different molecules talk
to each other in order to dictate important collective behavior in liquids and
solids. In addition to the scientific and technical innovations involved in this
research, it serves as a training platform to contribute to the intellectual
capital and scientific infrastructure of the US, in which quantum technologies
is growing in significance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Quantum
process tomography is developed as a novel materials optical probe, with clear
potential to isolate details of many-body and multi-quantum interactions with
unique selectivity with respect to classical nonlinear spectroscopy and
contemporary quantum spectroscopies. After one photon in a polarization-
entangled pair interacts with a sample, the change in entanglement entropy the
degree to which the initially pure state becomes a mixed quantum state is
quantified. This change is driven by nonlinear processes in the sample. The
objectives for this project are (i) to implement a versatile time-tagged
quantum-process tomography setup to investigate multi-quantum processes in
conjugated molecules and polymers, and (ii) to develop a theoretical formalism
invoking the quantum-optical nature of the technique and the effect on the
entangled biphoton state of the many-body physics intrinsic to the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.