* 1836559
* Orchestrating Discussions Around Proof
* EDU,DUE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Paul Dawkins, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 10/31/2022
* USD 299,574.00

Mathematics classes that incorporate student discussion have been shown to
engage students in authentic mathematical activity and support students'
development of conceptual understanding. Although major organizations (e.g., the
Mathematical Association of America) have called for a shift away from pure
lecture in all mathematics courses, college mathematics instructors have few
supports available to help them include student discussion in their classes.
This project aims to address this need helping faculty build discussion into
their Abstract Algebra courses, and to study those discussions. Abstract Algebra
is a proof-based course taken by many mathematics majors and preservice
secondary mathematics teachers in the United States. The project team will
design instructor supports (tasks, tools, and protocols) that can be used to
promote productive discussion. The goal is to help faculty guide classroom
discussion that advances a lesson's mathematical agenda, while genuinely
incorporating student ideas and voices. Through the design process, the study
will also document student discussion to aid in deeper knowledge of this
activity for both instructors and future researchers. The national impact of the
project lies in both the development of instructor supports for incorporating
discussion and the direct study of undergraduate students engaged in discussions
in an advanced mathematics course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of
a two-phase design-based research study focused on adapting research-based K-12
practices for orchestrating discussion to the context of an undergraduate proof-
based mathematics course. The project team will hypothesize, pilot, and refine a
model for promoting productive discussion in this context through a series of
task-based interviews (Phase 1) and classroom implementations (Phase 2). The
analysis will focus on the teaching moves and task components that promote
students' engagement in three key activities connected to proof: comprehending,
validating, and constructing. Results of these studies have the potential to
contribute to the field by testing the transferability of K-12 supports to the
undergraduate proof-based setting. Project outcomes could expand knowledge about
supporting productive discussions, and contribute refinements and principles
specific to the undergraduate proof-based setting. The project will also offer
analyses of student-instructor interactions in an authentic proof-based course
setting, complementing the current literature base that primarily uses clinical
settings. The project aims to affect the research community, instructors, and
students of proof-based courses by: (1) meeting the genuine need for resources
to support mathematics instructors' shift away from lecture-only pedagogy; (2)
providing opportunities for students to engage in important mathematical
activities that have the potential to support deeper mathematical understanding
and more equitable classrooms; (3) providing undergraduate mathematics students
with an opportunity to participate in a student-discourse driven mathematics
classroom; and (4) contributing to the field's knowledge via expanding and
testing results for using evidence-based K-12 instructional strategies in
undergraduate proof settings to promote productive
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.