* 1836984
* Collaborative Research: A Comparative Systems Approach to Complex Animal Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jason Bond, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2023
* USD 289,749.00

Many animals use more than one of their senses to communicate with each other,
for example, combining sounds with colors or motions. Understanding why animal
signals are so complex and how they evolved is a major research focus for
scientists in many fields. Such research can add to our knowledge about how the
senses work, how attention and learning shift perception, and how changing
environments can impact communication (among others). In this project,
scientists from the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and Auburn University use a
systems approach to study the evolution of courtship displays in a well-
developed animal system. The team uses genomics to reconstruct the evolutionary
history of more than 23 species. For each species, they also describe the
communication system in detail and how it changes with environmental conditions.
They then test hypotheses about system properties such as robustness and
flexibility/evolvability. The project will advance our understanding of complex
animal signals, and test long-standing theories from engineering and genomics
about system structure and function. The project involves the training of
undergraduate and graduate students. Research findings will also be integrated
into a science exhibit that will be made available to the general public at
natural history museums in Nebraska and Alabama. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite
an appreciation of the prevalence and importance of complex signals in animal
communication, progress towards an evolutionary analysis of signal complexity
has been constrained by a lack of hypotheses and tools that can compare
signaling systems across taxa and assess evolutionary and functional
implications. This project develops and tests a novel theoretical and empirical
paradigm by integrating a systems approach into animal communication research
using Schizocosa wolf spiders. North American Schizocosa include 23 species that
vary in their use of vibratory and visual courtship displays. Specific aims are
(1) to assess the structure and dynamics of vibratory and visual courtship
signals of each species in different environments; (2) to generate a robust
phylogeny; and (3) to use phylogenetic comparative methods to test (i) the
hypothesis that degeneracy facilitates robustness across changing conditions and
(ii) whether degeneracy facilitates (or constrains) elaboration and signal
divergence. The simultaneous measures of vibratory and visual signals across
contexts combined with a robust phylogeny will enable unparalleled opportunities
for evolutionary analyses of complexity. This research will facilitate an
integrative and comprehensive understanding of the evolution, diversification,
and maintenance of complex animal communication and provide a roadmap for
similar studies across distinct taxa and signaling systems.