* 1836565
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: An Unified Learnable Roadmap for Sequential Decision Making in Relational Domains
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Sriraam Natarajan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 08/31/2021
* USD 98,522.00

This project seeks to develop new algorithms and data structures for learning
and planning in situations where the environment is represented with a set of
relations between objects. Relational representations capture interactions
between objects in a succinct and easily interpretable representation. Examples
of domains that are well-suited to relational representations includes
intelligent drones assisting soldiers, activities in a supply chain management,
communication and friendship connections in a social network, and tracking
individuals and activities in video. Most recent advances in machine learning
and planning, such as so-called "deep neural networks", however, employ simple
"flat" representations, where the state of the world is an uninterpreted string
of bits. This project will make machine learning and planning methods easier to
use and more robust by generalizing them so that they explicitly work with
relational models and data. The methods, theory, and data resulting from this
proposal will impact the scientific community in several positive ways and will
be made publicly available through an appropriate website. The research will be
disseminated through refereed journals and conference proceedings and made
available to researchers. Code for the proposed algorithms and descriptions of
new benchmark problems will also be made publicly available. The investigators
will work on organizing workshops and tutorials based on the challenges and
findings arising from this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many special purpose
solutions have been developed to address small parts of these problems, but
there are no &lt;br/&gt;general purpose tools that harness recent advances in
machine learning to tackle this family of problems. This proposal seeks to
develop such tools, drawing upon the investigators' prior experience in learning
relational regression trees and experience in value function approximation for
reinforcement learning. In addition, this project seeks to build a bridge
between recent advances in deep learning, which generally has not been
compatible with relational representations, and recent advances in relational
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.