* 1836333
* EAGER: Design of an Active Voice Box Prosthesis with Embedded Actuation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Alexander Leonessa, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 07/31/2020
* USD 127,858.00

The most effective treatment for advanced cancer of the larynx, commonly called
the voice box, is often the removal of the entire organ, i.e., a "total
laryngectomy." Loss of the vocal folds, commonly called vocal cords, which were
housed in the larynx, leads to significant complications in all three of the
critical physiological functions that the vocal folds enabled: respiration,
swallowing, and voice production. Breathing and swallowing have received
considerable attention for patients with laryngectomy, but vocalization still
presents unresolved issues due to the complexity and variability of the vocal
fold dynamics. Current laryngectomy treatment options employ unnatural speech
production methods and require breathing through a redirected airway. This
project addresses this limitation by investigating the feasibility of creating
an artificial voice box that can recreate the dynamic behavior or replace the
functionality of healthy vocal fold tissue. Based on studies of the properties
of pig vocal folds, a 3D printing technique has been developed to produce
synthetic vocal folds that can be fine-tuned to have desired movement
properties. Vibrations will be created by embedding piezoelectric actuators
(small motors that can convert energy into motion) in the printed vocal folds. A
minimally invasive, closed-loop control system will be developed to generate
appropriate signals and control the synthetic vocal fold behavior. Efforts will
also be made to control the artificial voice box remotely using EEG
(electroencephalogram), i.e. brain signals, from a healthy subject to estimate
the subject's intent to move the vocal folds. The proposed research offers the
possibility of improving the quality of life of laryngectomy patients who could
develop a profound sense of isolation from their inability to communicate.
Development of an EEG-driven robust control strategy will also provide a
framework for guiding rehabilitation strategies for other impairments. Results
obtained will be disseminated through conference and journal papers and be made
available using dedicated websites such as Connexions and the National Science
Digital Library. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this exploratory project is
to investigate the feasibility of developing an artificial voice-box, with
embedded actuation, that uses biofeedback via EEG and leverages novel adaptive
control algorithms to restore full vocal function to patients requiring a
laryngectomy. Unlike current laryngectomy treatment options that employ
unnatural speech production methods and require breathing through a redirected
airway, this approach focuses on creating, controlling, and dynamically testing
an artificial voice box that can recreate the dynamic behavior or replace the
functionality of healthy vocal fold tissue. Preliminary work focused on
identifying continuous model parameters for porcine vocal folds and the additive
manufacturing techniques necessary to produce synthetic vocal folds serves as
the foundation for the project. The Research Plan is organized under six tasks.
TASK 1) Dynamic testing to evaluate vocal fold vibration of both excised porcine
vocal folds and the synthetic vocal fold models. Frequencies of vibration will
be recorded as the samples are dynamically loaded. Digital images captured at
3000 frames per second will enable the determination of strain fields and
deformation on the superior surface of the samples. TASK 2) Comparison and
iterative design of synthetic vocal fold in order to understand how the
fundamental frequencies change while the samples are loaded. The spatial
properties of the synthetic vocal fold model will be iteratively adjusted by
tuning manufacturing process parameters in order to achieve a desired frequency
response during dynamic tests. PZT (piezoelectric) actuation will be embedded
into the printed vocal folds with the goal of modulating the vocal fold
vibration during dynamic testing. TASK 3) Controlling vocal folds without a
human in the Loop through development of an Output Based Control algorithm that
will address effects such as time delays, actuator amplitude and rate saturation
limitations, and partial and noisy measurements. TASK 4) Controlling vocal folds
using EEG signals from a healthy subject, for the purpose of changing the pitch
of the sound produced when a constant flow of air is passed across the synthetic
vocal folds. TASK 5) Data post-processing and performance evaluation of the data
collected in Tasks 3 and 4. The closed loop results obtained using standard
controllers and the Output Based controller will be compared. A performance
index, based on the ease of implementation, tuning and actual performance of the
closed loop system will be developed and used to assess the performance of the
control with respect to existing algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.