* 1836603
* Paradigms in Physics: Second-Generation Dissemination Strategies
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Corinne Manogue, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 12/31/2023
* USD 298,948.00

The undergraduate physics curriculum has not changed much in the past fifty
years. To provide a skilled STEM workforce in the U.S., improvements in
undergraduate physics instruction is critical. The Paradigms in Physics Project
at Oregon State University recognized this problem early on and reformed the
entire upper-division curriculum for physics majors in 1966. This reform
involved two actions. The first was a rearrangement of content to better reflect
the way professional physicists think about the field. The second was infusion
of evidence-based interactive pedagogies that are known to engage students more
effectively. The resulting curriculum has become a local and national model for
curricular reform and includes a variety of active-engagement teaching
strategies. An ongoing challenge to sharing the Paradigms course materials with
other institutions is the large quantity of material available. This project
will develop two online resources to freely deliver these materials. The first
online resource will be an improved website designed from the ground up to
enable faculty to access the resources they need to improve their teaching. The
second online resource will be a new textbook for teaching the mathematical
skills students need to be successful in advanced physics courses. This textbook
will be based on years of research by the Paradigms team on student use of math
in physics courses. It will use the latest technologies to deliver an
interactive experience that deepens student
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new website will be designed using a
user-centered design process to make it intuitive for users to find needed
information. Employing a relational database for the structure underneath will
allow for adding new layers of information about sequences of activities and
courses. The result will be a more effective website that can be used by faculty
teaching upper-division physics courses across the world. Many curriculum
development groups are struggling to create a website that can be used
effectively. The complex structure of the long-term Paradigms project is a
further challenge. One of the two major aggregators of physics curricular
materials, PhysPort, simply links to the Paradigms site. Making the Paradigms
site more useful to those wishing to adopt various aspects of the Paradigms
materials could make this site a model for how other curriculum development
projects might achieve the same goals. The second strand of this work will build
an open source, modular, online mathematical methods book for use in a just-in-
time fashion in upper-division courses. Using Pretext and Sage will allow the
inclusion of multiple types of collapsible text alongside embedded computer
algebra coding and high-quality graphics. This book will document the content,
language, and interactive nature of Paradigms courses as a living curriculum,
whose continuous further development is driven by what happens in the classroom.
Thus, this project will provide a resource not only to Oregon State students,
but also to colleagues in mathematics, physics, and science education, both at
Oregon State and at other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.