* 1836626
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Ecosystem Indicators of Productivity of Lithic-Mulched Fields
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Nicholas Kessler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 22,883.00

This project investigates Pre-Columbian agricultural fields which relied on
runoff irrigation technologies unique to the ancient southwestern United States.
Understanding how runoff irrigation and water management influenced vegetative
productivity is critical to understanding the widespread occurrence of this
technology in certain parts of the region and has implications for understanding
how humans have shaped contemporary ecosystems. In addition to contributing to a
scientific understanding of the function and persistence of runoff irrigation
technology, this research addresses questions about the benefits for the
application of traditional farming practices in the modern day. Because these
features developed in a water limited environments, and are known only through
archaeological research, facts regarding their character and function contribute
information important to agriculture in present day drylands and have
implications for water diversion and conservation. Finally, the project will
contribute to undergraduate student training in field and laboratory techniques
in he fields of archaeology and environmental science. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The relative productivity of ancient runoff irrigated fields will be
measured at scales ranging from centuries to single years in northern New
Mexico. Particular focus will be given to fields that were mulched with pebbles
and cobbles. Fields of this type are particularly abundant, and the technology
was apparently well developed in this area. Soil and vegetation characteristics
have been documented for other dryland field types in the Southwest, but few
comparable studies have been conducted on rock-mulched fields. The study will
rectify this knowledge gap and generate data that will allow comparison across
the Southwest. Year-to-year changes in the width of growth rings for trees
established on fields will be measured to determine how water conserving
features may buffer trees from periodic droughts. Relative levels of organic
material in soils, which are derived from plant matter, track how water
conserving features alter plant productivity over the last few centuries.
Together, soil chemistry and tree-rings will help answer questions about how
ancient agricultural investments continue to effect contemporary ecosystem
productivity, and the role this infrastructure played in supporting the large
communities of northern New Mexico from 1300 A.D. until Spanish contact in the
1600s.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.