* 1836914
* BIGDATA: F: Metric-space Positioning Systems for Symbolic Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Manuel Lladser, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 610,560.00

Next-generation DNA sequencing technologies produce datasets that are the
epitome of "big data." Resulting files are typically quite large, consisting
almost entirely of symbolic (i.e., non-numeric) short DNA sequences. In
contrast, the most widely used machine learning algorithms require numerical
datasets to learn. Unfortunately, both traditional and cutting-edge methods to
numerically represent symbolic data often suffer from high-dimensionality or
substantial running time requirements, which hinder the application of powerful
machine learning algorithms to modern biological questions. To overcome these
crucial issues, this project addresses the fundamental problem of determining
the "right" dimension in which to embed symbolic data for a data-mining or
classification task. It does so by representing symbolic datasets numerically
via a method reminiscent of Global Positioning Systems (GPS) but in a far more
general setting. Besides exploring modern biology applications, the project will
also investigate how to predict the source of a spread (i.e., ground zero) over
large networks. This may assist administrators in determining how best to
respond to new epidemics and cyber-threats. Additionally, the project will
closely mentor undergraduate and graduate students to become mature data
scientists. Its findings will be communicated as notes, open-source software,
and video-lectures available to the general public, including students in the
Colorado Data Science Team, which encourages the participation of women and
under-represented minorities in Engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much
like GPS uses trilateration to locate a receiver anywhere on the planet, finite
metric spaces contain resolving sets, that is sets of points that uniquely
identify every point in the space via multilateration (i.e., the vector of
distances to points in the set). Associated with any resolving set R, there is a
one-to-one transformation from its ambient metric space to a Euclidean space of
dimension |R|, the cardinality of R. The smallest resolving set thus induces the
lowest-dimensional representation of its ambient space. Importantly, even when
the ambient metric space is finite but exponentially large, its metric dimension
is often much smaller than its cardinality. Determining the metric dimension is,
however, an NP-hard problem in a variety of contexts. Building on this
abstracted notion of multilateration, this project will: (1) assess the
computational complexity of calculating the metric dimension of Hamming graphs,
and characterize the metric dimension of various random graph models to guide
the development of new and efficient algorithms to approximate this quantity;
(2) explore relaxations and constraints of multilateration, including
approximate and probabilistic algorithms, to expand the reach of applications of
multilateration to other finite but large metric spaces; and finally (3) provide
proofs-of-concept of multilateration to learn non-contiguous regions of
dependencies in genomic sequences, develop classifiers for historically elusive
virus targets, and identify the source of spread of information or disease in
large networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.