* 1836857
* Creativity throughout the Curriculum: Educational Practices to Build the STEM Workforce of Tomorrow
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Suzanne Burgoyne, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,703.00

The nation's economy and security require an engineering workforce that can
design, manufacture, test, and deploy effective solutions to urgent, complex
problems. In addition to developing traditional engineering skills, this
workforce must also gain skills in innovation and creativity. This project aims
to address this need by investigating a new paradigm of engineering education
that integrates the foundations of science, engineering, problem-solving, and
critical thinking with training in creative thinking, which is the foundation of
innovation. The project will design, implement, and evaluate an experiential
training program to help engineering educators teach creative thinking skills in
sophomore-, junior-, and senior-level courses. The project's long-term goal is
to increase student engagement and retention through novel instructional
practices that prepare an innovative engineering workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of this project include advancing
knowledge about how to train an innovative workforce, investigating how focusing
on innovation affects the persistence of engineering students, particularly
under-represented minorities, and creating a transformative approach to
engineering education that will produce an engineering workforce that is
prepared to tackle complex, interdisciplinary problems. Standardized instruments
will be used to assess aspects of student creativity, including design self-
efficacy, resistance to change, and changes in creative thinking. The project's
broader impacts include national dissemination of the pedagogical approach via
publications, conferences, and workshops as well as research that may inform
engineering education efforts to broaden participation of under-represented
groups in engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.