* 1836529
* QLC: EAGER: Control of Quantum Dynamics and Catalysis Using Molecular Polaritonics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Kevin Kubarych, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2020
* USD 308,721.00

Chemists routinely study how light interacts with molecules. Optical
spectroscopy is an important tool in the characterization of molecular structure
and chemical reactions. In recent years there has been a growing interest in an
unusual twist of optical spectroscopy: if the container holding the molecules is
modified to include two parallel mirrors, light that enters the container will
interact with the sample molecules, and also reflect back and forth between the
mirrors. If the dimensions of the container just right (a few microns, where a
micron is one millionth of a meter), the mixing of light and molecules creates a
new kind of particle. These new light-matter hybrids are called "polaritons,"
and their behavior can be manipulated by changing the dimensions of the cavity
or the wavelength of light. In this project funded by the Chemical Structure
Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Kevin Kubarych of the University of Michigan and his students are combining
microcavities and advanced laser-based optical spectroscopy to study the
behavior of polaritons. They are interested in how polaritons respond to changes
in light exposure, and whether the actual chemical reactivity of the molecular
parts of the polaritons is different from normal molecules, and whether their
reactivity can be controlled simply by changing the dimensions of the container.
A potential outcome of this research is the improved efficiency and economy of
chemical reactions, perhaps including industrial catalytic processes and those
relevant to solar energy conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vibrational strong
coupling between molecular vibrational states and cavity modes leads to energy
shifted states that have hybrid molecular and optical character. Mode-selective
coupling offers the promise to externally modulate chemical structure and
energetics, which can be used to manipulate relaxation dynamics, such as excited
state charge transfer and ground electronic state electrocatalysis. This
proposal aims to (1) greatly expand the scope of coordination complexes coupled
to microcavities to develop fundamental understanding of polaritons and their
relaxation (vibrational energy relaxation and redistribution, as well as
spectral diffusion and coherence transfer); (2) employ polariton-modulated
excited state charge transfer in molecular ?forks? to control the movement of
electronic wavepackets with polaritonic bridging vibrations; (3) combine
microcavities with electrochemistry using thin gold layers as both cavity
mirrors and electrodes for electrochemistry and electrocatalysis. The students
involved in this project are gaining invaluable experience in ultrafast
spectroscopy, quantum dynamics, chemical reaction dynamics and electrocatalysis.
Improvements in practical electrocatalysis stand to dramatically enhance our
ability to reduce CO2 while generating useful fuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.