* 1836824
* MCA-PGR: Phylogeny-Guided Biochemical Genomics to Elucidate the Tyrosine-Derived Lignin Metabolic Network of Grasses
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Hiroshi Maeda, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,065,295.00

Plants produce a variety of chemical compounds that are essential for making
cells and the entire organism. One of these compounds, lignin, gives physical
strength and supports water transport in plants. It is beneficial to generate
bioenergy plants with less lignin because lignin impedes the production of
bioethanol. However, lowering lignin production may negatively impact plant
growth. This research will address this fundamental issue by studying how
essential compounds such as lignin are synthesized and how the underlying
processes evolved in different plants. Specifically, this project seeks to
understand the genes and pathways responsible for making lignin in grasses,
which are major sources of food and bioenergy production. Because grasses have a
unique pathway for making lignin that is not found in other plants,
understanding the evolution of this grass-specific lignin pathway will provide
better strategies to improve grasses for efficient production of food and
energy. To increase the awareness of the importance of plant-derived compounds
and to train next generations of scientists, this project will conduct K-12
outreach activities called "Pigment Art+." This will be specifically focused on
schools from communities that are underrepresented in science. The scientific
and educational outcomes of this project will have broad impacts for both
research and society through improved understanding of how essential compounds,
such as lignin, are made in plants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primary metabolites,
such as proteins and cell walls, directly impact yield, quality, and performance
of crops. This research will explore primary metabolic diversity to uncover
major evolutionary innovations of plant metabolism and to provide novel tools
and strategies to rationally optimize these core metabolic processes in plants.
A primary cell wall component, lignin, and other phenolic compounds are produced
through a complex network of the aromatic amino acid and phenylpropanoid
pathways and usually synthesized from L-phenylalanine. Uniquely, grasses
synthesize lignin additionally from L-tyrosine. This research aims to elucidate
biochemical and genetic basis of this unique diversification of primary
metabolism, the tyrosine-derived lignin biosynthetic pathway. Utilizing the
wealth of genome/transcriptome data from grass and non-grass monocots, this
project will employ "phylogeny-guided" biochemical and genomic analyses to
dissect the tyrosine-derived lignin biosynthetic pathways and their evolutionary
history. Aim 1) will determine the evolutionary timing of the emergence of the
tyrosine-lignin pathway through activity screening of key enzymes across
monocots. Aim 2) will define molecular basis of the evolution of the tyrosine-
derived lignin pathway through phylogeny-guided structure-function analyses of
these enzymes. Aim 3) will further identify genes and enzymes that co-evolved
and reshaped the overall tyrosine-lignin biosynthetic network. Aim 4) will
elucidate potential functionalization of key enzymes involved in the tyrosine-
lignin biosynthetic network. This study will establish a multidisciplinary
approach of phylogeny-guided biochemical genomics, which allows us to
investigate evolutionary history of complex traits, such as primary metabolic
diversity, that occurred in multiple loci over a long evolutionary time
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.