* 1836572
* Second Trans-Atlantic Symposium on Information and Communication Technology (ICT),To Be Held at the Woodrow Wilson Center for Scholars, in Washington DC, June 18-19, 2018.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Anne Bowser, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 44,954.00

New and emerging Information and Communications Technologies (ICT) developments
have the potential to accelerate scientific discovery and industrial growth with
positive social impacts. However, big picture assessments of new and emerging
ICT are often lacking, particularly from an international perspective. The
European Commission, under its Horizon 2020 program, launched a 2016 project on
ICT Policy, Research and Innovation for a Smart Society: Towards New Avenues in
EU-US ICT Collaboration (the PICASSO project). Under this proposal, NSF will
provide co-funding for US researchers to participate in a PICASSO project
symposium focused on exploring emerging areas of ICT relevant to cooperation
between researchers in the US and EU. This workshop, the 2nd Trans-Atlantic
Symposium on ICT Technology and Policy, will be held at the Woodrow Wilson
International Center for Scholars (the Wilson Center) in Washington, DC, on June
18-19, 2018. The symposium will result in greater awareness of shared US/EU
priorities and needs in ICT technology and policy and in enhanced
collaborations. Attendance of approximately 100 is anticipated, with outreach
designed to facilitate participation from groups that are historically under-
represented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pervasive sensing and connectivity,
large-scale secure data repositories, high-performance analytics in distributed
and cloud platforms, real-time closed-loop applications, and robotics all offer
individual advances in research and application areas, and will enable social,
environmental, and economic benefits on unprecedented levels as the impacts of
these technologies converge. Taking an international perspective, the goal of
this workshop is to convene representatives from academia, industry, and
government seeking to identify and advance collaborative research in new and
emerging ICT areas. Specific thematic areas to be explored include Cyber
Physical Systems (CPS), Internet of Things (IoT), big data, 5G and beyond, the
future of automation, and cyber-resiliency, all of which are a high priority for
the US and EU. The symposium will predominately feature a mix of keynote
speeches and plenary panel discussions, through breakout sessions on the second
day will allow researchers to discuss key technical aspects of different
thematic areas in detail. This workshop will provide inputs to help define
opportunities for US/ EU collaboration from a high-level road-mapping
perspective. A final report will be prepared for NSF and the European
Commission, and a version of this report will also be made publically available
on websites of the Wilson Center and PICASSO project. The symposium will also
identify opportunities for and advance collaborative research through networking
participants from the US and EU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.