* 1836654
* EAGER: Universal, programmable sensor-regulator elements for dynamic control and optimization of microbial biomanufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Kevin Solomon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 10/31/2019
* USD 112,958.00

Microbes can produce many valuable products. One obstacle to making these
products economically is our inability to easily redirect metabolism. This
project will evaluate a specific class of proteins as a metabolic switch. If
successful, the strategy could greatly expand our ability to manufacture
chemicals biologically. This project will also develop a diverse biotechnology
workforce through the involvement of underrepresented graduate and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will construct and
characterize novel temperature and pH responsive transcriptional regulators that
are of broad interest to the greater scientific community. The project also
establishes the potential of these systems as tunable, synthetic dynamic
regulators of metabolic pathways. A modular approach whose elements can be
easily swapped and tuned for full control of performance is proposed. Synthetic
elastin-like proteins (ELPs), are applied in a novel context to recognize
generic indicators of cellular stress. As sensor sensitivity is programmed by
ELP sequence, sensing elements are readily adapted to a number of processes.
Similarly, the transcription factor controller element may be swapped with
different species- specific transcriptional activators or repressors to effect
control in diverse production species and control modes. This project is
expected to help transform microbial chemical factory design by introducing a
new tool for the optimization of novel production pathways, thus broadening the
portfolio of feasible products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.