* 1836758
* EAGER: BRAIDING: High order non-Abelian excitations for topologically protected qubits
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Leonid Rokhinson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Quantum statistics is central to the quantum mechanical
understanding of the world. All known particles have so-called Abelian
statistics, meaning that result of several consecutive particle exchanges does
not depend on the order of the exchanges. Recently it has been proposed that
particles with non-Abelian statistics can be realized in some exotic systems,
and signatures of simplest such non-Abelian particles - Majorana fermions - have
been reported. The main driving force in the search for these elusive
excitations, apart from scientific curiosity, is a possibility to realize a
fault tolerant quantum computer. Qubits based on Majorana fermions have their
limitations, and the main objective on this proposal is to develop a new system
where more computationally useful higher order non-Abelian excitations can be
realized.

Technical Abstract: The main objective of the proposed research is to develop a
system where high-order non-Abelian excitations can be realized and manipulated.
The non-Abelian statistics (the notion that a result of consecutive exchanges of
several identical particles depends on the order of the exchanges) is at the
heart of a revolutionary concept to realize a fault-tolerant quantum computer.
Current efforts are focused on the development of Majorana-based qubits, the
simplest non-Abelian particles. Majorana-based qubits are not computationally
universal, though, and higher order non-Abelions are required to realize a
universal gate. Specifically, spin transitions in the fractional quantum Hall
effect regime will be explored to realize a reconfigurable network of helical
channels with fractionalized charged excitations. Demonstration of induced
superconductivity in these channels will be the major milestone. Quantum
statistics of excitations formed at a boundary of trivial and topologically non-
trivial superconductors will be investigated in multi-gate devices, where
network of topological channels can be reconfigured within a two-dimensional
plane.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.