* 1836369
* Collaborative Research:  Reshaping Mathematical Identity by Valuing Creativity in Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Gail Tang, University of La Verne
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2022
* USD 199,025.00

In this collaborative project, the University of La Verne and the University of
Oklahoma will develop, assess, and share teaching strategies to better prepare
students for STEM careers. According to recent reports from IBM and the World
Economic Forum, creativity is one of the most sought-after skills in STEM
occupations. Thus, helping undergraduates develop creativity could support the
future success of our nation's STEM workforce. Creativity in mathematics is an
under-researched but very significant area of study in undergraduate students'
mathematical learning. This collaborative project will study creativity and its
relationship to students' identity as mathematicians and confidence. The study
will investigate the effects of incorporating mathematical creativity exercises
into an introductory calculus course. This course is a prime target for
creativity training, since passing calculus is required for most students who
wish to major in STEM fields. The implementation of professional development and
studying its effects on both faculty and students will result in recommendations
for university instructors to enhance mathematical creativity early in students'
STEM undergraduate careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two goals: To
develop and use an existing Creativity-in-Progress Rubric (CPR) on Problem
Solving to explicitly value creativity in Calculus I and to investigate the
effects of valuing creativity using the CPR on Problem Solving on students'
identities as mathematicians. This work will be done through multiple
implementations at various institutions, including the collaborating
universities and the University of Central Oklahoma, the University of Northern
Colorado Greely, the University of New Haven, and California State Polytechnic
University Pomona. The project will investigate how instructors: a) explicitly
value creativity through their various uses of the CPR on Problem Solving; b)
assess creativity-based tasks; and c) attend to students' affect throughout the
course. A part of the project is situated within Hispanic-Serving Institutions,
providing the potential to further identify effectiveness of creativity-centered
pedagogies on Latinx students and potentially broaden the impact of this
project. The intersection of teaching strategies for creativity and equity will
be the focus of an additional exploration. Through developing students'
creativity, the project aims to build equity in the mathematics classroom, with
the ultimate goal of building equity in the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.