* 1836518
* EAGER Real-D: Real-time Data-Based Modeling and Control of Plasma-Enhanced Atomic Layer Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Panagiotis Christofides, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

CBET-1836518&lt;br/&gt;PI: Christofides, Panagiotis D. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Next generation electronic devices require the use of improved
materials and very precise material processing techniques. To reduce feature
sizes and improve energy efficiency, the devices employ extremely thin layers,
high aspect ratios, atomically-sharp interfaces, or any combination thereof. Due
to inherent difficulties in applying real-time in situ monitoring and control of
film properties, factory operators typically rely on batch thin film deposition
and etching cycles, followed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) or x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization of the deposited thin films to
determine the effect of controllable reactor parameters on the resulting
product. This empirical approach reduces productivity and fails to provide
complete data on the behavior and operation of chambered reactors common to
thin-film processing. Multiscale computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modeling
provides a means for addressing these concerns by reducing empiricism and
allowing the development of complete data sets that can be used to optimize and
control reactor operating conditions in real time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research is exploratory in nature and focuses on developing a
multiscale CFD modeling and control framework that can enable control of thin
film manufacturing via plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PE-ALD) to
optimize in real time the microstructure of the deposited thin films. CFD models
have been shown to capture the complex reaction and transport phenomena present
within plasma charged reactors, while microscopic models, typically based on
kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) algorithms, have successfully reproduced the surface
features of deposited films. A multiscale CFD model encompassing both domains
would represent a significant step forward in understanding of thin-film
processing via PE-ALD and could allow for improved real-time online monitoring
and control of chambered reactor operations. However, such a model will be
unsuitable for the development of real-time optimizers and model-based
controllers because CFD simulations are generally computationally demanding and
cannot be linked to online model predictive control schemes. Nonetheless, the
proposed multiscale CFD model can be used as a risk-free and effective tool to
investigate previously unexplored operating conditions of the PE-ALD reactor and
create a database which can be utilized to derive a computationally efficient
data-driven model for PE-ALD real-time control. The multiscale CFD model which
will be developed will allow for the application of a novel, computationally
efficient data-based Bayesian artificial neural network (ANN). Furthermore,
data-driven models developed using the reactor model will form the basis for
real-time process optimization and control. The data-based model will be used to
develop real-time operational decision strategies for PE-ALD that reduce thin
film layer deposition times, which constitutes a necessary step for adoption of
this technology. The proposed methodology can form a basis for real-time
optimization and control of next generation deposition systems and may be
adapted to a wide range of industrial processes. Dissemination of research
results will include web-based access to a database and results repository. In
addition to training a PhD student, the PI plans to integrate research results
into the curriculum through the inclusion of CFD modeling and its integration
with control in the Advanced Process Control course that the PI offers to both
graduate and undergraduate UCLA students, as well as through the integration of
CFD concepts and tools into the undergraduate numerical methods, process design
and process control core courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.