* 1836353
* EAGER: DISENTANGLING THE EFFECTS OF ECOLOGICAL CLADE SORTING AND ADAPTIVE DIVERSIFICATION TO THE ASSEMBLY OF REGIONAL BIOTAS
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Amy Zanne, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,995.00

The tropical Andes region of South America is among earth's most species-rich
biodiversity hotspots. For example, 15% of all plant species (&gt;45,000
species) occur in this region that covers only about 1% of the planet's land
surface. To explain this unexpectedly high species diversity, this research team
will investigate how environmental changes associated with the formation of the
Andes Mountains influenced the distribution, diversification and evolution of
tropical tree species in the region. Understanding the relationships between
mountain uplift, environmental change, and species distributions is not only
important to identify the causes of the remarkable Andean diversity, but also
provides insight into how species respond to large-scale changes in
environmental conditions. This information, in turn, can guide regional
conservation and management aimed at conserving diverse and resilient biological
communities. This project is unique because it is conducted over vast areas and
deep evolutionary time scales. Because of the broad scope, project results are
likely to significantly advance understanding of the long-term consequences of
the emergence of novel environments for the formation and organization of
biologically diverse communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test
the the importance of elevational gradients for shaping community composition by
integrating datasets on plant species distributions, functional traits and
evolutionary relationships. Following mountain uplift, new environments at
different elevations are hypothesized to promote (1) rapid adaptive
diversification of clades, (2) immigration and ecological sorting of pre-adapted
clades, or (3) a combination of both processes. This study will simultaneously
explore these mechanisms and disentangle their relative contributions to the
assembly of a hyper-diverse regional flora. This project leverages data from the
Madidi Project that has already documented the elevational distribution of tree
species in the Bolivian Andes. Distributional and elevation data will be
integrated with a comprehensive database of plant-specimens for across the New
World and elevational surveys of 10 plant functional traits. A large phylogeny
of all seed plants will be developed and used to study turnover in species and
functions among plant communities at different elevations and among
biogeographic regions across the Neotropics. The project is somewhat risky
because database uncertainties can be propagated in process modeling, but the
geographic density of sampling could preclude such problems. However, there is
high potential for revealing new insights into community assembly across
shifting environmental gradients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.