* 1836499
* I-Corps:  Customer discovery for algorithm commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Andrey Grigoriev, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project relates to the
developments in precision/personalized medicine, and specifically, to much-
needed improvements in accuracy and speed of finding genome variants using next-
generation sequencing (NGS). The personalized medicine concepts are based on
individual genome variants and the personalized medicine market is expected to
reach $178 billion in 2022. The cost advantage of a fast and accurate variant-
finding product will be proportional to the number of genomes analyzed by users
in this market. There has been a recent exponential increase in the size and
scope of whole genome sequencing projects from 10,000 publicly available human
genomes in 2016 to the UK 100,000 Genomes Project to even larger, though less-
clearly defined, sequencing projects involving 1,000,000 participants proposed
in the US (Precision Medicine Initiative, and Million Veteran Program) and
China. In a likely and important scenario of sequencing the whole US population
in the foreseeable future, the cost saving could be several billion dollars,
thus making such efforts more feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will enable entrepreneurial education and customer discovery for a
software that will be based on a novel comprehensive method of genome variant
detection, GROM (Genome Rearrangement Omni-Mapper). GROM boasts lightning-speed
runtimes, an order of magnitude faster than state-of-the-art variant detection
pipelines. While drastically reducing computational time, GROM provides superior
overall variant detection compared to commonly employed algorithms. These unique
advantages over available tools both in speed and precision could make GROM a
very desirable application in this field (utilized via either licensing or pay-
per-use commercial models). This will require a better understanding of a
potential market and customer discovery. The process will include an educational
component at I-Corps workshops and a discovery component via meetings and active
communication with numerous potential users of the technology in commercial and
non-commercial entities. The customer discovery effort may result in developing
an appropriate business plan for attracting investments in a potential startup
that will perform further development and licensing of the
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.