* 1836416
* Student Support for the 2018 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power Systems, To Be Held in Boise, IDaho, June 24-28, 2018
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Brian Johnson, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Anil Pahwa
* 02/28/2019
* USD 12,750.00

The 2018 International Conference on Probabilistic Methods Applied to Power
Systems (PMAPS) will be held in Boise, Idaho from June 24 to June 28, 2018. The
objective of this proposal is to request support for conference and housing
expenses for US students participating in the PMAPS conference. The PMAPS takes
place once every two years with locations around the world. It is a nonprofit
event with technical co-sponsorship from the IEEE Power and Energy Society. It
is specifically designed to provide a forum for academic and industrial
researchers, and students, to discuss innovative development and application of
probabilistic methods to a variety of problems in the planning and operation of
power systems to improve their operation. Traditionally the PMAPS conference has
attracted a sizable participation of researchers from countries across the
globe. The interaction of students with researchers from different cultural
backgrounds provides an enriching experience that reaches far beyond technical
knowledge acquisition. Support from NSF will significantly increase the number
of student participants including those from underrepresented minority groups
and minority serving institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PMAPS is the only
international conference entirely dedicated to probabilistic methodologies and
applications to power systems and thus provides an ideal forum for the
presentation of innovative research fostering close interaction among students,
professors, practicing engineers, and regulators.It also offers opportunities
for students to present their work in front an audience of experts and peers.
Students who attend this conference will have an opportunity to compete for the
"Roy Billinton Student Paper Award". In addition, students will have an
opportunity to learn about possible future directions in the research. PMAPS
also provides a unique opportunity to academia and power industry to discuss
their vision of challenges in power and energy fields where statistical and
probabilistic methods can be applied to power system planning, operation,
control, maintenance, condition monitoring, and
diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.