* 1836961
* EAGER: Understanding Molecular Control and Phase Behavior of Random Heteropolymer Materials for Selective Transport
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Ting Xu, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2020
* USD 298,064.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In nature, membrane proteins are the
gatekeepers that mediate molecular transport to maintain cellular processes. If
polymers can be generated with separation performance similar to that of
membrane proteins, they could offer very significant impacts on the environment,
energy, separation technologies, and life sciences. For example, membranes are
in high use for water purification and desalination, carbon dioxide capture and
separation, chemical purification, and lithium battery applications. Over
decades there have been significant efforts in improving polymer chemistry and
self-assembly to better mimic the known structures of membrane proteins, which
have led to limited advances in membrane performance. The bottleneck is to
identify critical design parameters in these highly complex and diverse
biological systems. By fundamentally understanding the spatial arrangement of a
polymer chain inserted in a cellular lipid analogue and correlating it with
molecular transport, this project aims to provide insights to the long-standing
question: "what level of molecular control over polymeric materials is needed to
replicate protein transport properties?" If successful, the project may result
in new design rules for bio-inspired polymers, change the pathways for membrane
development, and lead to technologically relevant membranes. The proposed
studies are highly interdisciplinary and afford an excellent platform for
training students at all levels. They will also provide software tools for
polymer analysis as well as multiple outreach
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For membrane proteins the common belief is that
well-defined protein structure is requisite to simultaneously achieving high
flux and selectivity. For decades, various porous materials have been designed
following this rule and explored for selective transport with limited success.
Based on preliminary results using random heteropolymers, the central hypothesis
for the proposed study is that once the heteropolymer composition is fixed, the
statistical monomer distribution, rather than the atomically precise polymer
structure, is the key parameter governing the resulting transport properties.
This project aims to test this hypothesis by: (1) developing software tools to
perform in-depth analysis of random heteropolymer sequence; (2) characterizing
heteropolymer chain conformation upon lipid insertion to correlate the
heteropolymer phase behavior with rapid, selective proton transport; (3)
exploring heteropolymer-based block copolymers for analysis of heteropolymer
chain conformation and transport properties for future membrane design.
Preliminary results point to the potential that unstructured polymer chains can
perform at similar level as well-folded proteins for proton transport. The
planned exploratory studies will identify the critical design parameters behind
such behavior, which may impact the current approach to designing membranes. The
results may also change the traditional view on structure-function relationships
in naturally occurring biopolymers and affect future development of bio-inspired
polymers. Based on recent advances in living polymerization, the results would
be well posed to generate technologically important membranes. Furthermore, the
planned studies will: (1) provide graduate and undergraduate research
opportunities, as well as outreach opportunities through a joint effort with the
California Academy for educating the public and middle school students on
polymers; (2) develop new software tools for heteropolymer analysis and make
them publicly available; and (3) provide the materials communities with a
mechanism to overcome a barrier in starting heteropolymer-related
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.