* 1836566
* QLC: EAGER: Electronic Spectroscopy and Photochemistry of Cavity Polaritons
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Todd Krauss, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Advances in quantum information science can lead to transformative real-world
applications such as quantum cryptography, which could enable ultra-secure
communications that are impossible to compromise. However, such breakthroughs
require overcoming difficult fundamental and technological challenges to create
systems that strongly couple together light and matter, resulting in new
physical properties that resemble both waves and particles. In this project
funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Todd Krauss and Professor Nick Vamivakas of the
University of Rochester are using sophisticated laser techniques to study the
unexplored physical and chemical properties of coupled light-matter systems. The
discoveries from this project could have broad implications for secure
communication and information technology, and other areas of national, medical,
economic and security interest. The project is also providing training
opportunities for the next generation of scientists in interdisciplinary
research at the intersection of optical science and nanomaterials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microcavity polaritons, hybrid excitations of excitons and
cavity confined photons, have been shown to exhibit unique optical and
electronic properties that result in precise optical control over electron spin
and/or crystal momentum. Recently, microcavity polaritons have been realized in
devices that combine atomically thin semiconductor materials, and their van der
Waals bonded heterostructures. This project is using ultrafast optical
spectroscopy to characterize the fundamental excited state photophysics that
governs light emission from microcavity polaritons (and associated excitons) and
thus provide a unique window into the many-body interactions present in the
coupled cavity-exciton system. Fluorescence microscopy techniques are being used
to image individual photochemical reactions involving microcavity polaritons
with single-reaction resolution. By controlling the potential energy surfaces of
molecules inside an optical cavity, new chemical reaction mechanisms could
result via photoexcitation of cavity polaritons that will open up new reaction
pathways and thus enable chemistries currently not possible using classical
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.