* 1836403
* CBMS Conference:The Cahn-Hilliard Equation: Recent Advances and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Roger Temam, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/29/2020
* USD 35,000.00

This NSF award supports a five day CBMS Conference on "The Cahn-Hilliard
Equation: Recent Advances and Applications". The conference will be held at
Montgomery Bell State Park's Conference Center and Inn, in Burns, Tennessee
(about 30 miles outside of Nashville) from May 20-24, 2019. Professor Alain
Miranville of the University of Poitiers (France) will deliver the main lecture
series. Professor Miranville is an international expert in CH-type equations and
applications and a world renowned expositor and lecturer. Miranville's ten
lectures will take the participants on a journey through the subject beginning
with the derivation of the equation and associated boundary conditions, through
the analysis of the problems, numerical methods, and ending with cutting edge
applications of Cahn-Hilliard (CH) type equations in fluid dynamics, image
inpainting, and tumor growth. The main lectures will be supported by a diverse
group of additional speakers and participants. There will be three panel
discussions lead by the main lecturers: (1) attracting and training PhD students
in applied differential equations and providing the appropriate
interdisciplinary background, (2) open problems and applications of CH-type
equations in the physical sciences, and (3) future directions for CH-type
equations in radiology and tumor analysis. About 30 participants will be
supported; women, minorities, graduate students, postdoctoral associates, junior
faculty and faculty at primarily undergraduate institutions are encouraged to
participate. Ample time and space for private discussions during the week is
provided to lead to collaborations that continue to develop long after the
conference concludes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed lectures and panel
discussions heavily emphasize open research problems across multiple scientific
fields. The discovery that tumor growth can be effectively modeled using CH-type
equations is recent and holds great promise. Applications in fluid dynamics and
inpainting are equally promising and will be presented. This area promotes
interactions among mathematicians, medical researchers, scientists and
engineers. Professor Miranville will produce a monograph which will serve as the
unique concise reference for the subject and its far reaching, cutting edge
applications. For more information, please refer to the conference website:
http:/www.memphis.edu/msci/cahn-hilliard-nsf-cbms2019&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.