* 1836551
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Sulfonated Polymer Membrane Morphology in Microscale Transport of Organic Molecules
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sergey Vasenkov, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2022
* USD 120,000.00

Advanced chemical sensors enable technologies such as point-of-care medical
testing and personal protective equipment against chemical warfare agents.
Increasing sophistication of the chemical sensors derives from advances in the
materials used as the sensor or in studying existing materials with unusual
properties. One such material is the commercial polymer, Nafion, which is used
in electrolysis, mineral extraction, specialty chemical synthesis,
electrochemical sensors, and fuel cells. The widespread use of Nafion is due to
its unique chemical structure, which is comprised of a long hydrophobic (water
repellent) backbone of fluorine and carbon atoms and hydrophilic (water loving)
branches. These dual functionalities give rise to high chemical stability, high
reactivity, and flexibility in the presence of water. The dual functionality
also leads to unique transport of molecules through the material, particularly
when fabricated into a thin membrane. Transport of small molecules within the
Nafion membrane is well described by existing theories. However, transport of
larger organic compounds, such as those found in chemical warfare agents, cannot
be explained within existing theoretical frameworks, particularly when the
water-induced flexibility of Nafion is considered. This project will use
advanced experimental techniques to deduce transport of large organic molecules
that are representative of chemical warfare agents through the dynamic Nafion
membrane. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a direct mechanistic
understanding of water-enabled transport of organic molecules through Nafion
membranes. Preliminary data suggests large organic molecules are effectively
immobilized in a tertiary interphase region between hydrophobic and hydrophilic
domains in dry Nafion. The source of this interphase is hypothesized to be the
fluoroether linkage between the backbone and the perfluorosulfonic acid side
chains. However, phenols and other weak organic acids remain immobilized under
both dry and wet conditions. This project will probe the interphase, and the
role of bulk sulfonated polystyrene copolymers on transport of large organic
molecules in mixed solvent systems. An interdisciplinary team will employ small
angle neutron scattering, X-ray scattering, and nuclear magnetic resonance at
high magnetic fields. If successful, the proposed research will resolve the
relationship between the structural and dynamic properties of the distinctly
different domains in perfluorosulfonic acid and sulfonated polystyrene
membranes. Specifically, the investigation will determine impact of domain
morphology on the transport, immobilization, and reactivity of organic
molecules. The project will support graduate education, create new teaching
modules, and community outreach activities that demonstrate opportunities at the
intersection of transport, catalysis and structure optimization of polymeric
membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.