* 1836746
* I-Corps: Dual adaptive self-centering system for mitigating earthquake-induced damage and wind induced vibrations of structures
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Tathagata Ray, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project relates to a
control system for mitigating earthquake-induced damage and wind-induced
vibrations in buildings. The estimated long-term value of the loss of building
stock in the USA in a year, due to earthquakes (Annualized Earthquake Loss), is
$5.3 billion. This project's technology has the potential to prevent loss of
human life and property from earthquakes. Although windstorms do not typically
cause damage to tall buildings, they can produce considerable vibrations.
Prolonged exposure to such vibrations has been known to lead to nausea and even
migraines among inhabitants of tall buildings. This project's technology may
eliminate the side effects of wind vibrations for a large segment of
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is focused on an adaptive
control system for controlling vibrations of structures. The control system is
friction based, leading to low cost fabrication and maintenance. The system can
be installed in a newly built building, as well as can be retrofitted in an
existing building. The state-of-art adaptive seismic energy dissipaters limit
structural deformations by increasing their stiffness with displacement. This
project's technology can outperform current systems as it limits the structural
deformation by increasing both stiffness and energy dissipation with
displacement. Seismic waves have higher energy content at higher frequencies
(around 1 Hz), while windstorms have higher energy content at lower frequencies
(0.001-0.1 Hz). The energy dissipation capability of the proposed technology is
frequency independent. Hence it can absorb both forced and free vibrations of
tall buildings at all frequencies of wind loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.