* 1836357
* EAGER: Designing the OSN Software Platform
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2019
* USD 300,000.00

This EAGER award will explore the software platform needed to power a radically
new type of infrastructure, viz., a national-scale open storage network. The
project team will work closely with the Open Storage Network (OSN) project team,
located at Johns Hopkins University and the four NSF Big Data Regional
Innovation Hubs, who will acquire and operate the hardware component of the OSN.
The project will engage in multidisciplinary collaboration among computer
scientists, software and network engineers, and application scientists, to
develop and prototype the software. The goal is to learn rapidly about the key
requirements placed on the software platform in preparation for the next phase
of OSN, which would involve the deployment of a nationwide, production-quality
storage network with hundreds of petabytes of fault tolerant, distributed
storage, interconnected via high-speed networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus
of this project is on the design and development of the OSN software platform
and corresponding programming interfaces, to ensure that they can be accessed
effectively and easily by three groups of users: OSN system administrators, who
are required to monitor and manage OSN operations; application developers, who
develop innovative applications that build upon OSN capabilities; and
researchers, educators, students, and others, who use the OSN either directly or
through such applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant explores and
develops rapid prototypes of the software stack for nodes of the Open Storage
Network (OSN), with a view to answering exploratory questions vital to the
eventual success of a national-scale implementation, such as:&lt;br/&gt;-What
are the use cases that should inform the design of a system like
OSN?&lt;br/&gt;-What are the mechanisms that will be required to administer and
manage a system like OSN?&lt;br/&gt;-What value-added services should be
provided on top of a core OSN fabric to support application use
cases?&lt;br/&gt;-What sustainability models can be used to expand and sustain
OSN?&lt;br/&gt;-What are the implications of OSN use cases and workflows for OSN
infrastructure at the storage system level?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To provide a
foundation for this exploratory, rapid prototyping effort the EAGER team will
work with the OSN team to establish a functional storage testbed with software
that is sufficiently robust to give users confidence and enable use in real
scientific applications, which will be the test cases for this testbed. That
work will involve deployment of existing software such as Ceph and Globus.
However, that work is just preparatory to addressing the exploratory questions
listed above, which are the focus of the proposed project. The work proposed
here will prototype an initial version of the OSN Software Platform that
provides an initial set of authentication, authorization, data movement, and
data sharing capabilities to support OSN experimentation and validation. The
project will also work towards the design and development of a more full-
featured OSN Software Platform for its next version, based upon community input,
and backed up by early experimental studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.