* 1836009
* Enhancing GBT metrology to support high resolution 3mm molecular imaging for the U.S. Community
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Felix Lockman, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 02/28/2022
* USD 1,345,903.00

The Green Bank Telescope (GBT) is the world's largest fully-steerable telescope
and a unique asset for the US scientific community. Its surface, which is larger
than a football field, must be adjusted very precisely to bring the incoming
radio waves into focus, so the surface was designed with more than 2000
individual panels mounted on precise motors. The motors can move the panels to
compensate for any deviations from the perfect shape. While this works quite
well at night, it can be very difficult to make this adjustment during daylight
hours, when sunlight falling on different parts of the dish causes temperature
changes and unpredictable distortions that cannot currently be measured. These
distortions limit use of the GBT at its highest operating frequencies, where
tolerances on surface accuracy are the tightest. The current project will
implement a laser ranging measurement system on the GBT that will measure any
surface distortions very accurately, allowing the GBT to be focused precisely
both day and night. This will increase the available usable time of the
telescope at its highest operating frequencies by as much as 1,000 hours every
year, with a corresponding increase in the scientific output of the GBT and its
utility to the US scientific community for a broad range of investigations. The
Green Bank Observatory also supports a wide range of public outreach activities
through its visitor center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancements to the Green Bank
Telescope (GBT) metrology system are planned that will enable expanded operation
in the 3mm wavelength band during daylight hours. This work will increase the
usable telescope time at 3mm by as much as a factor of two, and increase
available time on the molecule-rich inner Galactic plane and the Galactic center
by up to a factor of four. Recent technological advances in commercial metrology
make it possible to purchase a Terrestrial Laser Scanner (TLS) which, when
mounted near the prime focus of the GBT, can scan the entire dish in one to two
minutes, producing ~10 million data points with individual range accuracies of
the order of a few mm. A least-squares fit to these data provides an estimate of
the surface with accuracies ~30 microns rms, significantly better than the
current method of "out-of-focus holography" and well in excess of the accuracy
needed. The measured surface would be compared to the ideal surface to produce
commands to the surface panel actuators to compensate for the thermal
distortions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.