* 1836671
* Diffusion of Ideas on Gender Equity Interventions Through Networks of U.S. Universities
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Kathrin Zippel, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 359,999.00

This EAGER is an exploratory study that will use a social network approach and
data scrapping strategies to study the diffusion of innovative ideas on systemic
change and gender equity among NSF ADVANCE grantees and beyond. Research on
ADVANCE programs usually examine universities or equity enhancing strategies,
but not how universities have cooperated, learned from, and influenced each
other. This EAGER will provide knowledge about this movement of ideas and people
in order to better understand and document the impact of the NSF ADVANCE
program.

This project will use interdisciplinary social network approaches to analyze the
diffusion of ideas within and the impacts of the NSF ADVANCE grantee network.
The proposers will create an original dataset constructed from multiple sources
to study collaborations, citations, and job mobility networks. The original
dataset will combine multiple publicly available sources: 1) documents, such as
NSF ADVANCE project summaries, award database, proposals, reports, and web
sites; 2) demographic, career and bibliometric data of ADVANCE PIs and scholars
reflecting their publications, citations and collaborations with each other; 3)
university characteristics from the survey of Integrated Postsecondary Education
Data System (IPEDS), Carnegie classification, doctoral prestige, and other
rankings of U.S. News; and 4) qualitative interviews with ADVANCE grantees.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.