* 1836868
* Acquisition of High-Precision Water Isotope Analyzer for Arid-Zone Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Juske Horita, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 146,575.00

Arid and semi-arid zones are expanding and becoming drier due to increasing
human activity, agriculture, and climate change. Sustainable development of the
southwestern United States, including West Texas, critically depends on creative
and efficient use of water resources, which are the most important natural
resource to society. The transport of water at and below the surface plays a key
role in the water cycle in arid and semi-arid environments. This grant from the
National Science Foundation supports the purchase of a high-precision infrared
laser spectrometer at Texas Tech University for isotopic analysis of water. This
instrument will provide new research opportunities that will lead to better
water conservation in these regions. It will also provide undergraduate,
graduate and underserved minority students with opportunities to conduct
scientifically and socially important research projects as part of their
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant from the National Science Foundation
supports the acquisition of a high-precision infrared (IR) laser spectrometer at
Texas Tech University for isotopic analysis of water. This instrument is capable
of measuring, in addition to conventional &amp;#948;2H and &amp;#948;18O values,
the 17O-excess, which is a novel, very useful tracer of water for diffusion-
controlled hydrologic processes such as evaporation of water from surface and
soil waters. Thus, a combined use of &amp;#948;2H - &amp;#948;18O -17O-excess
values can help advance our understanding of the behavior and transport of water
in arid and semi-arid zones. To date, high-precision 17O-excess measurements of
water have been conducted only by a select few laboratories via highly skilled
isotope ratio mass spectrometry. However, recent developments of commercial,
high-precision water isotope analyzers enable routine, high-precision
measurements of 17O-excess (&lt;15 per meg), in addition to &amp;#948;2H and
&amp;#948;18O values. The acquisition of this instrument will benefit several
current and future isotope hydrology projects in West Texas and adjacent U.S.
southwest regions, involving many researchers from Texas Tech University, and
Federal and regional agencies. It will also provide undergraduate, graduate and
underserved minority students with opportunities to conduct scientifically and
socially important research projects as part of their
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.