* 1836942
* CPS: Small: Software-State Observability in CPS
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Samuel Guyer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 12/31/2022
* USD 499,986.00

Cyber-physical system (CPS) technologies, such as automated aircraft and cars,
have become sufficiently complex that CPS software verification is now a major
bottleneck in product development. This project examines new approaches for
auto-generating reduced models of CPS software, in order to incorporate those
models in analysis, for instance, in system-wide simulations or bug detection.
This project will allow CPS software to be adapted and analyzed much more
flexibility in comparison with state-of-the-art methods, which limit software
developers by prohibiting use of many modern programming constructs and by
penalizing iterative software improvements during the design
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's intellectual merit is the
introduction of a theory of software-state observability, which will have wide
utility for CPS analysis including in applications such as online bug detection.
To this end the project concentrates on three specific aims: (i) the development
of concepts for reduced-order software modeling based on static and dynamic
analyses of CPS software programs, (ii) the formulation of a theory of software-
state observability to enable state estimation across the boundaries of physical
and software components, and (iii) the application of these theories to online
bug monitoring for an open-source flight control
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project represents a fundamental departure from
the conventional treatment of software in a CPS, where software must be tightly
specified in advance, where the program must be carefully verified to prove that
it meets specifications, and where after final validation the software is
assumed to be essentially free of bugs. Our approach permits developers much
greater latitude in creating new CPS software by requiring reasonable but not
excessive initial testing, as justified by better analysis tools and by online
reliability monitoring. The result will enable more sophisticated and lower cost
automated cars and unmanned aircraft. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results related to
the project will be shared through archival publications and data will be made
available online through Tufts University at
https://tufts.box.com/s/aq305785bg2s3j29lls8u4wdpybzpcth. Software uploaded to
this repository will be available under suitable licensing models (such as BSD
or Apache). Data will be retained at least through the duration of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.