* 1836802
* ICE-T: RC: Towards Highly Reliable Low Latency Broadband  (HRLLBB) Communications over Wireless Heterogeneous Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Walid Saad, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Driven by the emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), next-generation
wireless networks will witness a radical departure from the rate-centric designs
of yesteryear, toward an ultra-reliable low latency communication (URLLC)
paradigm. While current URLLC research has been primarily guided by the need to
deliver very short IoT sensor packets, the advent of new IoT applications such
as the tactile Internet, is rapidly disrupting this original URLLC premise. Such
emerging IoT applications can be classified as highly reliable, low latency
broadband (HRLLBB) services as they require joint uplink and downlink
transmission of variable-length packets, while guaranteeing high reliability,
low latency, and broadband data rates. The goal of this research is, thus, to
initiate one of the first concerted US-EU efforts focused on developing the
fundamental science needed to seamlessly integrate HRLLBB services into
tomorrow's cellular networks. In particular, the proposed research will provide
novel analytical tools to facilitate the modeling, design, analysis, and
optimization of wireless networks that can cater to HRLLB services. This, in
turn, will enable a broad range of novel wireless services with significant
societal impacts, ranging from haptics to autonomous systems. The research is
further coupled with an extensive US-European Union (EU) educational plan that
includes new curriculum development and extensive training of US and EU students
and researchers on interdisciplinary research at the boundary of wireless
networking, economics, and network optimization. K-12 outreach events will be
organized to involve minority students in hands-on URLLC IoT activities thus
attracting them to Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics (STEM) and
wireless careers. Broad international dissemination will be ensured via joint
US-EU events such as tutorials and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will introduce a holistic framework for expediting the introduction of
emerging HRLLBB services over wireless networks. Through a collaboration between
the US, Denmark, and Finland, this research will yield a number of
transformative outcomes that include: 1) Rigorous reliability metrics that
leverage novel frameworks from statistics and economics to characterize the
achievable HRLLBB quality-of-service, jointly over uplink and downlink, under
extreme network conditions, 2) Fundamental characterization of the wireless
tradeoffs governing the rate-reliability-latency performance of HRLLBB services,
3) Novel, dynamic orthogonal and non-orthogonal multiple access designs coupled
with anticipatory HRLLBB handover schemes that enable a seamlessly co-existence
of heterogeneous services, 4) Disruptive online algorithms that will enable
HRLLBB services to optimize their rate-reliability-latency performance by
leveraging fog computing functions while effectively managing, in real-time,
their communications and computing resources, and 5) Validation using practical
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.