* 1836938
* III: Medium: Collaborative Research: Robust Large-Scale Electronic Medical Record Data Mining Framework to Conduct Risk Stratification for Personalized Intervention
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Heng Huang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 216,164.00

The increasingly large amounts of Electronic Medical Record (EMR) data offer
unprecedented opportunities for EMR data mining to enhance health care
experiences for personalized intervention, improve different diseases risk
stratifications, and facilitate understanding about disease and appropriate
treatment. To solve the key and challenging problems in mining such large-scale
heterogeneous EMRs, the investigators aim to develop: (i) new computational
tools to automate the EMRs processing, including new techniques for filling in
missing values using a new robust rank-k matrix completion method; (ii)
annotation of unstructured free-text EMRs using multi-label multi-instance
learning; (iii) a new sparse multi-view learning model to integrate
heterogeneous EMRs to predict the readmission risk of Heart Failure (HF)
patients and to support personalized intervention; (iv) novel methods for
identifying the longitudinal patterns using high-order multi-task learning; (v)
a nonparametric Bayesian model for predicting the event time outcomes of the HF
patients readmission. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sparse multi-view feature
learning and robust multi-task longitudinal pattern finding algorithms have a
broad range of applications beyond EMR data mining. Free dissemination of source
implementations of the algorithms enable other researchers to further develop
and apply the resulting techniques. In particular, the methods and tools are
expected to impact other EMR and public health research. This project offers
enhanced opportunities for research-based advanced training of students
(including members of minorities and under-served populations) and integration
of research results into curricula at the University of Texas at Arlington, the
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, and Southern
Methodist University. For further information see the web site at:
http://ranger.uta.edu/~heng/NSF-III-1302675.html