* 1836981
* Integrating novel molecular techniques to disentangle the roles of climate, time, and human agency on the evolution of the Icelandic landscape
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2024
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 11/30/2024
* USD 1,296,296.00

Project Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Significant uncertainties remain in our ability to
predict how ecosystems will respond and landscapes will change as the Arctic
continues to warm faster than the global average. We can look to past warm times
in recent Earth history to better constrain how the Earth system will respond to
warming over the coming century. At the end of the last ice age Earth's orbit
was such that the Northern Hemisphere received nearly 10% more solar energy in
summer than at present. That extra energy was sufficient to melt almost all
Iceland's glaciers, and the Sagas say birch forests extended from the shores to
the mountains. Molecular compounds that track changes in temperature, aridity,
and vegetation history are contained within the sediment deposited in Icelandic
lakes and nearby composite soils over the past 12,000 years. These "proxies"
provide a means to accurately reconstruct a continuous history of climate and
ecosystem status across Iceland since the end of the last ice age. This research
benefits from recent advances in the recovery of DNA from sedimentary archives
and in organic geochemistry to isolate biomarkers that track temperature and
moisture balance. A pervasive feature of the contemporary Icelandic landscape is
widespread soil erosion, but whether that erosion is a result of human
settlement and pastoral activity or climate change remains debated. Geochemical
proxies related to soil erosion preserved in well-dated lake sediment are
targeted to disentangle the roles of climate and humans in Iceland's soil
erosion history. This project helps launch an early-career Latino scientist,
provides international exposure to a recent PhD as postdoc in a DNA laboratory
in Norway, and supports a new PhD student, as well as supporting and mentoring
motivated undergraduate students, who gain research experience in a highly
relevant field. With an embedded journalist communicating the potential effects
of climate change derived from this research to the wider public is enhanced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The Arctic is currently
warming twice as fast as the global average with summer temperatures predicted
to be 4 to 6 degrees C above late 20th Century averages by the year 2100.
Amplified warming in the Arctic is expected to result in a northward shift in
woody plants. The increase in woody vegetation will reduce surface albedo and
increase atmospheric water vapor, positive feedback mechanisms that are
currently poorly constrained in climate models. In Iceland, stratified,
securely-dated, lake sediment records span the current interglacial (Holocene)
and contain a rich archive of sedimentary ancient DNA (sedaDNA) and lipid
biomarker proxies for temperature (brGDGTs), hydrology (delta2-Hwax) and human
agency (fecal sterols and PAHs). The analysis of modern soil and lake surface
sediment networks will provide calibrations that enhance the community's
understanding of these promising new molecular proxies and facilitate the
development of regional training sets. Merging the local calibrations with
similar measurements downcore in lake sediment and stratified aeolianites will
enable reliable reconstructions of past ecosystems and their dependence on
summer temperature and hydroclimate. The novel integration of these datasets
will provide transformative new insights into 1) how much warmer was the early
Holocene in Iceland relative to today, 2) when and to what elevation woody
plants established themselves during early Holocene warmth, and 3) to what
extent climate, volcanism and/or Norse settlement led to the widespread soil
erosion apparent across the Icelandic landscape today. Anticipated results from
this project provide key datasets needed to inform policy and improve forecasts
of a rapidly warming Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.