* 1836963
* Collaborative Project Management Institute for Informal Science Institutions
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Lesley Markham, Association of Science-Technology Centers
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 74,931.00

This workshop is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. The project will conduct an in-person participatory
workshop designed to broaden participation in STEM. The project is designed to
build the capacity of informal science institutions (ISIs) and their partners to
use evidence-based collaborative project management practices and culturally
responsive approaches to manage complex partnership efforts. The workshop will
develop structure and provide tools for effective collaborative project
management between ISIs including science centers and museums, and their
research and community partners. To guide the workshops, participants will
explore some core dimensions of culture to understand audiences, communities
traditionally underserved by informal STEM institutions, and institutional
differences. Participants will leave with concrete, actionable plans that will
enable them to more effectively bring their collaboration plans to fruition. The
project will develop resources including a playbook of project management
templates, video vignettes, and summaries of relevant research findings and
lessons from the field. Proceedings and resources from the workshop will be
shared online with the field and ultimately archived on
informalscience.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference participants will build the
human resource expertise, infrastructure, and capacity needed to develop and
maintain lasting partnerships that will further their institutions' aspirations
to broaden participation in STEM. The project brings together an experienced,
multidisciplinary team from informal science education and private industry
professionals to advance knowledge of the skills and tools needed for managing
complex collaborations between researchers, practitioners, and community
stakeholders that will increase their effectiveness when working with diverse
audiences. During the workshop, participants will think through their current
project work by using a defined collaborative project management process to
build a foundation of understanding and trust. Upon completion of the Institute,
participants will have: (1) a shared purpose and goals that represent the
interests of all parties; (2) identified some cross cultural and organizational
differences that need to be accommodated for successful collaboration; (3)
fostered joint decision making based on objective steps vs priorities of one
organization; and (4) clarified deliverables of their project and how to measure
success; (5)identified individual roles and responsibilities within their
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.