* 1836410
* Conference Proposal: Scientific Exploration of the Arctic and North Pacific (SEA-NorP)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Lindsay Worthington, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 01/31/2019
* USD 24,700.00

Better constraining the past climate and tectonic history of the North
Pacific/Bering Sea/Arctic Ocean region is critical to understanding modern
climatic changes as well as geologic hazards along the Alaskan margin. However,
these regions are seriously under-sampled in terms of complete records of change
over time, as recorded in marine sediments, which contain evidence of changes
occurring in the oceans and on land. Such records can be collected via
coring/drilling of seafloor sediments via the NSF-funded drill ship, the R/V
Joides Resolution which serves the NSF International Ocean Discovery Program.
This workshop improves coordination and maximizing/leveraging expensive ocean
drilling expeditions and the science that comes from them. It draws together
experts as well as scientists new to ocean drilling to evaluate best options for
drilling based on critical scientific questions and existing site-
characterization data needed to address them. The workshop specifically targets
investigators with broad interests in the North Pacific, Bering Sea, and Arctic
Ocean, as well as early career investigators. Potential topics include
paleoceanographic reconstructions, changes in marine ecosystems across climate
shifts, tectonics, volatile cycling and subduction and geohazards. The workshop
involves a series of keynote talks, short visionary/lightning talks that
spotlight early career scientists and those new to ocean drilling, and breakout
sessions organized both around science themes and geographic sub-regions will
develop targeted science questions. Funds are augmented by those the
International Ocean Discovery Program US Science Support Program. Broader
impacts include support of early career scientists to come to the meeting,
leveraging assets of the NSF-funded ocean drilling program the NSF-funded
GeoPRISMS program, and the emerging Subduction Zones in 4-Dimensions initiative.
It will also enhance science planning intended to document geohazards and their
frequency on the Aleutian arc and environs; and support of an early career
faculty member in New Mexico, an EPSCoR state (a state that does not receive
significant federal funding).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Limited previous drilling in
the North Pacific, Bering Sea, and Arctic Ocean hampers scientific understanding
of fundamental Earth processes such as: (1) impacts of oceanic exchange between
the Arctic and North Pacific Oceans on long-term climate evolution and the
dynamics of rapid climate change as seen in marine sediment cores that allow
reconstructions of changes in sea level, ocean salinity, temperature, sea-ice
extent, and the response of marine ecosystems along this critical junction in
the climate system; (2) understanding how ice and sea level respond to warming
and cooling and differentiation among paleoenvironments such as grounded glacial
ice, floating ice shelves, sea ice, and open waters; (3) documentation of the
extent of eruptions, the long term history of the Aleutian islands and the
evolution of the mantle magmatic source, histories that are an important
starting point for understanding subduction and tectonics in the North Pacific;
(4) studies of the time intervals and pattern of subduction zone earthquakes,
which is critical for understanding megathrust locking behavior and the
submarine landslides and tsunamis triggered by such events; and (5) improved
understanding of marine ecosystem thresholds in response to climate change and
different levels of atmospheric CO2, both in terms of surface productivity (such
as seasonal phytoplankton blooms) and subsurface marine ecosystems during times
of different CO2), sea surface temperature, and sea level boundary
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.