* 1836852
* Spin transition in germanate perovskite and post-perovskite at high pressure
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Thomas Duffy, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2023
* USD 415,077.00

The geological activity at Earth's surface can profoundly affect human
societies. It ultimately arises from on-going processes within the planet deep
interior. These large-scale processes are in turn controlled by the properties
of the constituent minerals of the deep Earth. A mineral's crystal and
electronic structures are its most fundamental characteristics, from which all
other physical and chemical properties follow. Due to the high pressures
(millions of atmospheres) and temperatures (thousands of degrees) of the Earth's
mantle, there is limited knowledge of the crystal and electronic structures of
minerals residing near its base. This region is primarily composed of silicate
minerals that adopt structures known as perovskite and post-perovskite. In this
project, the investigator will conduct laboratory experiments on these
structures to probe how incorporation of iron affects their properties. He will
study magnesium germanates, a class of compounds that are close analogs for the
silicate minerals of the deep Earth yet can be studied at pressures and
temperatures that are more easily attainable in the laboratory. Through this
work, he will provide fundamental knowledge of mineral properties that are
needed to interpret geophysical observations and constrain the physical
processes in Earth's interior. This project will have implications for the
understanding of mantle thermal convection, which drives plate tectonics at the
origin of numerous hazards for human societies, and provide insights on the
effect of extreme conditions of pressure and temperature on materials
properties. The project will also provide support for the training of a graduate
student&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron influences key physical properties of lower
mantle minerals including density, elasticity, element partitioning, and
electrical and thermal conductivity. These properties in turn affect the
interpretation of seismic and other geophysical observations and constrain
models of the deep Earth. Perovskites and post-perovskites are major structures
of the lower mantle. Iron in these materials may adopt different valences and
spin states and may occupy different structural sites. High-pressure synchrotron
Mossbauer spectroscopy and X-ray emission spectroscopy are the primary tools for
investigating the electronic state of iron in mantle minerals. In this study the
investigator will use these techniques together with conventional Mossbauer
spectroscopy to explore the properties of perovskites and post-perovskites over
a range of pressures and iron and aluminum contents. He will use magnesium
gemanate analogs which lower pressure of formation, compared to that of Earth's
silicates, will allow investigating the effect of pressure on post-perovskite
properties. The expected results will provide strong constraints on the site
occupancies, valences and spin states of perovskite and post-perovskite, as well
as a direct test of recent theoretical calculations. They will contribute to
unveiling the role of iron in perovskite and post-perovskite which is crucial
for the unambiguous interpretation of Mossbauer spectra. They will also enable a
more comprehensive understanding of spin-pairing behavior in major lower mantle
minerals, thus better constraining the properties of Earth's deep
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.