* 1836833
* ERC History Project: Phase Two
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Rocio Chavela Guerra, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 05/31/2021
* USD 291,558.00

Since 1984, the NSF's highly successful Engineering Research Centers (ERC)
Program has led the Foundation in developing innovative new modes of support for
research and education, led U.S. academic institutions to evolve the ways in
which research is structured and form intellectual and financial partnerships
with industry, produced thousands of engineering graduates who are highly
productive leaders and innovators in industry and academe, and enabled thousands
of innovative new technologies and companies that have stimulated the U.S.
economy and provided a substantial return on NSF's investment. The proposed
project is the second phase of a two-part project to prepare a detailed, book-
length History of the ERC Program over the program's more than 30-year span. The
History will serve the national interest by providing lessons learned, best
practices, and management guidance to government program managers, academic
faculty and administrators, and industry leaders regarding the structure,
operation, and management of such centers, not only in engineering but in any
field of science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ERC Program History
will be published as an e-book to have the maximum reach to different interested
communities. The core narrative of the History will contain hundreds of links to
ancillary material in various media - official documents, interview summaries,
personal essays, meeting presentations, reports, graphics, videos, and captured
websites. This material will be accessible to audiences ranging from engineering
faculty and students to academic administrators and government officials, to
industry executives and research managers, and to scholars of history and the
management of technology. The online History will be marketed via email and the
Web to all these audiences nationwide and worldwide. The book-length narrative
and its ancillary resources will together provide a thoroughly documented
understanding of how various groups involved in the ERC Program responded to the
challenges inherent in the ERC construct, and how through their collective
experiences it evolved through time to become one of the most recognized,
respected, and productive centers programs worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.