* 1836936
* FMitF: Collaborative Research: Synergies between Program Synthesis and Neural Learning of Graph Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Mayur Naik, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 12/31/2023
* USD 466,000.00

A challenging problem in a diverse and growing body of applications concerns
automatically generating computer programs that satisfy desired functional
requirements. Two promising and complementary approaches that have recently
emerged to address this problem are program synthesis and neural learning. This
project aims to synergistically combine the two approaches to improve the
productivity of programmers and the quality of software. The project also aims
to train graduate students at the intersection of formal methods and machine
learning, engage undergraduate students in research through internships, and
disseminate results in the form of publicly available course materials and open-
source software artifacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Program synthesis ensures that
the generated program is correct with respect to a logical specification.
Moreover, users can easily guide the synthesizer away from an undesired program
and towards a desired one, by changing the specification. On the other hand,
neural learning can handle user requirements that are impossible to provide via
a logical specification -- a fact highlighted by the success of neural networks
in domains such as natural language processing, computer vision, and robotics.
Moreover, neural networks scale extremely well, by virtue of their ability to
learn latent patterns that repeat across different programs. This project builds
upon recent progress in program synthesis by developing novel learning-based
mechanisms that enable flexible specifications, richer verifiers, and scalable
solvers. In the realm of machine learning, it enables deep neural networks to
provide correctness guarantees that are typically required when reasoning about
rich structured data. In doing so, it develops novel architectures and
methodologies for representation learning, reinforcement learning, and learning
with limited data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.