* 1836921
* ICE-T: RC: Multi-Domain Multi-Broker Elastic Optical Networks with Cognitive Functionalities
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* S.J.Ben Yoo, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2023
* USD 358,927.00

The proposed project seeks an innovative approach to the design, control and
management of next generation Internet core networks. A new inter-domain
networking paradigm is considered, where broker agents compete freely with each
other to provide attractive inter-networking services to Autonomous Systems
(ASes), while ASes also choose broker services suitable for their inter-
networking needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a market-driven
multi-broker-assisted multi-domain framework that can coordinate -- in a
distributed, incentivized manner - while providing complete autonomy and freedom
to both brokers and ASes. Through market-driven incentives and competitions, the
brokers and the ASes will pursue mutually beneficial services, which will in
turn continuously spur innovative solutions and services. The new inter-domain
networking architecture with multiple brokers will facilitate automated,
Quality-of-Service aware, and impairment-responsive services. The project
leverages cognitive functionalities based on machine learning to optimize end-
to-end service provisioning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
architect, simulate, prototype, and experiment to improve system (a)
scalability, (b) end-to-end performance, (c) robustness and adaptability, and
(d) manageability and coordination. The project will leverage novel and emerging
cognitive techniques for dynamic traffic prediction and adaptive provisioning,
quality of transmission estimation and fault detection across multiple domains.
This project extends a research collaboration between the University of
California, David, the Universitat Politecnica de Cataluna (UPC), Spain, and
Consorzio Nazionale and Interuniversitario per le Telecomunicazioni (CNIT),
Italy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.