* 1836469
* Supporting U.S.-Based Students to Participate in the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Data Mining (ICDM 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Ping Chen, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This grant provides international travel support for approximately sixteen U.S.
based graduate student participants to attend the 2018 International Conference
on Data Mining, to be held in Singapore, November 17-20, 2018. ICDM is the
world's premier research conference in data mining. It provides an international
forum for presentation of original research results, as well as exchange and
dissemination of innovative and practical development experiences. The total
number of ICDM participants in the past has been in excess of 500, with a
majority of the participants from the U.S., then Europe and Asia. Besides the
technical program, ICDM 2018 features workshops, tutorials, panels, demos, data
challenge competition, and a Ph.D. forum. The conference recognizes the
importance of recruiting and engaging students in data mining research in early
stage of their graduate study. The Ph.D. forum is designed to provide an
interactive environment in which Ph.D. students can meet, exchange their ideas
and experiences both with peers and with senior researchers from the data mining
community in an international scope. The supported students will advance their
skills and knowledge, learn about the latest research, and develop their
research networks in data mining. A strong representation of U.S. researchers at
the conference is useful in maintaining U.S. competitiveness in this important
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ICDM conference series promotes novel, high-
quality research findings, and innovative solutions to challenging data mining
problems, and seeks to advance the state-of-the-art in data mining. The
conference covers all aspects of data mining, including algorithms, software,
systems, and applications. ICDM draws researchers, application developers, and
practitioners from a wide range of data mining related areas such as statistics,
machine learning, pattern recognition, databases, data warehousing, data
visualization, knowledge-based systems, and high-performance computing. The
conference proceedings are published by IEEE. The recipients of the NSF travel
support will be listed at the ICDM 2018 conference website, together with
additional ICDM 2018 information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.