* 1836821
* Space Weather Operations-to-Research (O2R): Physics-Based Extension of the Wang-Sheeley-Arge (WSA) Model Capabilities
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Igor Sokolov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 02/28/2022
* USD 249,353.00

This is a 1-year pilot research program to extend the current operational
capability of forecasting the solar wind, which drives space weather in the
Earth's environment. The research will enhance understanding of the fundamental
processes in the solar wind and allow the further Research to Operation (R2O)
transition to a predictive tool to simulate and forecast dynamical Space Weather
Events. The research project will also provide education and training
opportunities for students in Space Weather.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a
1-year pilot research program to extend the current operational capability of
forecasting the ambient state of the solar wind. The Wang-Sheeley-Arge (WSA)
model is currently used for operational forecasts of the solar wind. The semi-
empirical WSA model provides a distribution of the solar wind parameters at a
spherical interface between the Solar Corona (SC) and Inner Heliosphere (IH)
based on the latest synoptic map for the solar magnetic field. The research will
develop a physics-based, self-consistent model to understand and forecast the
ambient state of the Solar Corona (SC). The research will (1) enhance
understanding of the fundamental processes, (2) improve our capability to model
and forecast the ambient state in both SC and IH, and (3) allow the further
Research to Operation (R2O) transition to a predictive tool to simulate and
forecast dynamical Space Weather Events. The new model for the SC based on the
Alfven wave turbulence will be delivered to the Community Coordinated Modeling
Center (CCMC) to enable broad use by the heliophysics community. Realtime runs
of the model at CCMC will be available to observers, who can use these models
results to interpret the observational data. The research project will also
provide education and training opportunities for
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.