* 1836719
* Fouling resistant, freestanding zwitterionic polysulfones for osmotically driven membrane processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Matthew Green, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 311,175.00

Providing sustainable and secure access to potable water is a critical challenge
facing this generation. Natural water sources are treated to remove salt,
organic matter, and biological organisms. As water demand increases, water
sources that require more rigorous pretreatment must be utilized. Polymer
membranes are a promising technology for these more rigorous water purification
demands, as they selectively transport purified water while rejecting
contaminants. Although promising, current membranes face two profound
limitations: adhesion and growth of biological films on the membrane, and
membrane degradation by chlorine. Both effects reduce membrane performance and
increase cost due to the need to clean or replace the membrane. This project
will design and test new polymeric membrane materials that retain the
performance of commercial membranes, with molecular-level modification of the
polymer for increased resistance to fouling by biofilms and decreased
degradation by chlorine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an integration of
macromolecular and process engineering, this project will investigate how
molecular level polymeric design impacts processing, microstructure, and
separation performance. Poly(arylene ether sulfone) precursors will be modified
using post-polymerization modifications to introduce sulfobetaine zwitterions
and a series of crosslinkers. The charge and crosslink densities will be
optimized to balance hydrophilicity and water sorption versus swelling that
leads to a loss of mechanical stability. Then, (anti)fouling mechanisms for the
new membranes will be probed, including the role of surface roughness,
hydrophilicity, and charge content on protein adhesion. Also, the influence of
systematic changes in charge content on physical membrane characteristics will
be studied, including water permeability, salt rejection at various salt
concentrations and pressure drops, membrane porosity, free volume, morphology,
and separation/process costs. Finally, the charge content and processing
conditions will be correlated to membrane longevity, specifically structural
integrity at various transmembrane pressure drops for asymmetric membranes,
resistance to chlorine-mediated oxidative degradation, and long-term fouling
studies. One graduate student will be trained in this project and undergraduate
students will be involved in the laboratory work. An educational outreach plan
is included that will engage the diverse student body of Arizona State
University and the surrounding metropolitan community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.