* 1836599
* QLC: EAGER: Molecular harvesting of ultrastrong light-matter coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Joel Yuen-Zhou, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Joel Yuen Zhou of the University of California, San Diego, is supported by an
EAGER award in the Division of Chemistry to study exotic forms of matter that
arise from ultra-strong coupling between molecules and light in an optical
cavity. An optical cavity is an arrangement of mirrors that forms a standing
wave cavity resonator for light waves. When ensembles of molecules are placed
between closely spaced mirrors, the energy states of the molecules mix with
those of the cavity photons (light particles) to produce new hybrid excited
quantum states. These states are partially molecular and partially photonic. If
the energy of interaction between light and matter is sufficiently strong, an
unusual phase of matter called the ultrastrong coupling (USC) phase is achieved.
In this phase, the ground state of the composite system contains a macroscopic
number of photons. USC has just been successfully attained in the context of
molecules embedded in optical microcavities at room temperature. What are the
physicochemical properties of these exotic molecular-photonic systems? Yuen and
coworkers use theoretical approaches to address this question. They study the
onset of this phase transition as a function of system parameters that can be
externally tuned. Such parameters may be temperature, molecular concentration or
other quantities. They will explore how USC affects chemical reactivity as well
as energy conversion and storage. The Yuen-Zhou group engages in outreach
activities aimed at broadening the participation of under-represented groups in
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yuen Zhou and his research group pioneer the theoretical
and computational frameworks to understand the physics and chemistry of
molecular USC between confined light and molecular degrees of freedom. In these
systems, the molecular ground state in principle stores a nontrivial number of
photons that can even scale with system size if the light-matter coupling is
stronger than a critical threshold. Currently, there is little understanding on
how to extract or use this energy. This research addresses how to harness
electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom in molecules to store and release
this vacuum energy and in doing so, concomitantly achieve new flavors of
chemical reactivity. This project also provides novel strategies to probe the
quantum nature of the modified vacuum and explore quantum phase transitions
using molecular systems. The relevance of this project is that it addresses a
timely yet largely unexplored frontier at the intersection of quantum
electrodynamics and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.