* 1836901
* ICE-T: RC: Orchestration and Reconfiguration Control Architecture for Software Defined Radios
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ivan Seskar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2021
* USD 316,000.00

Wireless networks have grown enormously during the past 30 years, impacting
numerous industries, including telecommunications, emergency response, and
entertainment. Wireless advances could radically change several industries in
the near future, including manufacturing, the automotive industry, healthcare,
assisted living, public events, home automation, and utilities. However, each
industry has different, often opposing, wireless demands. Manufacturing often
requires a low data rate, ultra-low latency closed loop communication between
machines, while emerging augmented reality interactions between people have much
larger large data volumes, but can tolerate higher latency. Today, applications
and services are constrained to a handful of wireless technologies, such as 4G,
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, because developing and modifying new radio protocols
requires many man-years. The challenge for the wireless community is to enable
wireless networks the same flexibility as regular computing devices, such as
laptops or phones, where the same hardware supports a near infinite variety of
behaviors realized in software. Flexibility at the wireless level has lagged as
radios have been implemented as fixed-function circuits, in order to minimize
marginal cost, energy use, and network latency. Enabling such flexibility would
open opportunities for new wireless functions in diverse application domains.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the emerging field of Software-Defined Radio (SDR)
has made progress toward this vision, recent results have shown that traditional
SDRs suffer serious limitations. The main problem is the slower sequential
execution, even when using multicore central processing units (CPUs) or graphics
processing units (GPUs), in contrast to the fast execution and high
parallelization in application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs)or field-
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). This research will explore and evaluate a new
software abstraction, Dynamic Blocks (DB), which will realize many software
abstractions in an SDR FPGA, including procedure calls, recursion, queuing,
dynamic routing, shared memory and matrix algebra. Realizing these abstractions
in FPGAs will allow developers to rapidly try new designs or modify existing
ones while meeting real-time latency and low energy requirements. The project
will use millimeter-wave (mmWave) scenarios to evaluate real-time SDRs
programmed using DBs. The SDRs available in the ORBIT testbed at Rutgers
University, and the future mmWave capable equipment from the recently-funded
COSMOS platform and European Union partners would be the target platforms for
this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.