* 1836779
* Collaborative Research: The Next Generation of Gravitational Wave-Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Bangalore Sathyaprakash, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 253,940.00

The NSF's Advanced LIGO and the European Virgo observatory have established a
new era in astronomy. The discoveries made by these second-generation
gravitational-wave detectors have had a transformative impact, even though they
are only able to observe a small fraction of the Universe. Taking full advantage
of the rich promise of gravitational-wave astronomy will require a new network
of third-generation detectors that can survey the Universe on its largest scales
to provide answers to questions of broad interest in astrophysics, cosmology,
fundamental physics, and nuclear physics. This award funds U.S. participation in
the international effort to develop a third-generation gravitational-wave
network; initiate a coordinated program to study third-generation gravitational-
wave science targets, networks, and detector configurations; and support the
U.S. role in planning the future of gravitational-wave astronomy. Third-
generation detectors will expand humanity's ability to listen to the cosmic
symphony of gravitational waves out to the very edge of the Universe. This award
broadens opportunities for underrepresented students and provides students and
postdocs with exposure to cutting-edge instrument technology, as well as project
planning and management opportunities, positioning them well for scientific
leadership positions. The technology development required to realize a next-
generation detector will expand collaboration with and drive improvements in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award leverages the decades-long investment
by the NSF in LIGO and will position the U.S. to be a leadership partner in the
future of gravitational-wave astronomy and physics. It will fund an effort to:
(i) work with the Gravitational Wave International Committee (GWIC) to develop
and document the international community's vision for third-generation science;
(ii) extend the catalog of third-generation candidate detector designs,
exploring configurations that were not included in previous international
studies like the European Einstein Telescope; (iii) produce parametric cost
estimates for the configurations that are identified; (iv) explore pathways to
achieving a successful third-generation global network; and (v) define metrics
for the network's discovery potential as a function of
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.