* 1836329
* Workshop on Real Time Data Analytics for Resilient Electric Grid. To Be Held in Portland, Oregon, August 4-5, 2018
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Anurag Srivastava, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/2019
* USD 49,992.00

Availability of data from massive sensors deployment enables novel data-driven
monitoring and control strategies in the power grid with improved decision
support for enhancing resiliency. This workshop will focus on identifying the
problem with evolving smart grid complexity and the recent advancements in
possible solutions to enable resiliency of the power grid, specifically focused
on utilizing real-time data analytics. This workshop will have top expert in
data analytics, cyber security, resiliency and electric grid operation from
federal agencies, utilities, ISOs, vendors, and NSF awardee and underrepresented
minority and women participants will be highly encouraged. Although the majority
of the participants will be from the power and energy area, some selected
experts from data science and analytics will be invited to participate in the
workshop. This will allow the participants to learn about best practices in
other areas to implement in power and energy systems. Strategies identified by
the stakeholders at the workshop will result in exchange of ideas and
educational content, in the preparation of a highly-trained workforce to manage
the complex grid of the future. Research needs identified by the stakeholders
will result in better investment by federal agencies and advancing the Nation
towards the resilient electric grid.

The workshop will result in new strategies and ideas for data-science approaches
to enable resiliency of the electric grid. Phasor measurement units (PMUs)
provide real time situational awareness and decision support. Distribution
automation and smart meters enables advanced volt-var control, real time load
behavior tracking, outage management and transactive control. Enhanced
visibility of low voltage distribution network enabled by data sensors may help
energy producers and consumers to better manage their energy portfolio for
resilient operation. Furthermore, an increasing number of digital devices and
sensor data in this cyber-physical electric grid also need solutions for data
anomalies and cyber-security management. One of the focus areas of this workshop
is real time data analytics to enable resilient electric grid. Big data is
generated and monitored ubiquitously in smart grids, but largely unexploited in
discovering knowledge and new solutions for critical smart grid applications.
Robust data analytics solutions are critical towards the optimized operation to
enhance the resiliency of the smart grid. Hence this workshop will focus on real
time data analytics to enhance situational awareness and decision support to
enhance resiliency of the power grid. Results of the workshop will be
disseminated through web for wider distribution.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.