* 1836306
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACS/IEEE International Conference on Computer Systems and Applications (ACS/IEEE AICCSA)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Ali Akoglu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 03/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This award is to assist US-based graduate students to attend the 2018 ACS/IEEE
International Conference on Computer Systems and Applications (ACS/IEEE AICCSA))
to be held in Aqaba, Jordan, October 28 - November 1, 2018. Participation in
AICCSA and similar conferences are valuable and important activities of the
graduate school experience. It provides a venue that may expand the experiences
of the participating graduate students to enable interactions with researchers
in general from all over the world and from the Middle East in particular. This
may have an important impact on their career development and will give some
experiences to participate effectively in the global economy and information
services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference held in Aqaba, Jordan will span
five days and will consist of technical paper presentations, industry
participation, posters, a Doctoral Symposium and a Career Mentoring session. It
will also feature keynote speeches from leading researchers and practitioners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student travel to conferences is an important activity.
Funds will be dispersed with preference given to students who would not
otherwise be able to attend the conference and students who are not already
scheduled to present a paper, paying particular attention to provide
opportunities to under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.