* 1836703
* EAGER: New and Returning Research Scholars:  Introducing Research Career Pathways to Women through On-Site Mentoring at GHC
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Erik Russell, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,402.00

The Computing Research Association's Committee on the Status of Women in
Computing Research (CRA-W) aims to increase the numbers and successes of women
in Computer Science and Engineering (CSE) research careers. With this proposal,
they will work within the 2018 Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing
(GHC) to (1) increase the engagement of undergraduate women CSE majors in
research and encourage their interest in and preparation for graduate school,
and (2) provide information, mentorship, and support for women who have worked
in industry and are considering a research-focused career change.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;CRA-W will continue the development the CRA-W GHC Research Scholars
Program, piloted in 2017, that brings undergraduates to the Grace Hopper
Celebration of Women in Computing (GHC), providing them with a research-focused
experience. In addition, CRA-W will pilot a new GHC Returning Scholars Program
for women potentially interested in returning to graduate school from industry.
Both programs will capitalize on the availability of role models and existing
programming at GHC. In addition, they will provide (1) guidance to research-
interested students on how to navigate the vast offerings at the conference, (2)
opportunities for students to meet and interact with peers, role models, and
mentors with similar interests in small-group settings, (3) mentors and role
models for industry professionals interested in a research-focused career
change, and (4) useful advice for pursuing and succeeding in a research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.