* 1836400
* LSAMP SciComp Skills Building Program
* EHR,HRD
* 07/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Noel Blackburn, Brookhaven Science Associates, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Martha James
* 01/31/2020
* USD 128,354.00

The Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP) program assists
universities and colleges in their efforts to significantly increase the numbers
of students matriculating into and successfully completing high quality degree
programs in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines
in order to diversify the STEM workforce. Particular emphasis is placed on
transforming undergraduate STEM education through innovative, evidence-based
recruitment and retention strategies, and relevant educational experiences in
support of racial and ethnic groups historically underrepresented in STEM
disciplines: African Americans, Hispanic Americans, American Indians, Alaska
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and Native Pacific Islanders. These strategies
facilitate the production of well-prepared students highly-qualified and
motivated to pursue graduate education or careers in STEM.

For the United States (U.S.) to remain globally competitive, it is vital that it
taps into the talent of all its citizens and provides exceptional educational
preparedness in STEM areas that underpin the knowledge-based economy. In the
spirit of this endeavor, Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL), a US Department
of Energy (DOE) multi-discipline research laboratory proposes to pilot a 3-week
"Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (LSAMP) SciComp Skills
Building Internship Program" with the goal of enabling LSAMP students to develop
scientific computing skills to integrate into their regular STEM academic
activities and scientific research, thereby increasing their competitiveness and
preparation for internship programs and graduate research.

This activity has significant societal potential for: (1) increasing the number
and quality of underrepresented minority (URM) students at LSAMP institutions
who are accepted for participation in advanced science internship programs
across the Department of Energy (DOE) complex, (2) advancing knowledge in the
STEM disciplines through the promotion of interdisciplinary research activity,
and (3) contributing to a more globally competitive STEM workforce who can
adeptly wield the power of computing to advance scientific discovery. The intent
is to inspire students to pursue a career in the exciting field of scientific
computing and/or apply scientific computing to other fields of scientific
discovery. Furthermore, the integration of LSAMP program participants and their
administrators will strengthen the relationship between the NSF LSAMP program
and the DOE research enterprise to increase URM employment at national
laboratories and as users of their world-class facilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.