* 1836510
* Combining Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences with Place-based Learning to Increase Student Retention, Civic Engagement, and Self-efficacy
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Katharine Suding, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,951.00

Promoting students' science learning and retaining students in STEM fields
requires educational experiences that help them grow as engaged and ethical
citizens who are also innovative scientists. This project aims to provide these
educational experiences by engaging students in scientific research that
intersects with issues of interest to the local community. Specifically, this
project will involve university and community college students in researching a
locally important biological resource, Boulder's historic apple trees. In the
mid-1800s, there were thousands of diverse apple varieties in the United States.
When the apple industry settled on a handful of varieties to promote worldwide,
the rest of the varieties were forgotten. Across Boulder County today, these
forgotten apple trees are still growing in residents' yards or in public parks.
However, they are beginning to die, and the community is at risk of losing this
important ecological, genetic, and historic resource. This project will engage
students in research projects to study and preserve historic apple trees,
enabling the students to use their scientific knowledge to serve their
community. This project has the potential to increase the engagement of
tomorrow's scientists in civic action that will serve citizens of the United
States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and study the impact of
course-based undergraduate research experiences that incorporate place-based
learning, thus creating community-relevant research opportunities for students.
Students will engage in research projects to map the location of apple trees in
Boulder County, characterize how these trees interact with the local ecology,
identify which genetic varieties are currently growing, and graft the trees to
preserve these genetic and cultural resources. It is expected that participation
in this research will help students develop a sense of belonging to their local
communities and to their scientific communities, will increase their civic
engagement and civic efficacy, and will improve institution-community
relationships. Both the scientific and educational goals of this project will be
assessed to track progress, discover the processes by which students develop
into civically-minded scientists, and prepare this model for broad
dissemination. Among the broader impacts of this program are its potential to
increase the civic engagement of future scientists, improve students' sense of
belonging to and persistence in STEM, and enhance how institutions of higher
education can serve the broader good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.