* 1836932
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Certifiable reinforcement learning for cyber-physical systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Samuel Coogan, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 329,670.00

We propose to generalize and certify the performance of reinforcement learning
algorithms for control of cyber-physical systems (CPS). Broadly speaking,
reinforcement learning applied to physical systems is concerned with making
predictions from data to control the system to extremize a performance
criterion. The project will particularly focus on developing theory and
algorithms applicable to hybrid and multi-agent control systems, that is,
systems with continuous and discrete elements and systems with multiple
decision-making agents, which are ubiquitous in CPS across spatiotemporal scales
and application domains. Reinforcement learning algorithms are not yet mature
enough to guarantee performance when applied to control of CPS. In light of
these limitations, this project aims to lay the theoretical and computational
foundation to certify reinforcement learning algorithms so that they may be
deployed in society with high confidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
certify reinforcement learning algorithms that compute optimal control policies
in systems with non-classical dynamics and non-classical costs. To achieve this
goal, we will generalize convergent algorithms originally designed for purely
continuous systems to apply in hybrid control systems whose states undergo a
mixture of discrete and continuous transitions. Moreover, we specifically aim to
ensure this approach is applicable to societal-scale CPS in which multiple
agents, some of which may be humans, interact directly with the CPS. These
algorithms will be experimentally validated on three testbeds that represent a
range of hybrid and multi-agent phenomena that arise in CPS. The first testbed
will test the performance of our algorithms on societal-scale traffic flow
networks via simulation. The second testbed will consider heterogeneous teams of
aerial and terrestrial mobile robots collaborating with human partners to
perform construction, inspection, and maintenance tasks on scale facsimiles of
infrastructure like bridges, and tunnels. The third testbed will study the
closed-loop interaction between individual humans and remote, teleoperated
robots that perform dynamic locomotion and manipulation behaviors. This project
will also co-organize an interdisciplinary workshop with technology policy
experts, the results of which will form the basis for an interdisciplinary
multi-campus graduate-level seminar run by the PIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.