* 1836374
* QLC: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Developing Experiment and Theory for Entangled Photon Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Theodore Gore Goodson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

DRAFT ONLY!&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project is concerned with
understanding quantum phenomena that are arise when light interacts with
molecules. Light can be thought of as involving bundles of energy known as
photons, and the focus of this project involves the near-simultaneous absorption
of two photons by molecules. The photons normally act independently, but there
is a quantum effect in which two photons become entangled, and absorption of the
two photons is strongly correlated. When this happens, the rate of absorption of
two photons can be enhanced by many orders of magnitude, which is of interest in
applications that range from electronic devices to chemical sensing. However the
process is poorly understood, with the few experiments that have been done
showing conflicting behavior for similar molecules. The research therefore
includes both measurements and computational modeling to study the absorption of
entangled photons. Students and postdocs who work on this project are being
trained in new experimental and theoretical techniques that are likely to play a
role as new technologies are developed based on these unique quantum effects. In
addition, the PI?s are engaging in active outreach programs related to their
research that touches on broad segments of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project a quantum optical experimental approach and a quantum electronic
computational approach are being applied to investigate new properties of
organic molecules that are accessible through entangled two-photon absorption
(ETPA). Both experiment and theory take advantage of the quantum entanglement of
photons created by the process of spontaneous parametric down conversion and the
subsequent excitation of electronic states in molecules. The phenomenon of ETPA
has been theoretically predicted to exhibit interesting non-classical effects
such as linear rather than quadratic dependence of absorption rate on incident
photon flux. In prior work, one of the PI?s, Goodson, developed experimental
methods in his lab which make it possible to measure ETPA cross sections for a
wide variety of molecules, and indeed the linear dependence on photon flux was
observed. A surprise in this earlier work is that some molecules show
significant ETPA cross sections while other nominally similar molecules show no
observable ETPA. To go further, in this work, theory and experimentsare aimed at
understanding intermediate states that participate in ETPA. The theory studies
involve calculating transition moments that couple excited states, which is an
ability that is generally missing from electronic structure theories. However
the project takes advantage of a new TDDFT approach from the other PI, Schatz,
for calculating energies and transition moments, and from this to evaluate ETPA
cross sections. The results are being compared with pump-probe entangled time-
resolved measurements using a new apparatus, with the goal of sorting out the
role of intermediate states in ETPA. Successful implementation of the theory
should lead to predictions of interesting ETPA behavior for molecules not yet
studied, and this will stimulate further experimental work leading to the
discovery of new molecular properties. The project is also concerned with
training graduate students and postdocs, and enabling them to develop careers of
their own that explore directions of the quantum world that haven?t yet been
considered. In addition, the PIs have active outreach programs where the
research described in this proposal is presented at levels that range from
graduate courses in quantum mechanics to talks to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.