* 1836382
* CBMS Conference: L-Functions and Multiplicative Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Laura Sheppardson, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 04/30/2020
* USD 36,182.00

This National Science Foundation award provides support for the CBMS Conference:
L-functions and Multiplicative Number Theory, to be held at the University of
Mississippi in Oxford, MS on May 20-24, 2019. The conference will feature a
series of ten lectures by Professor Kannan Soundararajan from Stanford
University who is well known for his prolific and influential research in this
area, and also for his skill as a lecturer and expositor. Professor
Soundararajan's lectures will culminate in an expository monograph that will be
a valuable resource for current and future researchers. The conference will also
feature six additional lectures intended to complement and enhance the main
lecture series. Approximately thirty participants will be supported, many of
whom will be graduate students. The organizers intend to bring together both
beginning and more established researchers to stimulate advances and
collaboration on this current research topic. The organizers will actively
recruit female participants as well as participants from other groups that are
underrepresented in the mathematical sciences. In accordance with the NSF-CBMS
goals, the host institution is interested upgrading and improving its research
efforts, and trying to build a strong research group in number theory. Number
theory is an old and very active branch of mathematics, and the theory of
L-functions has played a central role in its modern development. The tools used
to study L-functions draw from many fields including analysis, algebra,
algebraic geometry, automorphic forms and representation theory, probability and
random matrices, and even mathematical physics. The broad theme for the
conference will be the value distribution of zeta and L-functions. The lecture
series will touch upon several important questions including the maximal size of
L-functions, asymptotics for moments of L-values, the distribution of zeros, and
non-vanishing of L-functions at special points. Moreover, it will be shown how
the techniques used in the study of moments have close counterparts in the
understanding of other problems in multiplicative number theory. The lecture
series and accompanying monograph will give a broad perspective of this sharply
focused research area in a way that will help researchers of all levels
understand the major ideas and possible future directions for the field.
Information regarding the conference can be found at
https://math.olemiss.edu/cbms2019/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.