* 1836415
* Student Travel Support for IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, To Be Held in  Miami, FL, December 17-19, 2018
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Elisa Franco, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 17,000.00

This award supports student travel to and participation in the 57th IEEE
Conference on Decision and Control (CDC), to be held in Miami, FL, December
17-19, 2018. The IEEE CDC has been the world's leading annual forum for
engineers and researchers with an interest in systems and control theory as well
as control technology. As in previous years, the 57th CDC will feature the
presentation of contributed and invited papers, tutorial sessions, plenary and
semi-plenary sessions, and workshops. It is anticipated that the conference will
draw over 1500 participants, including more than 500 students. Recognizing the
importance of students to the present and future of the Control Systems Society
(CSS), this award will support CSS in providing funding for students traveling
to attend CDC-18.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research topics covered every year by
CDC presentations is very broad: this reflects the multitude of applications of
controls and systems theory. Control systems have enabled the development of
many technologies and infrastructures present in everyday life, from printers to
power systems to self-driving cars. Systems and control theoretic tools are
central in the design, operation, and security of cyber-physical systems, where
they can inform researchers about ways to make large networks (e.g., power,
communication, computer, traffic) robust to deliberate and accidental
disturbances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students receiving travel funds from this
award to attend CDC will have many opportunities to interact with members of the
professional community in a stimulating setting, and to exchange ideas with a
broad group of colleagues. The large number of workshops before the conference
and the interactive format of many of the presentations will allow additional
opportunity for training and learning. Specific outreach effort will be devoted
to advertising the conference and the student travel award program to under-
represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.