* 1836538
* QLC:EAGER: Precisely configurable 2-dimensional array of colloidal perovskite quantum dots as a new platform for chemical qubits
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Dong Son, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum computation is a new paradigm that can solve highly complex problems
that are difficult to tackle with current computing technology. To realize a
practical quantum computer, an important prerequisite is the construction of the
basic hardware units for performing quantum computation, called qubits. The
qubit is analogous to the bit found in modern digital computers. However, unlike
a bit, which can be in one of two different states, qubits can exist in many
different states. One of the challenges in quantum computation is the
construction of the qubits in large scale and in a robust manner for practical
and low-cost implementation of quantum computation. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professors Dong Son and Alexey Akimov at Texas A&amp;M University are
developing a new qubit platform based on chemically synthesized quantum dots
that can be mass-produced with extremely high uniformity and assembled in a
precisely controlled manner. While the fabrication and positioning of the QDs on
the nanometer scale is very risky, the research may have broad implications for
the development of quantum computers and quantum information systems. The
project also provides training opportunities for students, in an
interdisciplinary environment that combines chemistry and quantum optics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working alongside with their students, Professors Son and
Akimov are developing templating strategies to fabricate qubit structures based
on finite-sized arrays of perovskite quantum dots, with each structure being
replicated many times in large scale. The approach takes advantage of recent
progress in chemical synthesis of structurally identical quantum dots used as
the building blocks of the qubits. Understanding and controlling the behavior of
the quantum mechanically coupled excitons and spins of the magnetic impurities
doped in the quantum dot arrays is particularly important to verify the
functionality of the new structures. For this purpose, photoluminescence optical
microscopy methods are used to characterize the qubit structures and to confirm
the quantum mechanical behavior needed for the scaled-up qubit platform to
function as a robust quantum computer. These are necessary steps to take towards
the application of quantum computation to solve real-world problems. The team,
composed of a chemist and a physicist, is also actively developing the
interdisciplinary and outreach programs that utilize the new frontiers of modern
science to educate the next-generation scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.