* 1836437
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM International Conference on Nanoscale Computing and Communication (ACM/IEEE NanoCom)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Josep Jornet, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Monisha Ghosh
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The NanoCom conference series, sponsored by the Association for Computing
Machinery (ACM), aims at creating a trans-disciplinary forum to foster and
develop new communications and computing paradigms for nanoscale machines. The
conference has been held annually since 2014, and has become the reference venue
for fundamental advances in nanoscale computing and communication networks. ACM
NanoCom highlights research potentials, stimulates novel and breakthrough ideas,
and identifies their short- and medium-term exploitation goals. The conference
features an open call for papers as well as keynote and plenary talks, tutorials
on state-of-the-art topics, and poster sessions. Both novel research results and
implementation-based solutions are welcome.

This award will support 10 students in the United States to attend ACM NanoCom
2018, which will be held in Reykjavik, Iceland on September 5-7, 2018. Attending
a high-caliber technical event such as this is extremely valuable for future
researchers. This is a truly inter-disciplinary field, which requires close
interaction and frequent discussions with experts that span different areas. ACM
NanoCom 2018 is aimed at becoming the forum for such discussions to occur.
Students will not only be exposed to the state-of the-art in the field, but they
will also have the opportunity to interact with peers from institutions
worldwide, meet with leading researchers, and take part in discussions that are
likely to shape the future of the field. The travel grants will target graduate
students who will substantially benefit from attending this conference but have
limited travel funds. Priority will be given to students from groups
underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.