* 1836072
* EAGER: New Paths for Communicating Science
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Kim Dionne, Menlo College
* Continuing Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2022
* USD 281,782.00

Despite the wide diversity of expertise in social science, women are
underrepresented in scholarship and in news coverage of social science
expertise. Men are more likely to be invited to talks, to have their work
assigned on course syllabi, and to be contacted by the media for reactions to
current events. But many social science experts are women; they are simply not
as visible or well-known, and it is easier for those seeking expertise to call
on those scholars with whom they are already familiar. Reducing this implicit
bias against women requires positive steps to make the expertise of women more
visible and easily accessible. The Women Also Know Stuff (WAKS) project does
exactly that. Created in February 2016, the Women Also Know Stuff initiative is
working to make it easier for scholars and journalists to identify experts who
are women, through a website of women experts and an active Twitter feed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Women Also Know Stuff has worked for the past 20 months to
populate and publicize a crowd-sourced online database that highlights the
expertise of women scholars. The Women Also Know Stuff Editorial Board collects
and manages this information with the goal of promoting women's public and
professional engagement. This project will allow women listed on the website to
give citations of 1) peer-reviewed published journal articles and books and 2)
media interviews, by allowing them to check boxes for relevant subject areas
(e.g., conflict studies, international relations) next to each citation. Icons
(e.g., stars) next to the names of scholars will indicate if they have provided
a linked citation for a given subject area. This system of linked citations and
icons will allow users of the website to narrow their searches to only those
scholars who have citations listed for publications and/or media interviews in
the subject area of interest. This quality control feature will also encourage
women scholars to be more attentive to their profiles on the website, thus
making it more likely that they will list (and provide relevant linked citations
to their work on) topics in the news, thus increasing its relevance for media
users and the likelihood that news outlets will contact women scholars for
comment on current events. In sum, adding these quality control icons will both
improve the usefulness of the website and also increase its
utilization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.