* 1836735
* Collaborative Research: Enabling rational design of MOF-polymer mixed matrix membranes for liquid separations through understanding of microscale and macroscale properties
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Sergey Vasenkov, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 09/30/2022
* USD 185,000.00

Gasoline, plastics, laundry detergent, many pharmaceuticals, and cosmetics are
all derived from organic liquids. Organic liquids are essentially the liquid
fraction of crude oil. The molecules in crude oil are a complex mixture, that
must first be separated before they can be converted to useful consumer
products. Today, separation of the mixture requires the organic liquids be
boiled and distilled. Boiling the liquid requires a large energy input, the cost
of which is ultimately passed on to the consumer. Given the vast consumption of
consumer products derived from organic liquids, this separation utilizes a
sizable fraction (about 10%) of the nation's total energy consumption. The
development of alternative, low-cost and low-energy separations of organic
liquids will allow the nation to continue, or improve upon, its standard of
living while reducing energy consumption. To achieve this goal, there is growing
interest in using solid mass separating agents to separate organic liquids,
rather than distilling the mixture. One such example of a mass separating agent
is a membrane, which acts as a sieve to separate the components of the mixture.
Unlike a macroscopic sieve, a membrane contains nanometer-sized pores with
specific chemical functionalities. Molecules pass through the pores and interact
with the chemical functionalities in different manners, leading to a separation
of different types of molecules. To separate organic liquids, which can dissolve
many materials, the membrane must be chemically robust. This research project
will couple traditional and advanced characterization techniques to track the
movement of the organic molecules through membranes, in order to advance the
rational design of mass separating agents that separate organic liquids.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will seek to understand changes of
the transport, structural, and sorption properties of organic liquids in
polymers, metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), and mixed-matrix membranes consisting
of both of these components. Diffusion will be determined using both traditional
transport measurements of molecular flux, as well as pulsed field gradient
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. To evaluate diffusion with sub-
micrometer spatial resolution, high magnetic field gradients and a high static
magnetic field will be used. An analytical model will be developed to link
microscopic and macroscopic diffusivities, transport properties, sorption, and
structural properties. The goal of this model will be to develop design
principles for MOF-based mixed-matrix membranes for organic liquid separations.
Educational and outreach aspects of the work will leverage existing programs,
introduce animations and educational demonstrations, and offer students
participation in well-defined engineering projects related to membrane
separations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.