* 1836546
* QLC: EAGER: New Chemical Reactivity Enabled by Cavity Quantum Electrodynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Pengfei Huo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2021
* USD 295,095.00

Pengfei Huo of the University of Rochester is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to theoretically investigate new types of reactions caused by
interactions between molecules and light. Discovering new types of reactions is
a central goal of Chemistry. When molecules and light are introduced into small,
confined spaces new possibilities arise for how they interact. One possible
outcome is the generation of "entangled" molecule-photon states, which is a
feature that arises due to the quantum mechanical nature of light and matter.
Understanding how these systems change over time will uncover design principles
that should lead to new, unexpected chemical transformations. However,
simulating these systems accurately is one of the most challenging tasks in
modern theoretical chemistry. To address this challenge, the PI and his group
develop and apply new approaches to investigate this cavity-induced entangled
photochemistry. These investigations provide fundamental knowledge about quantum
light-matter-interaction-induced chemistry. Dr. Huo is organizing international
conferences that focus on this emerging field to facilitate advances that could
lead to new technologies and applications using systems of this type.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coupling molecules to a quantized radiation field in an
optical cavity has shown great promise to enable new paradigms for chemical
reactivities and transformations. The resulting new photon-matter entangled
states, so-called polaritons, have new conical intersections or avoid crossings
which significantly influence the photochemistry of molecules, and thus, open up
new possibilities to tune and control chemical reactivities. The non-adiabatic
dynamics of such hybrid matter-field systems remains unclear and beyond the
usual paradigm of photochemistry which does not include quantum photons, or
quantum optics which has not focused on molecules. Theoretical investigations
play a vital role in understanding the fundamental limits and new principles in
this emerging field. However, existing approaches and models that are commonly
used in quantum optics are significantly limited by their scope and
applicability for describing photochemistry. To provide fundamental knowledge in
this emerging field, located between photochemistry and quantum optics, the PI
and his research group are (1) investigating the fundamental limit, the basic
mechanisms, and new principles in cavity quantum electrodynamics (QED) induced
photochemistry, and (2) developing accurate and efficient path-integral based
approaches to simulate quantum transitions among polariton states induced by
cavity QED. The results of these investigations provide the fundamental
understanding of quantum light-matter induced chemistry and new theoretical
approaches that facilitate the merger of quantum optics and photochemistry. The
conferences organized by the PI will stimulate new approaches in the field that
can expand its potential impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.