* 1836723
* Rational Design of Dynamic Antifouling Material Topographies for Safer Medical Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Dacheng Ren, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 07/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical Summary: As of February 2017, the FDA had received 359 medical
device reports (MDRs) of breast implant associated anaplastic large cell
lymphoma (BIA-ALCL), including nine deaths. Among the 231 reports that had
information about the implant surface, 203 were reported to be textured implants
and 28 were reported to be smooth implants. It has been hypothesized that BIA-
ALCL may be caused by bacterial colonization and formation of biofilms
(multicellular structures of attached cells) on breast implants. However, it is
not clear why textured implants have a specific association with ALCL. It is
also not known how to improve the safety of these implants. This challenge is
largely due to the knowledge gap in the fundamental understanding of how surface
topography affects microbial adhesion and biofilm formation, as well as the lack
of guiding principles for the design of antifouling topographies. The teams at
Syracuse University and FDA will collaborate to address this challenge and gain
critical new knowledge through complementary studies. Specifically, the team
will collaborate to investigate how bacteria respond to surface topography
during attachment and how to engineer new surfaces to prevent bacterial
attachment. The results of this project will provide new knowledge and valuable
information to FDA about what types of surfaces are more likely to be colonized,
which will be useful for FDA's regulation of novel anti-biofilm topographies. In
addition to research, the team will also leverage this project to promote
student training, especially the individuals from underrepresented groups; and
educate the next generation of engineers to be leaders solving challenging
technical and societal problems to improve human health and well
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary: Bacteria attach to implanted
medical devices using flagella, pili, and other factors such as adhesins. The
attachment of microbes leads to the subsequent formation of a biofilm, which is
a surface-attached multicellular structure comprised of an extracellular matrix
secreted by the attached cells. Biofilm infections are difficult to treat
because of extremely high tolerance of biofilm cells to antimicrobials and
disinfectants (up to 1000 times higher compared to their planktonic
counterparts). Since properties of the substratum material such as surface
chemistry, stiffness, hydrophobicity, roughness, topography, and charge affect
bacterial adhesion, biofilm formation may be inhibited by tailoring these
properties. However, previous research on biofilm control by altering surface
topography is largely empirical and lacks a mechanistic understanding of how
bacteria make a decision between planktonic growth and biofilm formation by
sensing and responding to surface topography. In addition, the engineered
antifouling topographies to date are largely static and cannot move. Even if a
small number of bacteria cells attach, they can multiply and gradually overcome
most anti-biofilm topographies. To more effectively control biofouling, it is
important to engineer new dynamic materials that can change surface topography
upon an environmental cue. A dynamic material can both prevent initial bacterial
adhesion and disrupt established biofilms, causing the colonizers to disperse
into planktonic form where they can be eradicated by the host immune system and
antibiotic treatment. The team hypothesizes that specific micron-scale surface
topographies can be rationally designed to inhibit bacterial biofilm formation
while promoting the adhesion of mammalian cells. It is also hypothesized that
established biofilms can be removed by dynamic changes in such surface
topographies via on-demand triggering when needed. The team will test these
hypotheses by studying how bacteria respond to different surface topographies
using Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, and Staphylococcus aureus as
model species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.