* 1836537
* QLC: EAGER: Toward Magnetic Selectivity with Molecular Clock Qubits
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Sandra Eaton, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Joseph M. Zadrozny of the
Department of Chemistry at Colorado State University is developing new classes
of metal complexes for the detection of physiological magnetic phenomena. These
complexes are designed as molecular analogues to spin-based quantum bits
(qubits) of a quantum computer. Molecular qubits are extremely sensitive to
their local environment, a sensitivity that is to be suppressed for quantum
computing applications. The proposed work will embark in a different direction
by asking the fundamental question: Can the inherent sensitivity of molecular
qubits be embraced to create new bioimaging sensors? Toward such application, it
is desirable to focus the extreme sensitivity of a qubit toward specific
environmental factors. This program will take the first fundamental steps toward
that vision of selective sensitivity. Outreach activities as part of this
project include the creation of a learning kit to instruct students at the K-12
level on fundamental magnetic phenomena.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A nascent type of
molecular qubits are the so-called clock qubits, which possess long spin-lattice
and spin-spin relaxation times that result from a strong insensitivity to
magnetic phenomena. This insensitivity stands as a stark counterpoint to
conventional molecular qubits, which possess relaxation times that are strongly
affected by local magnetism. The relative sensitivity of the two classes of
qubits indicates an inherent tunability of susceptibility to nearby magnetism,
potentially enabling relaxation-time-based sensing probes to be targeted toward
only specific classes of environmental spins, e.g. those that occur in different
types of biomolecules. In this work, a model system based on a V(IV) molecule
qubit will explore fundamental questions at the heart of clock qubit behavior:
(1) How do these systems interact with different classes of environmental
nuclear spins? (2) How do these clock qubits interact with different classes of
proximate electronic spins? Finally, (3) Is this interaction at all favored for
certain classes of spins over others, and what are the factors that govern that
favor? Each of these fundamental questions underlies the eventual development of
targeted sensitivity toward specific types of spin-bearing biologically relevant
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.