* 1836918
* CMPS Summer Research Conference; August 8-10, 2018 in Los Angeles, CA
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Matthew Barreto, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 01/31/2019
* USD 44,845.00

The Collaborative Multiracial Post-Election Survey (CMPS) Summer Research
Conference to be held at UCLA, August 8-10, 2018. The conference will bring
together a multidisciplinary group of about 80 scholars at varying stages of
their academic careers to: (1) present cutting-edge research using the 2016
CMPS, merged with hundreds of aggregate level variables from the 2000, 2010
Census, and the 2015 American Community Survey (ACS); (2) contribute to the
development of the 2020 CMPS; and (3) build an academic pipeline of scholars in
the political sciences and social science more broadly. Invited conference
attendees will include a diverse and interdisciplinary group of junior and
senior faculty, graduate and undergraduate students, as well as postdoctoral
fellows from large research institutions, smaller liberal arts colleges,
community colleges, Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). Invited research papers will use data from
the 2016 CMPS to examine the role of race, ethnicity, gender, religiosity,
linked fate, partisanship, health disparities, political mobilization, and other
sociodemographics in shaping political behavior, attitudes and public opinions
toward various policy concerns. Broad racial/ethnic diversity, gender balance,
and junior-senior collaborations among the presenters will be encouraged. While
research papers will be invited, the conference will be open to the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed 2016 CMPS Summer Research Conference
and Planning Meeting has several broader impacts: (1) enhance the shepherding of
existing manuscripts from preliminary drafts to publication in the study of
race, ethnicity and politics, immigration, political psychology, political
behavior and public opinion; (2) broaden cross-institutional faculty and student
collaborations and co-authorships; (3) enhance junior-senior networks and
mentorship opportunities (4) collaborative planning sessions for the 2020 CMPS,
to be fielded following the 2020 Presidential election. Our planning sessions
will include topics such as: (1) expanding the CMPS in several ways including
increasing the sample size from 10,000 to 20,000 cases including the following
groups: Latinos, African Americans, Asian Americans, Whites, Muslim Americans,
black Caribbean immigrants, black African immigrants, Native Americans, and
Native Hawaiians; (2) we will develop our strategy to incorporate the first CMPS
Panel Survey, following a Presidential election, which focuses on a subset of
issues important to the study of race, ethnicity and politics in the United
States over time; (3) survey question development. The conference will deepen
and diversify the participants' network ties throughout the discipline. The
conference will have positive spillover effects within the discipline of
political science and within the participants' Colleges/Universities:
Participants can use the insights from the research conference towards
postconference activities to collaborate, train, mentor, and network with
scholars in our profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.