* 1836002
* LLAMAS: A Facility Integral Field Spectrograph for the Magellan Telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael McDonald, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2023
* USD 6,437,209.00

Integral field spectroscopy (IFS) is a technique to construct 3D images of the
universe analogous to CAT scans or other 3D medical renderings, by optically
manipulating the light collected by astronomical telescopes. Using advances in
lithographic manufacture of microscopic lenses and fiberoptics, one can sort
each light ray entering a telescope according to its position on the sky, and
its color -- which physically maps onto a galaxy's velocity (via the Doppler
shift) or distance from Earth. The cost of IFS instruments is driven by the
large volume of collected data, since their information rate exceeds that of a
conventional spectrometer by roughly a hundred-fold. The Large Lenslet Array
Magellan Spectrograph (LLAMAS) uses commoditized digital CCD cameras to address
this challenge, spectrally imaging a wide field-of-view on the 6.5-meter
diameter Magellan Telescopes. LLAMAS will be available to the US astronomical
community through an open-access agreement, and will advance studies of
explosive astrophysical transients, and the formation and clustering of
galaxies. In addition to building LLAMAS, the MIT-based instrument team is
partnering with the FabLab maker space of the Somerville, MA Public High School.
They will co-teach a telescope-making course that exposes participants to team-
based design, optics, and CAD/additive manufacturing methods central to the
future engineering economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LLAMAS is designed for (1)
rapid and efficient spectroscopy of astrophysical transients discovered by the
Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST), (2) single-pointing redshift and
dynamical measurements of galaxy clusters identified by Sunyaev-Zel?dovich
surveys of the Southern sky, and (3) single-pointing emission and absorption
measurements of Lyman alpha and metal-enriched gas flows within the
circumgalactic halos of distant galaxies. It will produce spectral images of a
37" x 37" field of view (scalable to 60" x 60") at 0.75" spatial resolution
using 2400 optical fibers. Each fiber produces a spectrum of R=2200 covering the
full optical bandpass (350-980 nm) in a single exposure. LLAMAS will be the
first seeing-limited, arcminute-class IFS available on a large US telescope. As
a permanent facility instrument, it will be available 365 nights per year via
rotation of the Magellan tertiary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.