* 1836557
* Conference:  2018 Gordon Research Seminar on Genomic Instability, to be held at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in Kowloon, Hong Kong, July 21-22, 2018
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Catalina Pereira, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Karen Cone
* 11/30/2018
* USD 6,000.00

This award will support attendance by graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers at the Gordon Research Seminar on Genomic Instability: Chromosome
Replication, Repair and Organization in the Maintenance of Genomic Stability, to
be held at Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in Kowloon, Hong Kong,
July 21-22, 2018. The meeting is organized and chaired by two early-career
scientists. The format of the meeting is a combination of talks and posters,
which will promote scientific exchange in both formal and informal settings. A
keynote lecture from a leading researcher in the field will be featured,
together with a panel discussion on careers in science and a session on grant-
writing. There will be ample opportunity for sharing latest research results and
for exploring collaborative possibilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference
will bring together scientists studying diverse topics related to genomic
stability, including: genome replication, repair and recombination; chromatin
dynamics and chromosomal organization; and signaling in response to DNA lesions.
Cutting-edge and late-breaking research will be highlighted in short talks
chosen from the abstracts and in posters. The primary purposes of this
conference are to provide a venue for scientific exchange of new research
results and ideas among young researchers, to foster learning about emerging
trends and how they contribute to future goals for research on genomic
instability, and to promote career development of a new generation of
scientists, including those who are traditionally underrepresented in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.