* 1836473
* Navigating the New Arctic (NNA): Co-production of shorefast ice knowledge in Uummannaq Bay, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Laurence Smith, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2022
* USD 479,377.00

Shorefast ice (also known as landfast ice) is sea-ice that is attached to the
coastline. Since it does not drift with the winds and currents, shorefast ice
forms an important habitat for wildlife and a platform for human subsistence
food production and transport in the Arctic. As the climate warms, residents
local to the Arctic report that it is breaking up earlier in the year and is
thinner than it was a few decades ago. These environmental changes threaten the
sustainability of wildlife and traditional human activities that depend on
shorefast ice. Despite its significance, a comprehensive multidisciplinary
assessment of shorefast ice has yet to be made in Greenland. This project
therefore seeks to understand how shorefast ice has responded to atmospheric and
oceanic warming, and how these changes have affected livelihoods in communities
local to the Uummannaq region of West Greenland. The results will improve
institutional knowledge of environmental change in the Arctic and prediction of
its associated impacts, as well as strengthen US relations in an area of,
potentially global, strategic and economic importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will co-produce shorefast ice knowledge by leveraging large satellite
remote sensing datasets, community-based monitoring and local and Indigenous
knowledge. First, observations from high-resolution optical satellite sensors
will be supplemented with knowledge gathered from local residents. A community-
based monitoring program will then be initiated using small multi-rotor UAVs to
document key shorefast ice processes (e.g. formation and break-up) as they
happen. The quantitative and qualitative shorefast ice knowledge generated by
these two activities will be used to understand not only how the shorefast ice
has changed but how these changes matter to individuals and communities in the
Uummannaq region. The involvement of residents and institutions in Uummannaq at
all stages of the project, in combination with ongoing observations, will lay
the foundations for ongoing community support and enable new insights into the
complex social, cultural and economic changes caused by rapid environmental
change. The findings will also enhance the ability of local residents and
institutions to make informed and embedded choices concerning natural resource
governance and management, as well as choices about individual and collective
trajectories towards a desirable and sustainable
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is cofunded by the Office of
International Science &amp; Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.