* 1836008
* MAPS: The MMT Adaptive optics exoPlanet characterization System
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2025
* Katie Morzinski, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 08/31/2025
* USD 5,542,761.00

The study of planetary systems around nearby stars, and their similarity to or
difference from our own solar system, addresses a basic, central question about
humankind's place in the universe. The MAPS project will develop a new optics
and camera system for the detailed study of planets orbiting neighboring stars.
The program will probe the atmospheres and physical makeups of the planets.
Results from this research are easily accessible, and can be inspirational to
students considering a career in science or engineering. The MAPS program will
also provide training, through an annual winter school, for young people just
starting out in research. Hands-on training in building and deploying a system
such as MAPS provides critical experience for developing new tools for
scientific discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the 6.5m MMT telescope facility
on Mt. Hopkins, Arizona, the planned MMT Adaptive optics exoPlanet
characterization System (MAPS) will combine: (1) high spatial resolution to
resolve imaged exoplanets and disks; (2) high spectral resolution to detect
exoplanet atmospheric absorption lines in an unambiguous way; and (3) broad
wavelength coverage to probe systems across the range of wavelengths, crucial
for understanding the physical processes in exoplanet atmospheres. A core
science project will be executed to derive the physical parameters of known
exoplanets, as well as new targets identified by missions such as TESS. The MAPS
program will provide a vibrant training ground for young astronomers interested
in a deeper understanding of exoplanets and the underlying instrumentation. The
MAPS team will develop and hold the ExoTech Academy, an annual winter school
focused on training and academic development for students and early career
scientists. The MAPS team will also leverage proven, institutional-level
research education programs to recruit underrepresented and/or first-generation
undergraduates who will gain a mentored research training experience by working
on the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.