* 1836912
* Student Support for 4th International Summer School on Advanced Material Systems (AMS); Thessaloniki, Greece; July 1-7, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Dimitris Lagoudas, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 12/31/2018
* USD 20,000.00

The Fourth International Summer School on Advanced Material Systems (AMS) will
be held July 1-7, 2018 in Thessaloniki, Greece. This summer school follows the
model established by The International Institute for Multifunctional Materials
for Energy Conversion (IIMEC), an NSF-funded International Materials Institute,
established at Texas A&amp;M Engineering Experiment Station, in partnership with
US and international research collaborators. The aim of the summer school is to
familiarize graduate students with the state of the art in advanced composite
and multifunctional materials manufacturing, characterization, testing and
micro-mechanics, and computational methods modeling. This award supports travel
for US graduate students to participate in the summer school. The participating
graduate students and researchers will be exposed to a high-quality, intensive
educational experience in the field of advanced material systems. The format of
the meeting will allow ample time for formal and informal scientific
discussions, with the aim of building collaborations with participants of
different countries, institutions and areas of expertise, and building a long-
lasting international network with the students' peers as well as senior
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the AMS Summer School are
to: (1) establish a communication, knowledge-base, and computational-laboratory
grid advancing research in manufacturing, characterization, modeling and testing
of advanced and multifunctional materials, providing all participants with
global research and international leadership experience, and contributing to the
transformation and advancement of education on materials science and engineering
to all participants; (2) communicate the knowledge of commercialization and
promote the connection between research and industry; and (3) attract
participants from different countries and research fields in order to foster
interaction in an international academic environment, promoting scholarship and
leadership in advanced material systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.