* 1836554
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Food as a Defining Cultural Factor
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Lisa Duffy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 30,202.00

Scientists are curious about what ancient people ate and drank. Archaeologists
at the University of Florida are investigating the foods and beverages consumed
by the ancient Maya, by analyzing organic chemical residues and starch grains in
pottery vessels and on stone grinding tools. These analyses are innovative in
that they help identify ancient Maya "recipes" rather than single ingredients.
They provide insights into the individual's choices of ingredients and methods
of combining, processing, and serving foods and drinks, using different tools
and vessels. This study is focused on periods of cultural transition, to better
understand the relationship between people and food during times of social and
environmental change. Differences in Maya recipes through time, across space,
and among community members enable understanding of the relationships among
people, their foods, and their environmental and social circumstances. The role
of food in culture is vital to understanding expressions of personal identity
and responses to changing social and environmental circumstances. Thus, this
study is relevant to understanding of human cultures in all places and at all
times, including today. This study incorporates several methodological
advancements by: 1) conducting residue analysis on museum-curated and recently
recovered archaeological artifacts to assess preservation and recovery
techniques, 2) adding new chemical and micro-botanical signatures to the array
of expected ancient Maya ingredients, and 3) using methods to elucidate food
combinations and processing steps rather than just ingredients. These approaches
are influencing many scientific disciplines, and fostering collaboration among
archaeologists, geochemists, and analytical chemists. This research has an
important educational component, because multiple graduate students are learning
how to collect, extract and prepare organic chemical residues and starch grains
from archaeological contexts for analysis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This study will
use recovered food residues to identify combinations of ingredients found on
food-related artifacts from several pre-contact Maya sites in Belize and
Guatemala. The focus is on times of Maya cultural transition, both early (300
BC-250 AD) and late (800-1100 AD), and on places in different ecological zones
(coastal, inland, and riverine). Techniques used include liquid chromatography-
mass spectrometry, gas chromatography-mass spectrometry, and starch grain
analysis by microscopy. This is the first research project in the Maya region to
identify the chaine operatoire (operational sequence) of Maya "recipes" using
residue analysis and to explore correlations between food ingredients and food-
related artifacts and activities at different stages of food production and
consumption. Residues will be correlated to style and inferred function of the
artifacts (determined by analysts working on multiple archaeological projects),
and the context in which they were found (site location, age, function, and
social status), to provide insights into the relations among foods, food-related
tools and vessels, and the people who used them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.