* 1836690
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Fundamental Limits on Information Freshness
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Donald Brown, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2021
* USD 177,776.00

Information freshness is of critical importance in a variety of networked
monitoring and control systems such as Internet of Things (IoT), intelligent
vehicular systems, feedback in wireless communication systems, environmental
monitoring, robotic networks, and real-time monitoring and control in cyber-
physical systems. In addition it is important in several information-update and
data analytics applications including financial trading, social networks,
crowdsourcing, consensus systems, and online learning. In all these
applications, stale information can lead to incorrect decisions, unstable
control loops, and even compromises in safety and security. Since timely updates
are critical in these and many other contemporary applications, an important
problem is to understand the fundamental limits of information freshness in
networked status update systems. This project will further our understanding of
the fundamental limits of information freshness in general multi-source/multi-
monitor settings, and will develop strategies to achieve these limits. The
project also includes engaging research experiences for both undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach in this project differs
from prior work in age of information (AoI) by considering general multi-
source/multi-monitor networks with explicit contention and using techniques from
graph theory to study information freshness under the AoI metric in general
network topologies with interference constraints. This approach is expected to
lead to new insights in realistic networks with general topologies. The research
plan is organized into three related tasks to better understand the theoretical
foundations of AoI in the explicit contention framework: (i) simultaneous
transmission and network coding, (ii) generalized information mappings and age
weightings, and (iii) large-network limits. The focus in all of these tasks is
on characterizing fundamental limits of information freshness and developing
strategies to approach or achieve these limits in general classes of wireless
and wired networks. The proposed work will generalize the explicit contention
framework for AoI to a rich, realistic class of problem settings including
settings where nodes can simultaneously broadcast information updates, settings
where nodes have access to common or correlated information, and settings where
certain information is more critical than other
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.