* 1836989
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Organic Magnonics for room temperature Quantum Logic
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 299,998.00

Nontechnical description: As the limits of electrical circuitry are approached,
new paradigms are needed for future generations of faster miniature information
processing devices that require less energy. Presently, nearly all existing
electronics rely on the movement of electric charges in the form of electrons.
Electrons also possess a property known as spin, that gives them their magnetic
properties. Periodic undulations of these magnetic properties result in waves
known as magnons. Magnonics is a new paradigm which uses magnons for processing
and storing information, albeit with reduced energy losses and greater speeds
compared to traditional electronics. This project focuses on the study of
physical mechanisms that enable magnonics in organic (i.e. carbon-based)
magnetic materials. In particular, the control, manipulation, transport and the
very sensitive detection of magnons in organic magnetic thin films is
investigated. Magnonic devices based on such magnets are engineered, fabricated
and tested using electrical, magnetic and optical measurements. In addition, the
integration of the large arsenal of experimental efforts serves to efficiently
educate graduate and undergraduate students who are involved in this highly
interdisciplinary research project at the interface between Physics and
Chemistry. Furthermore, through outreach conducted in the course of this
project, high school and middle school students learn about the career
opportunities and technological potential of Physics, Chemistry and the Natural
Sciences in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Magnons are S =
1 quasi-particles that obey Bose-Einstein statistics and lack movement of a
particle, yet their coupling to electron spins can be utilized for information
transport, processing and storage. The technologies resulting from this, namely
Magnonics, are anticipated to form a new paradigm for future generations of
faster (GHz - THz frequencies) and reduced energy dissipation of miniature
information processing devices. The goal of this project is to enhance the
understanding of magnons in organic-based molecular materials. The latter are
hypothesized to be superior to traditional magnetic materials due to their long
magnon mean free paths that enable magnonics to be technologically viable at
room temperature and close to the magnetic ordering temperature. The room
temperature V(TCNE)x (TCNE = tetracyano-ethylene) magnet serves as a magnonic
gain medium for studying whispering gallery magnon modes in micro-resonators,
for further implementation as highly coherent quantum systems. The team focuses
on film growth and fabrication of microcavities for room-temperature quantum
logic, using parity-time symmetry. This project utilizes the University of
Utah's large arsenal of experimental capabilities, including chemical synthesis,
polymer and small molecule deposition, magneto-transport, electrically-detected
ferromagnetic resonance, magnon-related spin-pumping, inverse spin-Hall effect
spectroscopy, as well as device fabrication, processing and testing.
Furthermore, the broad impact of an entirely new class of electronics enables
educating a cohort of graduate and undergraduate students who are involved in
the execution of this project, as well as outreach to local high school and
middle school communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.