* 1836158
* HBCU Engineering Faculty Workshop 2019
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Eugene Anderson, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities
* Standard Grant
* Paige Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,990.00

The Association of Public and Land-grant Universities Office of Access and
Success is hosting an engineering faculty workshop in conjunction with the
Thurgood Marshall College Fund 2019 Opportunity Funding Corporation Innovation
and Entrepreneurship Program in Charlotte, North Carolina, May 20-21, 2019.
Increasing the number of underrepresented groups earning engineering degrees is
critical to the nation's economic competitiveness and national security because
of major demographic shifts on the near horizon. Research has shown that faculty
mentoring, role models and overall experience play a critical role in the
success of students from underrepresented groups in science, technology,
engineering and math. Historically Black Colleges and Universities provide a
unique environment for African American students because of the presence of a
critical mass of students from similar backgrounds and a more diverse faculty.
The goal of the workshop is to assist Historically Black College and University
faculty members in becoming more effective and strategic educators, mentors,
advisors, and researchers. Providing faculty with innovative pedagogy, mentoring
and advising strategies will positively impact the retention and graduation of
their students. Simultaneously, the faculty will improve their research capacity
by developing effective research grant writing strategies.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Faculty participating in the Historically Black College and
University Engineering Faculty Workshop will (1) develop action plans aimed at
improving student learning and increasing student retention and graduation
rates, (2) identify tools and strategies needed to develop grant proposals and
to compete effectively in national grant solicitations, and (3) develop a
research grant proposal outline. The goals of the workshop are to increase
student learning and retention while building the faculty member's capacity for
research and education through successful grant writing. Another aim of the
workshop is to establish a national network of Historically Black College and
University faculty collaborating to implement high impact and innovative
pedagogical practices in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.