* 1836033
* Preparing Future STEM Technicians by Using Assessment as a Teaching and Learning Tool in Course-based Research at Community Colleges
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jill Singer, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 863,378.00

Community colleges play a vital role in meeting the national demand for
qualified graduates in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM).
In particular, community colleges are key in preparing students to enter the
skilled technical workforce. In a growing number of community college STEM
programs, students are gaining technical skills by conducting course-based
research. There is a need for resources and tools that can measure the impact of
course-based research experiences on student outcomes, and the ways in which
this type of research conducting prepares students to enter the STEM technician
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will support community college
students who conduct course-based research in technician education programs. The
project aims to help students identify the knowledge and skills they gain
through their research experience, to identify areas in which they need to
improve, and to use this knowledge to their advantage as they enter the
workforce. The project aligns with the goals of the ATE program in educating a
skilled technical workforce, and leverages both the Community College
Undergraduate Research Initiative and the technical resources available through
the Science Education Resource Center at Carleton College. This project builds
upon EvaluateUR, an evidence-based method developed at SUNY Buffalo State to
measure a range of desirable outcomes of research participation. The EvaluateUR
tool measures content knowledge, as well as outcomes that are critically
important in the workplace, such as communication skills, creativity, autonomy,
an ability to overcome obstacles, critical thinking, and problem-solving skills.
EvaluateUR also provides students with metacognition skills, as well as a
strategy to identify how much academic progress they have made or still need to
make. To date, EvaluateUR has focused on one-on-one student/faculty mentor
relationships. This project will modify EvaluateUR to expand the number of
students who can benefit from this assessment method. This expansion is designed
to meet the needs of entire classrooms of students who conduct course-based
research. The lessons learned during implementation of this project at community
colleges may apply to course-based research conducted by undergraduates at other
institutions, including four-year colleges and
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.