* 1836317
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Function of Monumental Construction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Timothy Pugh, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 25,169.00

Debates about the innateness of warfare to human society speak broadly to the
inherent peacefulness or violence of human nature. Discussions in this vein
naturally turn to the circumstances in which social complexity was first
established within various world regions, seeking to assess the degree to which
violent conflict was foundational to the process. Archaeological study provides
the most robust means of studying these long-ago developments, particularly
through the analysis of large-scale features, such as encircling walls and
moats, that significantly altered the local landscape. This project led by
doctoral student Justin Bracken, will investigate the dynamics of construction
of such early features built by the Maya of Peten, Guatemala in the Late
Preclassic period (400/300 BC - AD 150). To do so, the project uses traditional
archaeological excavation and mapping techniques alongside innovative GIS
analyses and spatial theory, offering new approaches to the study of the built
environment. The fieldwork component will employ several Guatemalan university
students and local residents. This arrangement furthers their understanding of
the archaeological past of their home region while offering them valuable
fieldwork experience, increasing their employability on other projects. The
final results will be published as a dissertation and in academic journals, and
also presented at conferences in the United States and Guatemala. They will
serve to pinpoint the specific role played by warfare in the rise of complex
societies and offer a new angle of insight into the increasingly nuanced
understanding of Preclassic Maya developments.

The research design of the project is centered on the following question: What
roles did cooperation and conflict respectively play in the initial spread of
state-level society? The question is investigated by weighing the relative
contributions of cooperative behavior (numerous individuals working in concert
on a common project) and conflict (the long-term investment in defense that the
fortifications represent). This approach does not presuppose a hierarchical
arrangement in which an elite class compelled the labor of commoners; instead,
it allows for cooperative action as the driving factor. Further, it assesses the
multiple effects and levels of significance of the features beyond
fortification, analyzing their functions as hydrological controls, social
boundaries, and delineators of ceremonial space. The small site of Muralla de
Len, which rests upon a natural rise surrounded on three sides by water,
provides the setting for the study. With a stone perimeter wall encircling it
and a canal bisecting the widest point of access by land, the site appears
oriented toward defense. Occupation at the site dates at least back to the Late
Preclassic period and likely earlier, with the site layout established early in
its history. Excavations into and adjacent to the perimeter wall and canal will
aim to establish a firm chronology of construction of each, demonstrating their
form through time and their impact upon the flow of water and movements of
individuals, thereby defining their impact upon the local and regional social
settings in the era of early social complexity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.