* 1836604
* Paradigms in Physics: Representations in Quantum Mechanics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Corinne Manogue, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,282.00

Quantum mechanics is at the heart of 21st century science and technologies. To
prepare a large and competent STEM workforce, instruction in quantum mechanics
needs to reflect deep understandings of how people learn quantum mechanics. The
project team will study how experts and novices visualize and conceptualize
quantum systems. They will also study how people use and coordinate these
understandings during complex quantum calculations. This research will produce
new knowledge about three areas. The first area is how students and experts
understand and use a variety of ways to represent quantum mechanical systems.
The second area is how to best sequence representations in an approach that
starts with the quantum mechanical idea of spin. This question will seek to find
the approach that best supports development of correct student reasoning. The
third area is how computational tools might support student learning in quantum
mechanics. New research-based, student-centered instructional materials will be
developed and tested in courses across the Paradigms in Physics program. This
program is a national model for curricular reform that features a variety of
active-engagement teaching strategies. The Paradigms in Physics program takes a
spins-first approach to quantum mechanics, exploring the implications of the
postulates of quantum mechanics while using simulations of quantum experiments
to develop intuitions about quantum systems. The Paradigms in Physics program
also features a computational physics lab that is coordinated with the main
courses. This addition will allow students to harness the power of computation
to explore and understand physical systems. This project is aligned with the
discipline-based education research agenda recently set by The National Research
Council: research conducted in a sequence of upper-division courses at the
intersection of math, physics, and computer science with learning environments
that promote problem-solving, metacognition, and
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of this project is the
development of a learning progression for quantum mechanics, by documenting the
evolution of student understanding of the fundamental concepts and
representations used in quantum mechanics as they progress through the upper-
division physics major. Problem-solving interviews will be conducted with both
experts and students to establish levels and pathways in the learning
progression. Real-time student learning will be documented with videos of
students working collaboratively in class and analyzed using rigorous
qualitative research methods. The learning progression will be documented
graphically on a public, interactive website, including information about
instructional materials, sequences of concepts &amp; representations, and
supporting research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.