* 1836482
* QLC: EAGER: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Cavity-Enhanced Strategies to Protect and Entangle Quantum Emitters
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Randall Goldsmith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Quantum communication offers the tantalizing possibility of sending secure
messages over long distances. However, developing materials that can act as the
central information carriers, the "bits" in quantum communication, is difficult.
One strategy for creating quantum bits, or "qubits", is to combine the quantum
mechanical properties of light with molecules, or plasmonic nanoparticles. With
support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry and Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods Programs in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor David Masiello of the University of Washington and Professor Randall
Goldsmith of the University of Wisconsin Madison are developing ways to force
repeated interaction between light and molecular or nanoparticle quantum
emitters, enabling them to act as qubits. The research discoveries could have
broad implications for emerging quantum-based technologies, including quantum
computing and quantum communication. The project is also providing
interdisciplinary training at the graduate and undergraduate levels at the
intersection between optics, photonics, quantum information, and nanomaterial
fields, as well as public outreach activities demonstrating the importance of
photonics (the interaction of light and matter) and quantum information.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Working with their students, Professors Masiello and
Goldsmith create small disk-shaped structures called toroidal microresonators
decorated with molecules or nanoparticles. Light injected into the disk
undergoes total internal reflection, causing it to propagate almost endlessly
around the periphery of the disk with very little loss. As it moves around the
disk, it interacts with molecules or nanoparticles placed on its surface,
enabling the structure to maintain strong coupling between a variety of
molecular and nanomaterial quantum absorbers. The project, which contains a
strong interplay between theory and experiment, focuses on production and
manipulation of states that demonstrate Dicke superradiance. Characterization of
new coupled states is achieved by microresonator photothermal spectroscopy and
photoluminescence, with experimental observation being understood in the context
of an underlying theory that describes the state evolution and relevant
dissipation processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.