* 1836881
* ICE-T:RI: Towards End-to-End Resource Optimization for Time-Critical Computing Using Reinforcement Learning and Program Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Liqiang Wang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Data-intensive, time-critical applications generate an enormous amount of data
that needs to be analyzed quickly. Resource optimization for time-critical
computing faces many challenges including high demand on programming skills,
difficulty in determining suitable parallelism degree, and great complexity in
making resource allocation considering multiple optimization targets. To help in
designing more efficient applications, this project investigates end-to-end
resource optimization for time-critical computing using reinforcement learning
and program analysis techniques. The approach integrates both resource request
optimization by program analysis, and resource scheduling by reinforcement
learning with consideration of time-critical features. The project will enhance
our understanding of the challenges involved in addressing problem demand with
reinforcement learning and semantics-aware program
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to make the following novel
contributions: (1) designing a semantics-aware optimization for data-intensive
applications including two stages. The offline stage uses static program
analysis for analyzing big data system primitives and user-defined functions to
generate a parameterized data framework and fix partial performance flaws by
rule-based and cost-based models. The online stage uses dynamic program analysis
that instantiates a parameterized framework based on execution metrics to repair
performance problems; (2) exploring the trade-off between enlarging parallelism
degree and minimizing the amount of data shuffling across computing nodes; and
(3) designing a reinforcement learning based model for resource
allocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project initiates a research collaboration
between the University of Central Florida and the University of Amsterdam,
Netherlands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.