* 1836523
* NNA: Fresh Eyes on Ice: Connecting Arctic Communities through a Revitalized and Modernized Freshwater Ice Observation Network
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Laura Oxtoby, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 2,627,872.00

Snow and ice are essential parts of living in cold places, and all northern
peoples observe, understand, and appreciate how these change every year. Wide-
scale observations of freshwater ice and how its presence has changed over time
will meet a fundamental need for a broad range of stakeholders, from rural
communities that depend on ice for transportation and subsistence harvest, to
industries that rely on winter water for ice road construction, to scientists
studying climate change and ecosystem services. The Fresh Eyes on Ice
observation network addresses this need by collecting data across a wide area of
interior, western, and northern Alaska using satellite observations, monitoring
stations on lakes and rivers, and field campaigns by snowmachine--all integrated
with a partnership of community-based local scientists, teachers, and school
children. The design for this observation network builds on the Alaska Lake Ice
and Snow Observatory Network (ALISON), a project hosted by University of Alaska
Fairbanks from 1999 to 2011 that used this basic premise for hands-on data
collection by K-12 students and teachers in communities across Alaska. Teachers
still informally use the ALISON program; by reviving this approach through the
Fresh Eyes on Ice observation network, using modernized techniques, this project
will foster new appreciation for environmental change in the Arctic and inspire
new scientists, in addition to providing valuable information in a time of rapid
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Winter is the most rapidly changing season in the
Arctic, causing widespread responses in freshwater ice and the ecosystems and
communities that rely on frozen lakes and rivers. Freshwater ice dynamics--the
formation, growth, and melt of ice--not only integrate winter climate
conditions, but also impact permafrost, hydrology, greenhouse gas emissions, and
human travel and subsistence. Long-term observations document dramatic changes
in ice thickness and breakup timing in lakes and rivers of northern latitudes.
Such ice observations come from rigorous programs conducted by government and
academic scientists using satellites, in situ sensors, and sophisticated field
measurements, but also from lake- and river-side communities, school classrooms,
and subsistence-users who watch these changes daily. Together these ice
observations provide a valuable and integrated record of winter climate change
relevant at local, regional, and global-scales. Navigating the new Arctic with
Fresh Eyes on Ice, a new freshwater ice observation network, revitalizes
existing datasets and expands observations in space and time using modern
satellite, aerial, and in situ sensing techniques integrated with community-
based monitoring teams. Extensive late winter field campaigns, dedicated social
media and data sharing between widely spaced communities and interested
scientists, and visualization systems will connect communities in boreal and
arctic Alaska, making science education and outreach seamless components of this
observing network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.