* 1836629
* NSF Computer Systems Research (CSR) Program 2018 PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 07/31/2020
* USD 160,040.00

The Computing Systems Research (CSR) program of the NSF funds a wide range of
systems research including (but not limited to) systems for Internet-of-Things
(which makes our homes and city smarter), systems to make more affordable and
energy-efficient Supercomputers (which furthers medical research, our
understanding of the universe, and warns the population of tornadoes and
hurricanes, to name a few), systems to improve the usefulness, security, and
reliability of our smartphones, and systems to secure and scale cloud computing
(which has expanded the capabilities of Information Systems while dramatically
decreasing the associated costs). The project organizes and funds a community
event on October 24, 2018 in Bellevue, Washington, for the researchers of awards
from the CSR program. At this event, the researchers funded by the CSR program
will have the opportunity to meet and share their research and ideas for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project organizes a meeting of CSR researchers
that includes three types of activities. Plenary presentations will give a forum
for the most remarkable research in the field to be presented and diffused to a
large audience. These presentations are also useful to set the tone and quality
of expected research for the researchers of more recent awards. Poster
presentations of ongoing award enable casual scientific conversation and person-
to-person research diffusion; they are expected to strengthen the social
interaction between CSR researchers and to lead to new collaborations and
synergy in the field. Breakout sessions will focus on subfield of systems
research to summarize recent successful methodology and identify problems and
opportunities for future work. The project provides a forum for systems
researchers to meet and to form new collaborations, to discuss and to
disseminate successful efforts, to identify the problems and opportunities of
the future, and to maximize the impact of subsequent systems research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.