* 1836674
* NSF's ChemMatCARS: Construction of a Second Beamline using a Canted Undulator at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Matthew Tirrell, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 17,201,473.00

This award is supported by the Division of Chemistry and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering Environmental, and Transport
Systems in the Directorate for Engineering and the Divisions of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences and Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences. The award expands the scientific capabilities and
instrumentation at NSF's ChemMatCARS. NSF's ChemMatCARS is a national user
facility for frontier research in chemistry, materials science, bioengineering,
environmental engineering, and molecular biosciences that employs high-energy
synchrotron X-rays at the Advanced Photon Source located at Argonne National
Laboratory. Experimental stations at NSF's ChemMatCARS serve a broad national
and international community of scientists providing unique capabilities not
found anywhere else in the world. Research activities address vital societal
issues, including the development of new energy sources, biomolecular materials
inspired by biological processes, studies of interactions that help in
understanding the rules of life, environmental remediation processes, and new
materials and catalysts important for a wide range of industries. This award
supports the expansion of NSF's ChemMatCARS sector from one beamline to two,
thereby providing opportunities for innovative development of new capabilities
and enhanced capacity to meet the scientific needs of a larger user community.
The facility serves as a training ground for researchers at all levels of
education and carries out numerous activities to develop and diversify the
future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upgrade of NSF ChemMatCARS
enables improved performance and increased user access to new experimental
techniques including serial X-ray crystallography, low energy resonant
diffraction, the study of liquid-solid interfaces, scanning transmission
interfacial scattering, and coherent X-ray surface imaging. The award supports
the design and construction of a new beamline as well as two experimental
stations that are supplied with X-rays from an independent, second high-energy
insertion device (undulator) consisting of superconducting magnets. Beamtime
available for experiments at NSF's ChemMatCARS is being doubled, allowing for
the development of new techniques and new areas of inquiry. An upcoming upgrade
of the Advanced Photon Source will produce an X-ray beam with 100-fold greater
brightness and coherent flux enabling new sciences and shorter experiment times.
Serial X-ray crystallography of small molecules is being developed to study the
structural dynamics of irreversible chemical and physical reactions and
processes, that have proven challenging to characterize on the atomic scale.
Lower energy X-rays on the new beamline extend the capabilities of resonant
diffraction to provide complete coverage of 3d and 4d transition metals, thereby
enhancing investigations to replace precious metals with earth-abundant
materials for catalysis. In the area of liquid interfaces, new techniques are
addressing the challenge of characterizing the heterogeneity of liquid surfaces
and interfaces on the nanoscale. The study of liquid-solid interfaces is made
possible by new instrumentation capable of addressing a wide range of scientific
problems in the areas of water purification, protein-membrane interactions for
bio-signaling and transport, and electrolyte-electrode interactions for
catalysis and energy applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.