* 1836429
* I-Corps:  Affordable Thermo-Responsive Cell Culture Supports for Damage-Free Cell Harvesting
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Bi-min Zhang Newby, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to reduce
production costs of high-quality stem and primary cells for regenerative
medicine (RM), consequently reducing medical expenses and improving the quality
of life for individuals. RM has a projected global market of $67.6 billion by
2020, and is capable of repairing, replacing and regenerating tissues and organs
that are affected by disease/disorder, age, or injury. The common cell
harvesting methods cause severe damage to cells, especially primary cells and
stem cells. Our technology allows harvesting damage free cells, i.e., retaining
essential cell functionalities and characteristics, which are superior for RM.
Damage free cells will also enhance basic life science research by obtaining
more clinical relevant results that cannot be achieved by using cell lines or
damaged cells. While there is one commercially available thermo-responsive
product being used to reduce cell damages during harvesting, it is too expensive
to be adopted widely. Our technology is low cost, scalable, reproducible, and
serves large growing markets. Through this project, we will identify key markets
for adoption, correctly define the key product attributes, and understand
scaling requirements, hence providing a source of high-quality stem and primary
cells for critical medical research and applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project will validate market potentials of applying thermo-responsive
supports for damage free and chemical free cell harvesting, which is crucial for
cell based regenerative medicine and basic life science research. Our technology
for generating thermo-responsive supports employs a cost-effective and simple
process that involves only 3 steps: blending, casting and thermal annealing of a
thermo-responsive polymer and a network forming silane. During annealing, the
silane molecules anchor to the surface while simultaneously forming networks to
entrap polymer chains. Other reported thermo-responsive surfaces generally are
prepared by using non-easily accessible electron beam irradiation or plasma
polymerization to deposit a thermo-responsive layer, or painstakingly grow the
thermo-responsive polymer on a surface. Also, as compared to the commercial
product, our technology allows enhanced cell attachment and growth, and
accelerated cell detachment upon cooling, thus avoiding cell damage. Therefore,
our technology, described in research papers and patent protected, provides
better platforms for commercial expansion of stem and primary cells and for
basic research. In addition, our technology, with small scale samples, has been
validated by another research group for a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.