* 1836308
* International Collaboration in Chemistry: Collaborative Research: Development of Novel Catalysts and Approaches for Parahydrogen-Induced Enhancement of Magnetic Resonance
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Eduard Chekmenev, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2019
* USD 88,083.00

With this award, the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program is supporting a
collaborative team comprised of research groups in Russia (led by Igor Koptyug
of ITC Novosibirsk) and the US (led by Boyd Goodson of Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale and Eduard Chekmenev of Vanderbilt University) for
research to improve the capabilities of nuclear magnetic resonance, or NMR, the
key technology behind magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a widely used diagnostic
tool in modern medicine. The investigators are exploring a possible modification
that could enhance the sensitivity of this technique by many orders of
magnitude, thus improving MRI while also contributing to the improvement of
technologies for visualizing other types of systems. The research is exploring
the use of a special form of hydrogen known as parahydrogen that has been shown
to enhance an NMR signal. The work is bringing a variety of techniques to bear
on the task of understanding how this special form of hydrogen works in order to
develop more accurate and sensitive imaging methods. The work is having a broad
impact on the development of new scientific instruments that will find
applications in a wide variety of fields from medicine to chemical
manufacturing. It is having a further broad impact by bringing scientists
together across borders to work on problems of mutual global interest. This
project is contributing to the training of the next generation of scientists by
providing opportunities for students at all levels to participate in a highly
interdisciplinary, multi-site training environment. Specifically, students at
the US sites are able to visit and carry out research projects at the
international collaborator's site in Novosibirsk, one of Asia's most important
research hubs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective is to develop new
catalytic materials and approaches that can dramatically improve the
applicability of parahydrogen induced polarization (PHIP) techniques. Low
detection sensitivity remains an Achilles Heel of many conventional methods such
as NMR and MRI. However, the pure anti-phase spin order of parahydrogen (pH2)
can be exploited to achieve highly non-equilibrium nuclear spin population
distributions ("polarizations") in certain types of molecules, thereby enabling
the enhancement of NMR/MRI detection sensitivity by orders of magnitude. More
specifically, these efforts concern the synthesis, evaluation, and NMR
demonstration of: 1) new heterogeneous catalysts for traditional PHIP (which
involves the hydrogenation of unsaturated moieties with pH2); and 2) new
homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts for SABRE (signal amplification by
reversible exchange - a technique where spin order is transferred from pH2 to
molecules without requiring irreversible chemical change). New approaches
exploiting in situ high-field SABRE are also under study. Additionally, these
experiments are supported by the construction of an automated portable HET-
PHIP/SABRE polarizer with in situ MR detection and automated pH2 generation.
These research efforts endeavor to provide greater insight into current
limitations for key PHIP approaches, while working to dramatically improve their
utility.