* 1836900
* CPS: Frontier: Collaborative Research: Cognitive Autonomy for Human CPS: Turning Novices into Experts
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Tryphenia Peele-Eady, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 3,254,834.00

Human interaction with autonomous cyber-physical systems is becoming ubiquitous
in consumer products, transportation systems, manufacturing, and many other
domains. This project seeks constructive methods to answer the question: How can
we design cyber-physical systems to be responsive and personalized, yet also
provide high-confidence assurances of reliability? Cyber-physical systems that
adapt to the human, and account for the human's ongoing adaptation to the
system, could have enormous impact in everyday life as well as in specialized
domains (biomedical devices and systems, transportation systems, manufacturing,
military applications), by significantly reducing training time, increasing the
breadth of the human's experiences with the system prior to operation in a
safety-critical environment, improving safety, and improving both human and
system performance. Architectures that support dynamic interactions, enabled by
advances in computation, communication, and control, can leverage strengths of
the human and the automation to achieve new levels of performance and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates a human-centric
architecture for "cognitive autonomy" that couples human psychophysiological and
behavioral measures with objective measures of performance. The architecture has
four elements: 1) a computable cognitive model which is amenable to control, yet
highly customizable, responsive to the human, and context dependent; 2) a
predictive monitor, which provides a priori probabilistic verification as well
as real-time short-term predictions to anticipate problematic behaviors and
trigger the appropriate action; 3) cognitive control, which collaboratively
assures both desired safety properties and human performance metrics; and 4)
transparent communication, which helps maintain trust and situational awareness
through explanatory reasoning. The education and outreach plan focuses on
broadening participation of underrepresented minorities through a culturally
responsive undergraduate summer research program, which will also provide
insights about learning environments that support participation and retention.
All research and educational material generated by the project are being made
available to the public through the project webpage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.