* 1836710
* EAGER: BRAIDING: Multi-terminal Josephson circuits supporting nontrivial Chern topologies for anyonic qubits
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* James Eckstein, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: This research project aims to exploit the physical laws
of quantum mechanics to create a new tool for superfast information processing,
known as quantum computation. Researchers will encode information in identical
subatomic particles, known as non-Abelian particles, which can "remember" the
history of their mutual positions and how they have exchanged positions.
Practical quantum information processing hardware is expected to allow the
encoded information to be read out and will provide transformative advances in
several areas, including the design of new, functional materials and complex,
multi-dimensional information-processing operations. The quantum materials and
devices to be developed in this project are important for enabling very precise
measurements in science and technology. Furthermore, the project has important
implications for fundamental science; for example, cosmological models of the
Universe could be mimicked using these new methods of quantum information
processing. Under this project, students will receive extensive training in
advanced scientific methods, materials science and nanotechnology and, also, in
applying scientific methods for critical thinking and problem solving.

Technical Abstract: This work focuses on demonstrating the superior potential of
multi-terminal superconducting Josephson circuits and qubits as a braiding
platform for non-Abelian particles and as emulators of novel higher-dimensional
topological states and their possible use in applications for topologically
protected computing. The vortices are created in two-dimensional arrays of
superconducting nano-islands placed on a topological insulator. Such vortices
are predicted to carry non-Abelian Majorana zero modes. The studied qubit device
is a cross-current meissneron transmon qubit, which is able to supply a
circularly polarized supercurrent allowing circular braiding trajectories of
vortex-antivortex pairs. In this project, a quantum-superposition Lorentz force
is generated by means of the two qubits coupled to a multi-terminal
superconducting junction having the array of superconducting nano-islands. The
goal is to achieve a superposition of two-dimensional braiding trajectories in
order to store quantum information. At the first stage, a two-dimensional multi-
terminal superconducting proximity junction, decorated with an array of
superconducting nano-islands, is being used to stabilize and permit two-
dimensional translocation of vortices and antivortices. The parity of the
Majorana states affects the qubit excitation energy and thus can be measured by
qubit spectroscopy. Combining vortices and antivortices serves the purpose of
simplifying braiding algorithms, because the Lorentz force acting on
antivortices under a given supercurrent is opposite to the Lorentz force acting
on vortices. The two-dimensional nature of the proximity arrays, serving as
nonlinear inductors in transmon qubits, is the key factor allowing vortices and
antivortices to be present simultaneously in the junction and to move around
each other to achieve braiding operations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.