* 1836677
* Workshop: The Integrated Future of Additive Manufacturing, Design, Production and Qualification; Alexandria, Virginia; July 23-24, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Christopher Hansen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop brings together leading experts in the field of 3D printing to
discuss and identify the current challenges to be addressed and the
revolutionary future opportunities enabled by this broad and rapidly expanding
field. Interdisciplinary groups formed across material and processing
disciplines, and composed of a vibrant mix of academic, government, and industry
participants, will provide a creative yet realistic view of the transformative
potential of additive manufacturing. The cross-disciplinary discussions will
hone a broad range of opinions and visions towards a common agreement on the
major issues and avenues towards innovative solutions. Further, if these
solutions are successful, what new commercial opportunities, technical areas of
study, and other societal benefits will result. The workshop will be held at NSF
Headquarters, Alexandria, Virginia, July 23-24, 2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
future of Additive Manufacturing (AM) relies on the seamless integration of
design, production, and qualification of functional parts. These three high
level topics will be addressed across five working groups: (1) functional
materials and structures, (2) 3D printing processes, (3) embedded
instrumentation and methods for in-situ monitoring and real-time process
control, (4) process informed multi-objective design tools, and (5) logistics
and mass customization. The frontiers of each subtopic, their challenges, and
potential solutions to them will be discussed across working groups. The results
of these discussions will help frame future areas of research and opportunities
if these challenges are solved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.