* 1836540
* QLC: EAGER: Study of the hydrocarbon quantum formation process with carbon 12 and carbon 13 and optical control
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Mengyan Shen, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2020
* USD 123,682.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Mengyan Shen at University of
Massachusetts Lowell (UML) is testing the hypothesis that chain hydrocarbons are
quantum mechanically synthesized on a cobalt/cobalt oxide surface from carbon
dioxide, water, and light. This reaction mimics photosynthesis and is important
in reducing carbon dioxide and increasing the energy supply. The goals of this
research are to exploit the characteristics of an unusual isotope distribution
that is completely different from conventional expectation. The project provides
great opportunities for training students including those underrepresented in
sciences. It also helps to develop a workforce on quantum computing. Outreach
activities involving K-12 students will also be part of the funded project.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A cobalt oxide photo-catalyst, discovered in Professor
Shen's lab at UML, is physically activated by sunlight and has been proven to
directly convert carbon dioxide and water to long-chain hydrocarbons (C5 to
C15). When a mixture of isotopic C-12 and C-13 carbon dioxide was used, a highly
unusual isotope distribution was observed. Particular objectives of this
proposal are (1) To confirm the observation that pure C-12 hydrocarbons and pure
C-13 hydrocarbons tend to form easily on some catalysts' surfaces, which cannot
be explained with the current chemical theories, (2) To understand and create a
predictive model for the mechanism of the formation of chain hydrocarbons based
on experimental results using isotopic carbon dioxide and isotopic water. It is
hoped that this would explain the observation of pure C-13 and pure C-12 having
the tendency to group together in forming chain hydrocarbons, and (3) To find
controlling parameters with light wavelength, temperature, and pressures as well
as study the influence of the catalyst surface structures on the quantum
formation of hydrocarbons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.