* 1836602
* Collaborative Research:  CoLang 2020:  Institute for Collaborative Language Research, Montana
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Susan Penfield, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 299,060.00

Collaborative and community-based research models have increasingly been the
interests in the field of language documentation and revitalization. Since its
inception in 2008, the Institute on Collaborative Language Research (CoLang) has
been a biennial venue for researchers and community language workers to receive
intensive training in collaborative language research responding to the global
need for quality language documentation in the face of the world-wide crisis in
language endangerment. In 2020, CoLang will be held at the University of Montana
(UM), co-hosted by UM and Chief Dull Knife College (CDKC -- a two-year tribal
college of the Northern Cheyenne in Montana). It will bring stakeholders
together to develop collaborative practices and extend networking among all
participants including language workers, language activists, language teachers,
undergraduate and graduate students, and linguists from both academic and
language communities. In partnering with each other, CoLang 2020 co-hosts (UM
and CDKC) will demonstrate an Indigenous/non-Indigenous collaboration at the
organizational level and encourage participation from the Indigenous communities
of the United States and Canada. The Institute has continuously advanced
knowledge in linguistics by its role in developing and sharing cutting edge
practices in the scientific, ethical and sustainable methods for understanding
the linguistic structure of the world's estimated 7,000 languages and for
understanding the complex and important role language plays at the community
level. Broader impacts of project activities includes the training of a wide
range of audiences in skills in community-centered language documentation,
supporting and building capacity at Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) in
STEM through the language sciences and the broadening participation of American
Indians and Alaska Natives in the language sciences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With
prior Institutes held in 2008 (University of California, Santa Barbara), 2010
(University of Oregon), 2012 (University of Kansas), 2014 (University of Texas-
Arlington), 2016 (University of Alaska-Fairbanks), and 2018 (University of
Florida), CoLang has developed a significant track record of national and
international success, and previous participants have incorporated their
Institute experiences into successful fieldwork projects and community
documentation activities worldwide. CoLang 2020 will devote five weeks to
intensive training in collaborative approaches to language documentation. The
first two weeks will consist of focused workshops and organized discussions,
providing hands-on training in the latest linguistic technology,
interdisciplinary methods, and best practices in ethical community
collaborations. The following three weeks are dedicated to "practica" (intensive
field methods), where students will work directly with speakers of selected
endangered languages to learn documentation methods and applications first-hand,
integrating the skills acquired during the preceding workshops. The Institute is
at the forefront of methodology development through the intensive training
facilitated by co-instructors coming from the international community of
indigenous and academic experts in linguistic and interdisciplinary researchers.
Importantly, CoLang 2020 activities in this area continue to support models of
robust, reliable, and ethical research in the social and behavioral
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.