* 1836010
* MSIP: Innovation to Achieve the Full Science Reach of the BICEP Array Stage 3 CMB Polarization Experiment
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* John Carlstrom, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nigel Sharp
* 09/30/2024
* USD 9,206,890.00

Scientists funded by this program develop advanced millimeter-wave instruments
to conduct observations from the U.S. South Pole Station to study properties of
the early Universe. The main goal of the project is to test the inflationary
theory, a remarkable idea that the entire observable Universe began in a
violently accelerated expansion of a microscopic volume. Along the way,
superconducting detector technology and our knowledge on astronomical emission
will be significantly advanced. The specific feature being pursued is a tiny
swirly polarization pattern in the cosmic microwave background (CMB) radiation,
the 2.7-Kelvin afterglow of the Big Bang. Scientists involved in this program
will design and build a telescope populated with more than 20 thousand state-of-
the-art superconducting sensors, and field it to the South Pole station -- the
driest place on Earth. The research activities will provide excellent
opportunities for training of graduate students and postdocs. In addition, there
is a set of outreach goals aiming at the public audience: (1) Providing middle
and high school teachers with the training and tools they need to inspire
students to pursue STEM via the Research Experiences for Teachers program at
Stanford; (2) Inspiring the faculty, postdocs, and graduate students engaged in
the proposed work to be effective science communicators with well-organized
workshops, and (3) Enabling broad access to some of the most fascinating, but
difficult, concepts that underlie modern cosmology by creating a set of
animations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will use the BICEP Array and SPT-3G
data to produce cutting-edge measurements of CMB polarization. Data from this
new system will be used to discriminate the dust emission from our own Galaxy
and the primordial CMB signal. The program consists of three parts: (1)
Development of a 22,000-detector 220/270GHz receiver to complete the BICEP
Array. The required high detector count is enabled by a new technology?microwave
SQUID multiplexers; (2) Implementation of delensing analysis in conjunction with
SPT-3G; (3) Improvements to the control of instrumental systematics. In addition
to the main science goal of constraining inflation, the high-frequency receiver
will dramatically improve understanding of polarized Galactic dust emission.
Also, BICEP Array combined with SPT-3G is a pathfinder towards the CMB-S4
initiative to build an "ultimate" Stage 4 CMB polarization
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.