* 1836500
* QLC: EAGER: Quantum Simulation Using Solution Processed Quantum Dots Coupled to Nano-cavities
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Brandi Cossairt, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum technologies can revolutionize modern information systems by enabling
faster computing and secured communication. Such technologies can be realized by
exploiting the quantum nature of light, namely, photons. Unfortunately, photons
do not interact with each other on their own, which prevents their direct
application for quantum information processing. With support from the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program in the Division of
Chemistry, Professors Arka Majumdar and Brandi Cossairt from the University of
Washington are designing nanoscale optical structures that can store light for a
long time while simultaneously confining it to a small volume. It is like
focusing sun-light with a magnifying glass, but on the nanometer scale, the
effect happens at a single photon level. Integrating nanoparticles with these
optical nanostructures leads to a strong interaction between the photons. When
photons are made to influence one another, they can then be used to distribute
quantum information in a variety of useful ways. Discoveries from this project
are advancing our understanding of how light interacts with matter, as well as
leading to new, one-of-a-kind platforms for quantum technologies. Furthermore,
the project is providing training and education in quantum technologies for
graduate, undergraduate and high school students, with a strong emphasis on
including women and students from underrepresented minorities groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nano-optical resonators can enhance the light-matter
interaction via spatial and temporal confinement of light. The integration of a
single quantum dot with such a resonator can lead to the strong coupling regime,
where individual photons repel each other in an effect known as photon blockade.
Such strong interactions are necessary for simulating the complicated behavior
of electrons in real materials and other strongly correlated quantum many-body
systems. However, deterministic positioning of single quantum dots is a very
difficult task, and to date remains unsolved. To address this problem, the team
is using solution-processed colloidal quantum dots in conjunction with
lithographically defined windows on each nano-resonator. Combining numerical
simulations, new synthesis chemistry, and optical characterization, three
research thrusts are pursued: (i) Synthesis of quantum dots with large physical
size; (ii) Size-selective integration of quantum dots with nano-resonators and
measurement of quantum optical properties; (iii) Optical spectroscopy and photon
correlation measurements in a nonlinear cavity array. The proposed research is
built upon the PI's prior work on solution processed quantum dots, cavity
quantum electrodynamics, and single photon nonlinear
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.