* 1836504
* Reimagining Energy: Exploring Inclusive Practices for Teaching Energy Concepts to Undergraduate Engineering Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Diana Chen, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 09/30/2023
* USD 255,592.00

A collection of teaching practices that has been successful in promoting K-12
student engagement is "culturally sustaining pedagogies" (CSPs). CSPs seek to
create an inclusive educational experience that benefits all students, including
traditionally underserved students. The potential of CSPs to improve learning
has not yet been explored in undergraduate engineering. This project will apply
a CSP strategy to design and teach a new sophomore-level energy course that will
be required for undergraduate engineering majors at the University of San Diego.
Energy is a foundational concept across engineering disciplines, but it is
typically introduced to students in thermodynamics courses, that do not usually
provide a context that engages women or under-represented minorities in
engineering. By integrating energy practices from non-Western cultures, the
course may help all students develop a broader perspective of energy issues and
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project will examine how the
integration of CSPs affects engineering students. Specifically, energy examples
outside of those traditionally used in thermodynamics will be identified, a
course developed that integrates these non-traditional examples using CSPs will
be designed, and a mixed methods research will be used to investigate how CSPs
impact student learning, mindsets, and attitudes. Teaching materials will be
freely available so that other faculty may use CSPs to engage their students.
Consistent with NSF's mission to a diverse the STEM workforce, this project aims
to promote inclusion within engineering and thus to support broader
participation and increased diversity in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.