* 1836362
* CBMS Conference: Topological Methods in Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Robert Mignone, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2019
* USD 35,960.00

This National Science Foundation award supports the NSF-CBMS regional conference
on Topological Methods in Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence, hosted
by the College of Charleston in Charleston, South Carolina, during the week of
May 13-17, 2019. The conference will feature Professor Gunnar Carlsson of
Stanford University and Ayasdi Inc. as the Principal Lecturer. Professor
Carlsson will deliver a series of ten lectures introducing participants to the
fast-emerging field of Topological Data Analysis, which employs many of the
techniques commonly used in topology, the study of shape, to analyze massive and
complex data sets across multiple application domains. The conference will
benefit a broad group of participants as data science is rapidly establishing
itself as an interdisciplinary discipline with many high-impact applications.
Main targets of the lecture series and the ensuing monograph will be
applications to the medical sciences, including, e.g., better targeting and
prediction of diseases and improved patient care, though the lectures will
benefit a far larger constituency. The great majority of the NSF-supported
participants will be recruited from amongst early career researchers, graduate
students, minorities, and women. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Topological Data
Analysis refers to the use of topology as a tool for understanding and
interacting with large and complex data sets. It should be viewed as another
step in the development of Machine Learning. Many of the techniques used
extensively in topology - including the combinatorial construction of spaces as
simplicial complexes, homology and cohomology, local to global methods for
computation and application, and the organizing power of the language of
category theory and functoriality - all play important roles in the development
of this subject. Professor Carlsson?s lecture series and the resulting monograph
will introduce students and researchers to this rapidly emerging field. Topics
will include topological modeling of data; machine learning; applications of
homology to shape analytic tasks, statistics of image patches, and viral
evolution; adapting local-to-global methods from topology to point cloud
situations; persistence landscapes and persistence images with applications to
drug discovery; clustering; and algorithms as data sources. The conference
website is at http://math.cofc.edu/CBMS-TDA2019/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.