* 1836889
* ICE-T:RC: Optimizing Internet video through support from the network edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Sanjay Rao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Despite many advances in recent years, the performance of Internet video often
falls below user expectations. The issues are likely to be exacerbated with the
emergence of bandwidth-intensive 4K video, and more recently, interactive video
such as 360-degree video which is latency sensitive as well. This project
investigates new opportunities opened by recent Internet Service Provider (ISP)
interest in deploying value-added services at the edge of the provider's
network. Such edge-based services can aid video streaming applications through
lower latencies, higher throughput, and visibility into network
performance&lt;br/&gt;bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore novel services that may be deployed at the ISP edge, which can
significantly improve the performance of video streaming solutions, as well as
develop new approaches to video streaming that can leverage these services. The
research will systematically characterize these benefits, develop new
mechanisms, and consider practical deployment concerns. Specific research
contributions will include: 1. Techniques for proactively estimating the rate at
which video applications can transmit informed by explicit information collected
at the network edge in real-time. The approach includes edge-based monitoring
and estimation to ensure scalability, and extensive use of network data to
refine and validate our algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;2. Redesigning state-of-the-art
available bit rate (ABR) approaches to exploit proactive rate estimation. The
project team will also explore a new design point where the ABR algorithm itself
is run on an edge server rather than the client.&lt;br/&gt;3. Measurement-based
characterization studies of interactive video streaming to investigate issues
around edge support for interactive video. Specifically, the project will
consider the interplay between the encoding scheme used for 360-degree video,
user interactivity models, and the edge cache hit rate. This project will extend
an ongoing research collaboration between Purdue University and the Politecnico
di Torino, Italy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.