* 1836435
* QLC: EAGER: Toward the visualization of chemical control
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Roseanne Sension, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 01/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Roseanne Sension of The University
of Michigan is using x-ray techniques to develop visual images and movies of the
internal motions of the atoms in molecules which have been exposed to a pulse of
ultraviolet (UV) or visible (Vis) light. Pulses of UV/Vis light can cause
distortions of the chemical bonds in molecules, and even cause them to break or
re-form in what we call a photochemical reaction. These light-induced motions
occur on very short time scales, from a few femtoseconds to a few nanoseconds (A
femtosecond is one quadrillionth of a second. A nanosecond is one billionth of a
second). X-ray diffraction has been used to determine molecular structure for
more than a century. However, these have been molecules that are stationary in a
crystal lattice. In order to capture the extremely fast motions of molecules
after they have been exposed to light, Prof. Sensions is using the intense
x-rays produced by free electron lasers (for example, at the LINAC Coherent
Light Source at Stanford University). Professor Sension and her students are
measuring how molecules absorb x-rays, and developing methods to convert x-ray
absorption information into images that can be sequenced as frames in a motion
picture. The visualization of photochemical reactions at the molecular level
helps us understand chemical reactions in general, and also supports the long-
term goal to control chemical reactions with light. The project is also training
students in the use of advanced experimental facilities and in advanced computer
simulation of UV/Vis and x-ray absorption. In addition, the results are being
integrated into the undergraduate curriculum to help students understand the
relevance of mathematics and physics to chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project uses femtosecond x-ray free electron lasers to visualize quantum wave
packet motion in molecules. A short laser pulse is used to initiate and control
a photochemical reaction. A polarized x-ray pulse probes the coherent structural
dynamics on the excited state potential energy surface. Cobalamin photochemistry
and photophysics is used as a model system for molecular visualization and
quantum control with femtosecond x-ray pulses sources. The visualization of
coherent excited state dynamics and the correlation of dynamics with the
molecular ligands facilitate the understanding and development of cobalamin
based molecular devices. The experimental observations are interpreted using
quantum chemical calculations and finite difference near edge spectroscopy ab
initio code to simulate x-ray absorption spectra. In addition, general
simulation methods are being developed to model ultrafast x-ray spectroscopy and
coherent excited state dynamics. This research project has implications for a
wide range of applications in energy conversion, medical therapeutics, molecular
electronics, switches, sensors, and delivery platforms. Many of these
applications exploit intrinsically quantum mechanical dynamics of the molecules
involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.