* 1836950
* D3SC: EAGER: Deep learning to design selective kinase inhibitors
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* John Karanicolas, Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 298,559.00

John Karanicolas of the Institute for Cancer Research is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program and by the
Data-Driven Discovery Science in Chemistry initiative in the Division of
Chemistry, to develop an artificial intelligence-based strategy for designing
small molecule compounds that bind to and probe the functions of human kinases.
Kinases are a family of proteins responsible for controlling virtually all
signaling processes in multicellular organisms. Such processes are fundamental
to life itself, and play a critical role in cell division, cell growth and
motility, and cellular transport. Consequently, kinases also represent potential
targets for novel cancer drugs. There are several hundred kinase proteins,
organized into complex signaling pathways. Each pathway acts like a set of
cascading dominos: once an initial chemical trigger occurs at a key location on
the kinase molecule, it sets in motion a series of downstream reactions
translating into specialized molecular functions. Since individual kinases can
participate in multiple cellular processes, these signaling pathways are often
highly intertwined. To determine the function of a particular kinase, scientists
utilize small molecules as chemical probes that bind to the kinase, suppress its
activity, and enable the analysis of downstream impact on cellular function.
However, a significant challenge is that most existing chemical probes are not
as selective as originally thought: many probes act on multiple kinases at once.
Experimental "wet lab" testing of all possible combinations of hundreds of
kinases against tens of thousands of potential chemical probes is not practical
due to cost. Professor Karanicolas and his students are utilizing state-of-the-
art advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning, publicly-available
data on select kinase-probe interactions, and specialized techniques developed
in his laboratory for modeling the 3D structure of protein-small molecule
binding, to develop a computational model that accurately predicts kinase
binding affinities and chemical probe selectivity. The project's discoveries
have the potential for significant impact in facilitating fundamental studies of
cell biology, as well as the identification of selective kinase inhibitors for
pharmaceutical design. The new methods are being implemented in software
distributed through public repositories and the widely-used Rosetta software
suite. The research is providing cross-disciplinary training opportunities
fusing chemical biology and data science to students at the high school,
undergraduate, and graduate levels.

Modern cell biology leans heavily on kinase inhibitors as chemical probes for
analyzing the consequences of deactivating a particular kinase, but the majority
of commonly-used chemical probes are not sufficiently target-selective for
robust interpretation of observed phenotypes. By assembling large panels of
kinases (corresponding to much of the human kinome), it is possible to
experimentally determine selectivity for a given probe: however, these
experiments are expensive and impractical to perform at scale. This project is
applying deep learning techniques to predict the binding affinities of
individual inhibitor/kinase pairs, using 3D structural descriptors derived from
a novel method for modeling inhibitor/kinase complexes, recently developed in
the Karanicolas group. Following careful training and benchmarking, the
predictive model is being used in two ways: 1) to evaluate the selectivity of
chemical probes that are widely used by cell biologists, and determine which
compounds constitute useful tools and which compounds should be deprecated; and
2) to screen a large chemical library of small molecules to identify new
candidate probes that are expected to have strong binding affinity and
selectivity for a given kinase. The model's predictions in both applications are
being tested experimentally through biochemical assays. While it has long been
hypothesized that inclusion of 3D structural features would improve existing
machine learning approaches for predicting protein/ligand binding affinities,
the availability of a rapid and accurate method for building 3D structural
models will allow this hypothesis to be tested for the first time. If
successful, insights from this project will provide a starting point for
developing models to predict binding affinities of other protein-ligand
complexes as well, for expanded applications in cell biology and drug discovery.
The results of the project are being disseminated as publicly-available source
code through SourceForge, and as modules within the widely-used Rosetta software
suite.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.