* 1836997
* Workshop Proposal:  Rethinking NSF's Computational Ecosystem for 21st Century Science and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Daniel Reed, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Robert Chadduck
* 05/31/2019
* USD 26,645.00

For nearly four decades, NSF has effectively supported the broad availability
and innovative uses of leading edge computational resources to accelerate
advances in science and engineering. These NSF investments have spanned
discipline-specific instruments and facilities; computational systems of varying
capabilities and architectures optimized for different applications; virtual
organizations for allocating resources and interfacing with users; and network
backbones connecting and providing access to these resources. Recent profound
advances across science and engineering interests and priorities, as well as in
enabling technologies, contribute to the current view of cyberinfrastructure
supporting research as appropriately embodying a model of an "ecosystem"
constituting interconnected, appropriately synergistically evolving,
elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this workshop is to further
foster and promote the NSF supported cyberinfrastructure ecosystem, including
its makeup of interconnected, appropriately evolving, elements, to continue to
be both motivated by scientific interests and priorities, as well as to evolve
responsively to an increasing pace of technologies
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.