* 1836392
* QLC: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Developing Experiment and Theory for Entangled Photon Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* George Schatz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

This research project is concerned with understanding unusual phenomena that
arise when light interacts with molecules. Light can be thought of as tiny
bundles of energy known as photons. In most cases, molecules absorb light energy
one photon at a time. This absorption can give rise to things we commonly
observe, such as color and fluorescence. The focus of this project is the near-
simultaneous absorption of two photons by molecules. Photons normally act
independently, but there is a quantum effect in which two photons become
entangled, and absorption of one photon becomes strongly dependent on the other
photon. We can think of the two photons talking to each other. When this
happens, the rate of absorption of two photons can be enhanced by many orders of
magnitude. Such enhancements in light absorption could advance many
technological applications that range from electronic devices to chemical
sensing. However, the details of molecule absorption of entangled photons are
poorly understood. The few experiments that have been done on entangled photons
do not always produce consistent results, even for similar molecules. In this
research project, Professors George Schatz of Northwestern University and
Theodore Goodson of the University of Michigan are combing experimental laser-
based measurements and computational modeling to study the absorption of
entangled photons by molecules. Students and postdocs who work on this project
are being trained in new experimental and theoretical techniques that are likely
to play a role as new technologies are developed based on these unique quantum
effects. In addition, Profs. Schatz and Goodson are engaging in active outreach
programs related to their research that touches on broad segments of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a quantum optical experimental
approach and a quantum electronic computational approach are being applied to
investigate new properties of organic molecules that are accessible through
entangled two-photon absorption (ETPA). The studies take advantage of the
quantum entanglement of photons created by the process of spontaneous parametric
down conversion and the subsequent excitation of electronic states in molecules.
The phenomenon of ETPA has been theoretically predicted to exhibit interesting
non-classical effects such as linear rather than quadratic dependence of
absorption rate on incident photon flux. In prior work, Prof. Goodson,
demonstrated the surprising result that some molecules show significant ETPA
cross sections while other nominally similar molecules show no observable ETPA.
To go further, this project employs theory and experiments aimed at
understanding intermediate states that participate in ETPA. The theory studies
involve calculating transition moments that couple excited states, which is an
ability that is generally missing from electronic structure theories. The
computational aspect of the project also utilizes a new time-dependent density
functional theory (TDDFT) approach developed by Prof. Schatz, for calculating
energies and transition moments, and ultimately ETPA cross sections. The
computational results are being compared with pump-probe entangled time-resolved
measurements using a new apparatus, with the goal of sorting out the role of
intermediate states in ETPA. The project is also concerned with training
graduate students and postdocs, and enabling them to develop careers of their
own that explore directions of the quantum world that have not yet been
conceived. In addition, the PIs have active outreach programs where the research
described in this proposal is presented at levels that range from graduate
courses in quantum mechanics to talks to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.