* 1836707
* EAGER: BRAIDING:  Transport studies of the anyon braiding
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Dmitri Averin, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,232.00

Nontechnical Abstract: Quantum computing has been a major research topic of
interest in recent years. The realization of quantum computing is based on
creation and manipulation of quantum bits (qubits). While this paradigm-changing
idea has been known for over 30 years, the realization of quantum computers is
still at the very early stage. A major challenge is to minimize quantum
decoherence, originated from various factors such as the interaction between a
quantum system and the environment. Towards this challenge, a potential solution
is topological quantum computing which utilizes qubits whose coherence is
protected. The proposed work here aims to experimentally realize the very
foundation of topological quantum computing, by studying the charge transport
signatures. The proposed work combines theoretical and experimental efforts. The
outcome may provide direct guidance for future research on how to control
individual topological excitations, potentially leading to breakthroughs in the
development of novel qubits for topological quantum computing. The proposed
research brings a combination of material science (nanomaterials),
nanotechnology, electronics, cryogenics, theoretical condensed matter physics
and quantum information science to students involved in the project. In
addition, outreach activities, including Stony Brook University Simons summer
research program and Department of Physics and Astronomy's World of Physics
Friday evening lectures will be carried out to the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: The concept of topological quantum
computing, based on anyonic quasiparticle braiding, potentially offers a
solution to the decoherence challenge in quantum computing. The objective of the
proposed research is to investigate the possibility to manipulate the
topological states with a set-up in which the braiding of anyonic excitations is
achieved automatically as a part of the transport process without the need for
the time-dependent control. The set-up consists of a triple-dot structure, whose
transport characteristics manifest the braiding statistics of the anyonic
excitation through inter-dot tunneling. Such scheme is studied in two types of
material systems. 1) 2DEG with 'antidots' which support fractional quantum Hall
states and anyonic charged quasiparticles; 2) topological insulator/s-wave
superconductor heterojunctions which support Majorana modes. In both systems,
measurements of the source-drain current provide information on the
quasiparticle anyon statistics. The proposed work bypasses the difficulty in
time-dependent controlling over the individual topological excitations and
directly investigate the basis for the topological braiding: the quasiparticle
exchange statistics and its transport signature. Understanding the quantum
interference of the anyonic excitations and the impact of topological braiding
on the anyonic statistics lays the scientific foundation of topological quantum
computing. The technical approach proposed here will provide direct answers to
how topological braiding impacts on the charge transport characteristics, and
how various parameters including temperature and disorder affect quantum
coherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.