* 1836669
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Development of Human Technological Abilities
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Emma Finestone, CUNY Graduate School University Center
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 12,473.00

Humans and their ancestors are unique in their ability to alter behavioral
strategies in response to changes in the environment and use technology to cope
with adaptive problems. The appearance of modified stone tools in the fossil
record represents a potential adaptive shift in the human lineage as ancestors
accessed nutrient-dense foods, established flexible niches, and began to alter
environments through cumulative technology and shape the selective pressures
within them. Understanding the origin and transmission of early tool technology
is of inherent interest to the evolution of the human lineage. What were the
behavioral strategies of early toolmakers? How much energy did toolmakers invest
in producing stone artifacts? How did tool behaviors change through evolutionary
time? Dr. Tom Plummer and PhD candidate Emma Finestone, of the City University
of New York, will conduct a regional study investigating the earliest persistent
stone tool industry - termed the Oldowan - across time scales. Oldowan tools
vary in size, shape, degree of reduction, and stone raw material type and these
properties are thought to reflect behavioral, cognitive, and dietary changes in
the human lineage that are often linked to known trends in anatomical and
energetic evolution, including an increase in body mass and metabolic rate. This
investigation of trends in the Oldowan archaeological record will expand the
geographic range of the earliest Oldowan and shed light on the origins of
persistent tool use in a broader evolutionary context.

Plummer and Finestone will undertake a project comparing stone tool reduction
and raw material procurement at three Oldowan sites spanning nearly a million
year interval on the Homa Peninsula in Kenya. This approach offers a snapshot
into regional Oldowan behavior and allows researchers to evaluate technological
strategies, mobility, and landscape use of some of the earliest toolmakers over
time. Using energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence (ED-XRF) geochemical analyses,
elemental signatures will link raw materials used in stone tool production to
nearby primary outcrops and secondary drainages. This allows researchers to
identify raw material sources and determine which sources were utilized by
toolmakers and which rock types were most heavily reduced. After identifying
regional patterns in stone resource procurement, investigators will reconstruct
ranging behavior across the three localities and evaluate if and how investment
in stone transport and toolmaker mobility changed through time. This not only
addresses the evolution of behavior and archaeology on the Homa Peninsula, but
also informs of broader adaptive shifts in the human lineage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.