* 1836776
* EAGER: BRAIDING: Lattice engineered nonabelian defects in fractional Chern insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Andrea Young, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract: in the last decade, the possibility of utilizing unusual
quantum statistics of emergent states of matter as a basis for quantum
computation has gone from being a distant dream to an ambitious but reasonable
possibility. Recent advances are based on assembly of required ingredients
through proximity effects. In this approach, two materials with complementary
properties are placed in close proximity to each other, for example allowing
superconductivity to be introduced into materials which have complementary
properties. Most prominently, Majorana bound states, the simplest states that
can support certain forms of quantum computation, can be engineered by inducing
superconductivity in a one-dimensional wire. As the experimental hunt for
Majorana bound states intensifies, the question arises as to whether even richer
ground states can be realized using the same synthetic approach. This proposal
describes a route towards realizing such states in a newly discovered class of
topologically ordered metamaterials known as fractional Chern insulators.
Remarkably, these class of metamaterials allow the requisite disparate
properties to be engineered with single-site resolution in an artificial
lattice, opening completely new design principles for quantum devices.

Technical Abstract: in the last decade, the possibility of using ground state
topological degeneracy as a basis for quantum computation has gone from being a
distant dream to an ambitious but reasonable possibility. Recent advances owe
much to a shift in focus to a `synthetic' approach. Rather than seeking
nonabelian anyons as elementary excitations in 'natural' electronic systems, the
disparate ingredients required are assembled through proximity effects. For
example, Majorana bound state - the simplest nonabelian defect state - can be
engineered by inducing superconductivity in an effectively spinless, one
dimensional fermionic wire. As the experimental hunt for Majorana bound states
intensifies, the question arises as to whether richer parafermion and Fibonacci
anyon ground states can be realized using the same synthetic approach. This
proposal describes a route towards realizing nonabelian defects in the recently
discovered fractional Chern insulators in graphene heterostructures, including
parafermion bound states. Fractional Chern insulators are generalizations of
fractional quantum Hall states to lattice systems. Like conventional fractional
quantum Hall states, the low-lying charged excitations of gapped fractional
Chern insulators have anyonic statistics; however, the lattice degree of freedom
endows them with new experimental tunability. Under the current proposal, we
will classify fractional Chern insulator ground states in lithographically
defined superlattices and use them to Engineer lattice defects and sublattice
selective contacts for measurement-only braiding of nonabelian defect states.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.