* 1836906
* ICE-T: RI: A Knowledge-Defined Platform for Real-Time Management of Transmissions and Computations at Network Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Flavio Esposito, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 12/31/2022
* USD 116,000.00

Due to the highly dynamic nature of the communications and computations in 5th
Generation (5G) cellular communications systems, new services will require real-
time management to achieve extremely low latencies in communication and
computation. To advance the state of the art, this project explores resource
management algorithms that borrow ideas from the use of statistical learning,
estimation, and data-driven techniques from high frequency financial trading
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will design and prototype a platform
based on low-cost programmable switches that will allow researchers to
experiment with novel statistical learning-based algorithmic solutions for real-
time management of edge networks. The platform will have two main research
objectives: 1) to explore learning based solutions for real time management of
virtual paths and virtual switches; and 2) to investigate real-time management
of core 5G computation and network resources, and to orchestrate edge computing
processing at the network edge. By leveraging learning theory, the project will
define new abstractions and interfaces that will allow network operators to
coordinate computation and traffic allocation decisions at the network edge.
This project will develop novel approaches towards understanding the development
of algorithmic aspects of prediction of network parameters and computational
needs. This project will initiate a new research collaboration between
investigators at Saint Louis University and the University of Padova,
Italy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.