* 1836288
* Workshop on modeling earthquake source processes: from tectonics to dynamic rupture; October 8-10, 2018, Pasadena, CA
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Nadia Lapusta, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2022
* USD 49,824.00

Much progress has been made in recent years in understanding earthquake source
processes from field observations, laboratory studies, and numerical modeling.
Yet studies of the earthquake source face significant challenges, amplified by
the remote nature of most observations, vast ranges of relevant spatial and
temporal scales, and a long list of interactive physical mechanisms each with
the potential to significantly contribute and even dominate the behavior of the
earthquake source. This workshop will explore future strategies for developing
predictive earthquake models that consider all of the available knowledge about
earthquake sources and highlight the most crucial gaps in our understanding.
Such models can eventually move society beyond making conclusions based on
short-term incomplete earthquake data. The broader impacts of this project are
the focus on improving our understanding of earthquakes and their associated
hazards and support for a diverse and early career set of researchers to
participate in this activity.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will
develop future strategies for developing realistic earthquake source models that
couple multiple temporal scales: dynamic rupture, interseismic periods,
earthquake sequences, short-term tectonics; multiple spatial scales: shear
zone/fault core, damage zone and deeper extensions, fault segments, fault
networks; and multiple physical and chemical factors: fluid effects, inelastic
processes, realistic geometry/roughness, heterogeneity. The discussion will be
directed towards identifying developments in numerical methodologies and
resources needed for such modeling as well as key required laboratory and
observational inputs. The targeted topics will include (i) which novel numerical
methodologies are needed for resolving non-planar interfaces/realistic
geometries, combinations of dynamic effects and long deformation histories,
interaction of failure and fluid flow, and coupling earthquake cycles with
short-term tectonics; (ii) how to constrain the needed rheology of faults and
bulk by combining new and existing results into comprehensive theory-driven
understanding of rock behavior; (iii) how to properly interpret field
observations and harnessing big data to observe the previously unobservable;
(iv) targeted areas for rapid progress within the next 10 years; and (v) new
community initiatives that would provide a substantial boost to the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.