* 1836601
* CPS: Small: Reconciling Safety with the Internet for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Edward Lee, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 499,037.00

Internet technology, originally developed to convey information, is increasingly
being used to control and operate physical devices in homes, factories, medical
facilities, and transportation systems, to name just a few application domains.
In these more physically-grounded applications, the consequences of misbehavior
of a system can be dire, involving not just loss or leakage of information, but
loss of life. Historically, computers used in safety-critical systems have been
completely isolated from the Internet to protect them from malicious hackers and
unpredictable demands for their resources. But the benefits that Internet
connectivity offers are irresistible, enabling far more sophisticated services.
This project is developing a suite of mathematically-grounded design patterns
and open-source software that leverages Internet technology while guaranteeing
safety, reliability, and resilience to malicious attacks. One of these patterns
endows a networked system with a stronger coordinated notion of time to ensure
consistent behavior of the system even in face of unpredictable and
uncontrollable delays in the network. Another of these patterns leverages edge
computing, placement of computing services near the devices that use them, in
hospitals, onboard in cars and trains, and in factories, for example, to
mitigate the risks of relying on remote cloud-based services. Edge computers can
ensure continuous safe operation even in face of Internet infrastructure
collapse, as has occasionally happened under malicious attack.

Technical Description:

The Internet of Things (IoT) leverages Internet technology in cyber-physical
systems, but the protocols and principles of the Internet were not designed for
interacting with the physical world. For example, timeliness is not a factor in
any widespread Internet technology, with Quality-of-Service (QoS) features
having been routinely omitted for decades. Nevertheless, properties of the
Internet could prove valuable in CPS, including a global namespace, reliable
(eventual) delivery of messages, end-to-end security through asymmetric
encryption, certificate-based authentication, and the ability to aggregate data
from a multiplicity of sources in cloud-based warehouses. This proposal
leverages recent developments that hold promise to bridge the gap, enabling the
use of Internet technologies even in safety-critical, timing-sensitive
applications such as factory automation and transportation. Specifically, we
leverage time-sensitive network (TSN) technology; the use of smart gateways to
isolate safety-critical services from best-effort services and to provide local
proxies for cloud-based services; locally centralized, globally distributed
authentication and authorization; and the development of coherent time-based
semantics for distributed real-time services. The focus of this project will be
on sound concurrent models of computation, on type-theoretic methods for
ensuring correct composition, and on the realization of these formalisms in a
software architecture that reconciles widely-used mechanisms in Internet
services to hide uncontrollable latencies with the need for repeatable,
testable, and robust real-time services in safety-critical systems. An open-
source reference implementation will be delivered together with analytical
papers on the formal properties of the models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.