* 1836827
* CPS: Medium: Coupled cAscade Modeling, Prevention, and Recovery (CAMPR): When Graph Theory meets Trajectory Sensitivity
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Nilanjan Ray Chaudhuri, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,000.00

The proposed research focuses on cascading failures in electrical energy cyber-
physical systems (CPS), which is a critical infrastructure of our nation.
Cascading failures, where the failure of one or few components causes a wide-
spread failure of the interconnected system, is a major cause of blackouts in
power grids. The mechanism of such failures is highly complex as it involves the
physical layer of the grid (e.g. generators, transmission lines, etc.) and the
cyber layer (e.g. communication and control elements) in a coupled manner. This
is a very important problem to investigate as cascading failures can cost our
economy billions of dollars. This project takes a holistic view at taming
cascading failures in electrical energy CPS. The proposed research has two
tightly coupled thrust areas. Thrust 1 aims at an accurate understanding of the
cascading failure mechanism and its prevention, while Thrust 2 focuses on
recovery following blackouts under uncertainty of failure locations. Theory of
trajectory sensitivity and graph theory are leveraged to develop a fundamental
understanding of cascading failures in energy CPS, which can be applied to other
CPSs where the physical system is dynamic in nature and the failure propagation
in the physical system and the cyber system are coupled. The proposed preventive
control strategy can protect critical infrastructures from large-scale failures
and facilitate higher resiliency, whereas the proposed recovery strategy is
applicable in the aftermath of a blackout caused by cascades, natural disasters,
or other events, which will reduce downtime of the critical infrastructure. In
support of the Broadening Participation in Computing initiative among women, the
proposed research will be integrated into the one-week summer camps offered by
the School of EECS at Penn State. Presentations about this research will be
given to high school girls over the course of one week in the 2019 camps, and
then camps focused on curriculum on the topic of this research will be offered
in 2020 and 2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has two key
objectives (a) develop an accurate understanding of the cascading failure
mechanism and its prevention, and (b) develop a recovery plan following
blackouts under uncertainty of failure locations and budget constraints. The
quasi-steady-state (QSS) model of power grid used in literature for studying
cascade propagation produces inaccurate results towards the later stages of
blackouts, whereas a fully dynamic model is impractical for large-scale
statistical analyses. To solve this, a 'temporally hybrid' and a 'spatio-
temporally hybrid' model are proposed, which quantify the stress of the grid at
the systems level and the component level, respectively, using trajectory
sensitivity theory, and appropriately switch from the QSS to the dynamic model.
Next, a unified graph-based model for interdependent power grid and
communication systems is developed, which takes into account several special
features of the legacy Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system
along with the modern Wide-Area Monitoring, Protection, and Controls (WAMPAC)
system, and the observability and controllability they provide for the CPS.
Furthermore, a stability-constrained remedial action scheme for cascade
prevention is proposed. Finally, a new approach for progressive assessment and
recovery, which leverages the hybrid power grid models and the unified
communication network model, is proposed in the presence of budget constraints
and failure uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.