* 1837813
* CAREER: A Few Layer Thin, Graphene-Based Membranes: Nanostructure Understanding, Permeation Mechanisms and Separation Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,03/31/2021
* Miao Yu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 03/31/2021
* USD 351,159.00

1451887 Yu University of Sourth Carolina at Columbia

The goal of this proposed research is to rationally design few layer thin
(thickness 3 nm), graphene-based membranes, understand their nanostructures and
permeation mechanisms, and study their potential for selective, high flux
separation of a wide range of mixtures. This proposed research is expected to
have great scientific as well as technological impact on mixture separations and
has great potential to revolutionize separation using membrane technology. If
successful, this new generation ultrathin membranes with tunable material
properties, membrane nanostructures, and structural defects sizes will have wide
applications for high throughput mixture separations, including gas separation,
liquid mixture separation, and nanofiltration, etc., and thus greatly reduce
energy cost in separations. It is anticipated that this study could serve as a
model for the rational design of ultrathin, graphene-based membranes with
tunable membrane performance. In addition, the obtained fundamental
understanding and knowledge on graphene-based coating deposition and coating
nanostructures may have potential impact on optoelectronics applications, such
as touch screens and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), energy storage, and
photovoltaic cells.

Ultrathin membranes with rationally designed and optimized nanostructures have
great potential to achieve effective mixture separation with high throughput.
The proposed research will focus on fabrication, nanostructure clarification,
and separation study of a few layer thin, graphene-based membranes. The
objectives of the proposed research are i) applying liquid phase deposition
processes to controllably deposit a few layer thin, graphene-based membranes;
ii) elucidating the nanostructures of fabricated membranes and correlating the
deposition parameters with the resulting nanostructures; iii) understanding
permeation mechanisms of molecules through the a few layer thin membranes and
investigating various etching processes on controlling pore sizes; and iv)
exploring the separation potential of a few layer thin, graphene-based membranes
for various gas and liquid mixtures. We will deposit graphene oxide (GO) flakes
with controlled properties on appropriate porous substrates by vacuum
filtration, dip-coating, and casting-evaporation; employ both macroscopic and
microscopic techniques to characterize the nanostructures of deposited thin
coatings/membranes; explore molecular transport pathways through GO and reduced
GO (rGO), including interlayer spacing and structural defects, by gas, vapor and
liquid permeation; study the separation of mixtures by pressurized gas
permeation, pervaporation and liquid filtration.

The PI proposes the integration of research and education through advancement of
the education of all students in the STEM fields with special emphasis on
enhancing retention of minority students in this population. The PI has
leveraged a number of existing programs at USC to provide organizational
structure and to resource the various activities. Specifically, the PI plans(1)
the development of a special topics graduate class in the study area, (2) try to
recruit a GEM scholar as a PhD mentee, (3) host 2 URM undergraduate researchers
per year, (4) participate in K-12 outreach organized by USC and develop a
continuous relationship with one minority serving high school that will include
4 visits from the PI each year.