* 1837344
* Building Student Retention through Individuated Guided Cohort Training in Computer Science Research-Practitioner Partnership
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ryoko Yamaguchi, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2021
* USD 293,756.00

There is a severe underrepresentation of black women in computing, explained by
educational barriers that black girls face in the K-12 education system even
before reaching postsecondary education. Middle grades are a critical transition
point for students, where achievement gaps and interest in STEM-CS widen over
time. This project, a Researcher-Practitioner Partnership (RPP), is a two-year
project that will engage teachers, school leaders, guidance counselors, and
researchers to identify barriers and future work in the areas of structural,
instructional, and curricular improvements in middle schools to promote more
black girls to gain interest and experience in computer science. Some of the
core members of the team are developing a computer science learning ecosystem
for middle school black girls, called BRIGHT-CS, that includes summer and school
based programming. This project is an extension of the BRIGHT-CS project to
engage teachers in an RPP to create an inclusive environment to promote CS
interest and learning among black girls in their schools. While the core team
has had implicit support from schools in the community, there is an exigent need
to explicitly engage teachers, guidance counselors, and school leaders to
further support an inclusive environment where black girls can thrive at school.
The project rests on the foundation that issues of diversity and inclusivity,
and broadening participation in computer science specifically, must be
systematic, persistent, and ongoing work within the teaching community. Further,
the RPP addresses issues around identifying and rectifying barriers in the
school that will promote an inclusive school environment that will benefit all
students including other marginalized students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the
RPP, the project will establish professional learning communities (PLCs) in
three middle schools that includes researchers, guidance counselors, teachers
and school leaders. The RPP will support the initial steps in addressing why
there are so few black girls interested and pursuing computer science in the
middle grades. Rather than speaking in general terms, or looking at national
trends, the RPP will look specifically at the three schools and classroom data
to conduct an equity audit on the structural, instructional, and curricular
barriers that black girls face in their school. The result will be a PLC logic
model and a research agenda for future RPP proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.