* 1837869
* 2018 Workshop: Integrating Neurophotonics, Statistical Physics, and Control Theory for Advancing Neuroscience
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* David Boas, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 10/31/2019
* USD 88,350.00

The 50-person, two-day 2018 Workshop: "Integrating Neurophotonics, Statistical
Physics, and Control Theory for Advancing Neuroscience" will identify research
efforts that will be needed to close the gaps between the future potential and
the current state-of-the-art in neurophotonic-sensing and modulation and big
data as it relates to advancing our understanding of the rules of the
functioning brain. The discussions among the multi-disciplinary participants
will help to define the challenges and questions that should be addressed given
the recent explosive growth in neurophotonics and big data technological
capabilities for studying the brain. Inclusion of young scientists in the
workshop will bring fresh perspective to the discussions and foster their career
development through the interactions and networking. Specific major outcomes of
the workshop will include the increased awareness of research, education, and
technology transfer related to neurophotonics and big data; ideas enabling the
transformation of research and STEM education; partnership opportunities among
government, academia, industry, and the general public; and synergism for
transformative activities in the application of neurophotonics and big data
technology.

The Workshop will provide a forum for disseminating information and sharing
ideas about the frontiers of neuro-sensing and modulation with light and the
integration with statistical modeling, machine learning, and control theory. The
workshop will contribute toward defining the important topics and questions to
be addressed with future research, and will identify research directions and
opportunities that, if pursued, can initiate new developments in neurotechnology
and computational neuroscience / big data modeling that will lead to new break-
through neuroscientific studies. The workshop will result in a comprehensive
publishable document that will be widely distributed in the SPIE journal
Neurophotonics. This workshop will be a two-day event on October 22-23, 2018, in
Alexandria, Virginia. The workshop will focus on three themes: reviewing the
frontiers of neuro-sensing and modulation with light and the intersection with
big data methods; exploring the opportunities for neurophotonic methods to
integrate with big data methods to significantly advance the impact on
neuroscientific studies; and defining novel neuroscientific studies to guide the
integration and advancement of these technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.