* 1837253
* CPS: Medium:  Rethinking Communication and Control for Low-Latency, High Reliability loT Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* George Pappas, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

The internet-of-things (IoT) revolution is bringing millions of physical devices
online (e.g. cars, UAVs, homes, medical devices), enabling them to connect to
each other in real-time, as well as to cloud services. Wireless communication
will be critical in providing IoT connectivity. There are three main strategic
directions that are envisioned in the future wireless networking. First,
enhanced mobile broadband will result in even larger data rates for future 3D
applications such as virtual reality. Second, Smart City/Community applications
require large number of sensors that communicate sporadically over large urban
or rural areas in a scalable, asynchronous, and energy efficient manner. The
previous two directions, while important, are not the focus of our proposal.
Instead, our proposal focuses on low-latency and ultra-reliable communications
and networking that is critical for latency-sensitive, closed-loop control
applications, like vehicle to vehicle communications, collaborative swam
planning, and industrial control. In such latency sensitive applications, we
need to rethink the networking stack, coding, networking architecture, and
control design to enable communications and networking that can provide ultra-
low latency (99.999%). This is far beyond what is currently possible. But even
more importantly, we do not know what is possible and what are the fundamental
limits for control system design over low-latency, high-reliability
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, we will be rethinking the
scientific foundations for ultra-reliable, low-latency wireless communications
for latency sensitive control applications. We propose to achieve our scientific
agenda by addressing three intellectual challenges: 1) Low-latency channel
coding, where the goal is to focus on short packet codes for control loops 2)
Control over low latency-aware communication channels, where the goal is to
understand the what is the optimal tradeoff of latency to reliability for
control loops and 3) Learning for Large Scale Wireless Control Networks, where
machine learning will perform resource allocation for large numbers of control
loops with competing latency/reliability requirements We intend to evaluate the
proposed research agenda by leveraging our existing Intel Science and Technology
Center (ISTC) on Wireless Autonomous Systems and demonstrate our ideas in future
wireless protocols (IEEE 802.11ax) and experimentally demonstrate it in high-
speed V2V and fast formation control with aerial swarms. On the educational
front, the University of Pennsylvania is planning to offer a Micro-Masters
program in Internet of Things (IoT) on the edX MOOC platform. Longer term, our
goal is to create a new community of researchers that focus on control over low-
latency wireless networks for IoT devices. Towards this goal, we plan on
leveraging departmental efforts to increase and diversify the PhD students
working on this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.