* 1837999
* BIGDATA: IA: Collaborative Research: Asynchronous Distributed Machine Learning Framework for Multi-Site Collaborative Brain Big Data Mining
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Todd Parrish, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 119,982.00

Recent advances in multimodal brain imaging and high throughput genotyping and
sequencing techniques provide exciting new opportunities to ultimately improve
our understanding of brain structure and neural dynamics, their genetic
architecture, and their influences on cognition and behavior. However, data
privacy and security issues have inhibited data sharing across institutes.
Emerging multi-site collaborative data analysis can address these issues and
facilitate data and computing resource sharing. In collaborative data analysis,
the participating institutes keep their own data, which are analyzed and
computed locally, and only share the computed results by communicating with a
server. The server communicates with all institutes and updates the local models
such that the trained machine learning models indirectly use all data and are
shared with all institutes. Although some distributed/parallel computation
techniques were recently proposed to address big data mining problems, most of
them are synchronous models. Asynchronous distributed learning methods are much
more efficient, because they allow the server to update the model with
information from only one worker node without waiting for slow worker nodes in
each round. However, the convergence analysis for the asynchronous distributed
algorithms is much more difficult due to the inconsistent variables update
across nodes. Thus, it is challenging to design efficient distributed machine
learning algorithms for collaborative big data analysis. The research objective
of this project is to address the computational challenges in the emerging
multi-site collaborative data mining for brain big data.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to harness the opportunities of designing new
efficient asynchronous distributed machine learning algorithms with rigorous
theoretical foundations for multi-site collaborative brain big data mining,
creating large-scale computational strategies and effective software tools to
reveal sophisticated relationships among heterogeneous brain data. This project
designs the asynchronous distributed machine learning and principled big data
mining models to conduct the comprehensive study of brain imaging genomics and
connectomics. Specifically, the principal investigators investigate: 1)
collaborative genotype and phenotype association study using new asynchronous
doubly stochastic proximal gradient algorithms; 2) communication-efficient
multi-site collaborative data integration models to integrate imaging genomics
data for predicting outcomes of interest; 3) collaborative deep learning
algorithm speedup by the asynchronous distributed algorithms with applications
in temporal cognitive change prediction; and 4) new graph convolutional deep
learning models for brain network mining. It is innovative to integrate new
distributed machine learning and data-intensive computing with brain imaging
genomics and connectomics that hold great promise for a systems biology of the
brain. The developed methods and tools impact other neuroimaging, genomics, and
neuroscience research, and enable investigators working on brain science to
effectively test their scientific hypotheses. This project will also facilitate
the development of novel educational tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.