* 1837655
* A Coordinated, Cross-Institutional Career and Technical Education Cybersecurity Pathway
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jill Denner, ETR Associates
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 999,737.00

Community colleges are an untapped resource for broadening participation in
computing education and the tech workforce. They are the entry point for the
majority of Latino/a college students in the United States, yet efforts to
increase diversity in computing are focused on 4-year institutions, and assume
students maintain a linear and forward-moving pathway, even though this is not
typical for community college students. This project is a collaboration between
Education, Training, Research, Pjaro Valley Unified School District, Digital
NEST, and Cabrillo College; together they will build a cybersecurity-focused
computer information systems pathway from high school to college in a majority-
Latino district. Project activities center on: a) A Research-Practice
Partnership that will design the pathway, build the capacity of educators to
implement and support it, and create policies to institutionalize the pathway,
b) high school activities designed to both engage student learning and serve as
pathway on-ramps, c) high school/college dual enrollment classes, d) Services
that support student pathway success and increase college readiness, and e) Data
collection and analysis to: i) monitor student movement along the pathway and
ii) guide continuous improvement.

Data will be collected from 140 students who will be tracked over time, and from
faculty, teachers, counselors, and parents. The results will contribute to
knowledge of how to recruit HS students from underrepresented groups into a
computer information systems pathway, and the preparation and supports they need
to enroll, persist, and complete a computationally intense dual enrollment
class. It will also contribute to knowledge about what it takes to have
culturally responsive and computationally prepared teachers. The project will
produce tested strategies for building on the interests and strengths of girls,
Latino/as, and English language learners. It will identify how to get low income
students into dual enrollment classes, and what it takes to help them enroll in
college and earn college credits in a timely manner. It will also identify
multiple entry and exit points in the pathway, in order to produce a model that
is more accurate than existing descriptions of linear and always forward-moving
pathways. An external evaluator will monitor whether the project is meeting key
milestones necessary to test its theory of change. Findings will be shared with
a range of stakeholders, including researchers, computer science education
practitioners, and administrators, both regionally and nationally.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.