* 1837481
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Collaborative Research: Smoothing Traffic via Energy-efficient Autonomous Driving (STEAD)
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Benedetto Piccoli, Rutgers University Camden
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2022
* USD 230,000.00

Studies show five of the top 10 most-gridlocked cities in the world are in the
United States. Traffic congestion puts undue burden on transportation systems
across the United States, raising transportation costs and the energy footprint.
Vehicle automation creates an opportunity to reduce traffic and improve
efficiency of the transportation infrastructure. In particular, this project
aims to reduce the energy footprint of phantom traffic jams, where dense traffic
comes to a halt for no apparent reason, and also stop-and-go-waves in
congestion. The research team aims to reduce the overall energy footprint of
stop-and-go congestion by up to 40% via a small portion of connected and
autonomous vehicles (CAVs) inserted into normal traffic with drivers, also known
as manned traffic. The work will build models of mixed autonomy (a combination
of CAVs and manned traffic), and test the ability for this portion of CAVs to
smooth the flow of traffic in a controlled manner, and thus reduce the energy
footprint. The research combines mathematics, control theory, machine learning,
and transportation engineering. The project includes four universities and
engages industry and government partners. The project will also engage students
and community stakeholders, including State and Federal transportation agencies
and CAV manufacturers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the technical
contributions enabling traffic smoothing and reduction in the environmental
footprint include new mean-field optimal control formulations for sparse control
settings where only a subset of vehicles are CAVs and can be controlled.
Investigators will develop data-driven control algorithms based on deep
reinforcement learning designed to enable control in settings where analytical
approaches to derive explicit controllers are too complex (e.g., due to multi-
lane, ramps, and high variation of human driving styles). They will also develop
tools based on Satisfiability Modulo Convex optimization to enable safety and
robustness of these controllers. The approach will first be validated using
microsimulation tools to assess their efficiency and their validity. Once
validated in simulation, the project will then field test the algorithm with
manned vehicles following real-time control commands of the system, executed by
100 human drivers following control signals communicated via a phone app with
target speeds and lanes. After which, the system will be tested with up to 20
CAVs inserted onto a freeway stretch in the Transition to Practice component of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.