* 1837337
* CPS: Medium: GOALI: Real-Time Computer Vision in Autonomous Vehicles: Real Fast Isn't Good Enough
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Jan-Michael Frahm, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The push towards deploying autonomous-driving capabilities in vehicles is
happening at breakneck speed. Semi-autonomous features are becoming increasingly
common, and fully autonomous vehicles at mass-market scales are on the horizon.
Cameras are cost-effective sensors, so computer-vision techniques have loomed
large in implementing autonomous features. In a vehicle, these techniques must
function "in real time." Unfortunately, this requirement lies at the heart of a
significant disconnect: when computer-vision researchers refer to "real time,"
they usually mean "real fast"; in contrast, certifiable automotive systems must
be "real time" in the sense of being able to predictably react to input
information (such as a detected pedestrian) within specified deadlines so that
adverse outcomes (such as striking a pedestrian) are provably precluded. The
goal of this project is to eliminate this disconnect. It will do so through
research on several fronts. First, a real-time computer-vision programming
framework will be created by extending OpenVX, which is a recently ratified
standard intended for developing computer-vision applications for embedded
systems. Second, new computer-vision algorithms that exploit the features of
this programming framework will be created, and methods will be developed to
transform existing algorithms to make them "real time" in a predictability
sense. Third, an experimental evaluation of "real-fast" vs. "real-time" computer
vision will be conducted using driving simulators, sub-scale autonomous
vehicles, and advanced testing infrastructure at General
Motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While industry is pushing hard in the area of
autonomous driving, autonomous vehicles will never become a common mode of
transportation unless methods for certifying real-time safety are produced. This
project will focus on a key aspect of certification: validating the real-time
correctness of computer-vision applications. The results that are produced will
be made available to the world at large through open-source software. This
software will include the new programming framework to be produced as well as
tools for validating the real-time correctness of applications developed using
this framework. In this project, a special emphasis will be placed on outreach
to girls and women, as three female graduate students will be involved in the
project. Such outreach will include: events involving the Graduate Women in
Computer Science (GWiCS) group at the University of North Carolina (UNC), which
hosts an annual research symposium targeted toward undergraduate women and other
under-represented minorities; Tar Heel Hack, a hackathon for local middle and
high school girls; the UNC Girls Who Code Club, which provides local girls in
grades 6-12 with a community for learning about computer science; and the UNC
Computer Science Department's annual Open House and Science Expo. These events
will include hackathon projects as well as demos of a driving simulator and a
sub-scale autonomous car.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.