* 1837382
* CPS: Medium: Edge-Cloud Support for Predictable, Global Situational-Awareness for Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Taeyoung Lee, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The goal of this project is improved situation awareness for autonomous vehicles
across many different networks. The approach is new theory and abstractions for
systems where potentially moving physical systems join and leave the network at
a high rate. Making these kinds of cyber-physical systems (CPS) efficient and
safe requires leveraging the sensor information from other proximate vehicles
over the network: this will enable vehicles to have much higher situational
awareness--effectively seeing around corners. However, computation must be
performed fast enough to accurately control the physical system, and
coordination over networks makes this even more challenging. The research
program is paired with an educational initiative integrated into the extensive
mentoring program of the researchers, with an emphasis on involving students of
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates CPSEdge, a
software platform deployed at the network "edge", which aggregates sensor
information from nearby vehicles, and intelligently shares resulting plans of
action. CPSEdge leverages its network proximity to vehicles, and is carefully
designed to reply to vehicles fast enough to keep up with a quickly changing
physical environment. The tools and techniques developed for CPSEdge will offer
greater situational awareness to autonomous vehicles, and improve the
responsiveness, reliability, and security of the software platforms that manage
them. CPSEdge is built on a new process abstraction that is lightweight and can
scale up to very large systems, even under significant churn, while providing
increased reliability and security. This abstraction is managed by the CPSEdge
system to ensure that the requisite computation is conducted in real-time with
the physical system. Sensor data will be fused to generate a probabilistic model
of the environment, providing global planning for nearby
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.