* 1837245
* CPS: Small: Behaviorally Compatible, Energy Efficient, and Network-Aware Vehicle Platooning Using Connected Vehicle Technology
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Yafeng Yin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to explore vehicle platooning at scale in Smart and
Connected Communities. The approach is the development of techniques and models
that provide incentives for vehicles to join platoons and maintain their platoon
memberships. Connected vehicle technology helps in forming vehicle platoons
(virtual trains of vehicles traveling with small gaps between them) with
benefits including improved energy efficiency, increased road capacity, and
enhanced mobility. Vehicles in a platoon may benefit differently depending on
where they are in the virtual train (for example, the lead saves less energy
compared to a vehicle in the middle). As such, some vehicles may not be willing
to join a platoon, or stay in one as better opportunities for platoon formation
arise. This project explores how platoons with these competing goals will be
formed and controlled, so as to understand how to motivate vehicles to
participate in them. The Mcity testbed is part of the validation of the research
work, and workshops involving local high-school and college students are
planned. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A stable platoon structure does not contain any
coalition of vehicles who could increase their individual utilities by trading
their platoon memberships. Given the dynamic nature of traffic streams, forming
and maintaining stable platoon structures is a complex task, and requires
accounting for both local and network-level conditions at the time of platoon
formation. This proposal introduces a general framework that enhances optimal-
control-based trajectory planning models by enabling them to also account for
network level traffic conditions. This proposal further integrates stable
platoon formation into the enhanced trajectory planning models, enabling them to
incorporate both local and network-level information to form behaviorally
compatible platoon structures that stay stable in a dynamic traffic
stream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.