* 1837380
* Preparing K-5 Teachers to Integrate the Computer Science Standards of Learning in Inclusive Classrooms to Support Students with High Incidence Disabilities
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jeff Offutt, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,423.00

Although there has been an increase in efforts to introduce computer science and
computational thinking (CS/CT) into secondary schools, most initiatives have not
been designed to develop related knowledge and skills necessary for elementary
in-service teachers. This issue is particularly important as states begin to
adopt CS standards for K-12 with little to no support for implementation of the
standards. At the same time, students with the most common disabilities need to
have opportunities to learn the content and practices outlined those CS
standards. The project will address this problem by generating, working in
partnership with a local school division, Norfolk City Public Schools, a usable,
comprehensive, effective, and appealing model of professional development (PD)
to support CS integration in elementary instruction for all learners, with an
emphasis on supporting students with high-incidence disabilities. In developing
PD for integration of CS standards in elementary grades and creating resources
to support teachers in this integration, this project will work with more than
75 elementary teachers in the partner district. Of the nearly 10,000 current
K-5th grade students in NCPS in any given year, these teachers will,
conservatively, teach 1,500 students or 15% of the student population yearly.
The PD model will also be extended into other school divisions in Virginia
through its relationship with CodeVA. Finally, PD and research-partnership
strategies will be disseminated through online resources (i.e., video library,
online training modules), presentations at local and national conferences, and
peer reviewed manuscripts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Faculty from George Mason
University and Old Dominion University created a Researcher Practitioner
Partnership with personnel from Norfolk City Public Schools (NCPS) that will use
a Design Based Implementation Research (DBIR) process to refine an effective PD
model to support elementary teachers in inclusive classrooms in integrating
recently-mandated CS standards into math, science, and literacy instruction in
ways accessible to students with high-incidence disabilities (e.g. learning
disabilities, emotional or behavioral disorders, mild intellectual disability,
high functioning autism, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder).
Theoretically and conceptually, the research will contribute to pedagogical
strategies and approaches for integrating computer science and understanding how
elementary teachers understand CS standards and approach CS integration. The
Universal Design for Learning instructional framework will guide the
implementation team and partner educators to design instruction to meet the
needs of all learners, including those with disabilities, by addressing barriers
to learning. The research will examine CS sequencing through grade-appropriate
progressions by drawing on the expert insights of elementary classroom teachers.
The project will also develop disciplinary literacy through CS as students use
various strategies to read, write, and communicate their understanding within
and among various disciplines. Combined, these efforts will help answer the
overarching question: How do multiple stakeholders collaboratively refine and
develop effective and sustainable PD on the integration of computer science in
K-5 inclusive classrooms to support students with high incidence disabilities?
The project will collect data via interviews with teachers, field notes from
observations, teacher assessment &amp; survey results, verbal protocol data,
teacher lesson plans, video data, and student work samples across 6-week
iterative cycles as part of the DBIR process. Analysis of interviews,
observations, lesson plans, and verbal protocol think-alouds in each cycle will
rely on the constant-comparative qualitative method. Analysis of data from pre-
post measures will include descriptive statistics and paired-sample t-test to
measure the growth of teachers through the PD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.