* 1837369
* CPS: Small: Multi-Human Assisted Learning for Multi-Agent Systems using Intrinsically Generated Event-Related EEG Potentials
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Faramarz Fekri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

The goal of this project is to allow humans to assist machine learning
algorithms in a Cyber-Physical System. The approach involves the use of
electroencephalogram (EEG) based brain waves of the human-in-the-loop to
generate feedback for the learning algorithms. Machine learning solutions are
particularly useful for the monitoring, instrumenting, and optimization of
complex cyber physical systems (CPS). However, several important problems
spanning domains such as natural language processing, automated language
translation, and understanding what is in a scene or image remain beyond the
scope of true machine learning algorithms, and require human participation. The
project involves collaboration with Georgia Tech's Create-X and Venture Lab
programs to commercialize the outcomes of the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project considers recognizing the erroneous behavior of the
machine intrinsically by the error related negativity (ERN) in the human EEG
signals, which are then used as the reward function for the reinforcement
learning (RL) algorithm of the machine to improve its intelligence. Another
novel aspect of the research is the consideration of multiple humans-in-the-loop
providing feedback that is used as a reward function by the learning algorithms
embedded within the CPS. Finally, the project also is exploring the benefits of
convergence time acceleration and deep learning techniques to extract features
from EEG that are independent of canonical ERN component peaks. The research is
evaluated using both a game proxy based analysis and experimental analysis
within the context of real-world CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.