* 1837519
* CPS: Medium: S2Guard: Building Security and Safety in Autonomous Vehicles via Multi-Layer Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Thomas Hou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,150,000.00

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) are revolutionizing the transportation ecosystem and
are expected to become a critical part of our society. AVs are equipped with
many electronic devices, including various sensors, electronic control units
(ECUs), internal control networks, as well as capabilities in artificial
intelligence, computing, storage, and communication. Although the automotive
industry, as well as the public, are optimistic that an AV can perform many
basic functions on par with human drivers, few are confident about the security
and safety of AVs, especially when AVs are highly vulnerable to potential
attacks from cyberspace, as demonstrated in recent series of car hacking
incidents. In this project, a team of researchers from Virginia Tech aims to
address some of the fundamental security and safety challenges for AVs. The
research team follows a novel defense-in-depth approach that combines three
layers of defense against attacks on software systems, in-vehicle networks, and
safety-critical ECUs in an AV. Each layer can be designed and deployed
independently from the other layers and when working jointly, they can not only
effectively thwart most system and network attacks but also provide fail-
operational protection against both known and potentially unforeseen
cyberattacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The close coupling of AV with cyberspace
introduces new security and safety risks that continue to challenge the
automobile industry and the computer security community. This project will
develop a multi-layer protection framework, S2Guard, that takes a defense-in-
depth approach to address a broad range of security and safety issues due to
cyberattacks. The first layer aims to enhance the software system security of
ECUs with external interfaces by employing hardware-assisted security protection
mechanisms. Research in this thrust will focus on devising effective software
system design to isolate and protect safety-critical software components,
without significantly increasing the trusted computing base while still being
able to meet real-time requirements of the system. The second layer aims to
defend against attackers that are able to breach the first layer of defense by
either physically bypassing it inside the vehicle or exploiting an unforeseen
vulnerability. The focus is to build innovative in-vehicle network security
mechanisms and enable network-level defenses against adversaries who are capable
of sending raw control packets within the in-vehicle network. The last layer of
defense aims to offer worst-case safety guarantee to AVs even if an attacker is
able to circumvent the first two layers of defenses. The team will develop novel
methods to understand the safety rules of autonomous vehicles and provide safety
guarantees at runtime. These safety mechanisms are to be deployed in the safety-
critical ECUs to automatically detect and correct unsafe ECU
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.