* 1837473
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Machine learning enabled "smart nets" to optimize sustainable fisheries technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Sule Ozev, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Fisheries employ 260 million people globally and fish are a primary animal
protein source for roughly 40% of the world's population. Fishing effort has
increased worldwide over the past few decades, leading to concerns over the
incidental capture (termed "bycatch") of non-target species, especially
endangered species such as sea turtles, sharks, and marine mammals. Globally,
bycatch of sea turtles is especially problematic as recent estimates suggest
that hundreds of thousands of turtles are killed annually in fishing gear,
representing the greatest known threat to their continued survival. This project
addresses this problem through cyber-physical system-enabled technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on an observation about fish behavior
that species respond differently to the light spectrum and that can be used to
modulate their behaviors. This smart nets project extends that observation to
determine signatures for sensing modalities of different species. The intent is
to develop fishing gear, specifically fishing nets, that can deter non-target
species. The project uses machine learning to determine effective cues, e.g.,
light and sound that uses the least amount of power possible to prevent an
endangered species from capture in the nets without decreasing the fishermen's
target catch. Using underwater cameras with standard video, infrared, and sonar
to monitor species behavior to various signatures, it builds a database of the
responses for each species under varying oceanic environment conditions. The
project plans large-scale follow-up studies in partnership with the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). This research on CPS technology
for the fishing industry will be invaluable to the design of the next-generation
of CPS-enabled fishing nets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.