* 1837116
* Natural sources and microbial transformation of marine halogenated pollutants
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Eric Allen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 767,250.00

Natural polybrominated organic compounds such as hydroxylated polybrominated
diphenyl ethers (OH-BDEs) and polybrominated pyrroles (PBPs) have recently
emerged as chemicals of human health concern. These natural product relatives of
man-made halogenated persistent organic pollutants (POPs) are widely distributed
throughout the marine food web and accumulate in seafood sources consumed by
humans. Researchers have demonstrated that OH-BDEs such as 6-OH-BDE-47 (thyroid
hormone receptor) and PBPs such as tetrabromopyrrole (ryanodine receptor) are
potent toxins and thus pose a potential risk to humans. Many fundamental
questions however remain about the extent of sources for these natural
organobromine molecules, how these chemicals enter and move through the marine
food web, whether changes in the climate will impact their production and
accumulation, and whether humans are more or less impacted by natural
halogenated POPs versus their man-made counterparts. This project seeks to
advance the biology and chemistry of marine contaminants of emerging concern. A
better understanding of the sources and sinks of these compounds will improve
public understanding about links between oceans and human health and help
improve guidelines and evidence-based policies regarding fish consumption and
health. The project will support a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher. The project is jointly supported by NSF and by the National
Institute for Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
discoveries by these investigators have rigorously established the genetic and
biochemical basis for the microbial synthesis of natural OH-BDE molecules in
diverse lineages of marine bacteria. However, the global distribution and
ubiquity of these polybrominated POPs in marine biota cannot be fully explained
by the sources discovered thus far, suggesting additional biogenic sources exist
and are actively contributing to OH-BDE and MeO-BDE accumulation in the marine
food web. This information is critical to more accurately identify trophic
connections and interconversions that lead to natural PBDE accumulation in
marine fish and ultimately, human dietary exposure risks. In this project, new
genetic and biochemical evidence for the biosynthesis and biotransformation of
PBDE molecules will be established for marine macroalgae, a conspicuous but
uncharacterized source of PBDE molecules in marine habitats, using transcriptome
analysis coupled with biochemical enzyme characterization. Additional microbial
sources for PBDE synthesis/transformation will be characterized by the
comprehensive analysis of fish and marine-mammal associated microbiomes using
integrated genomic and metabolomic approaches combined with experimental
microbiome enrichment reactors amended with PBDE molecules or biosynthetic
substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.