* 1837386
* Developing Inclusive K-12 Computing Pathways for the League of Innovative Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jeremy Roschelle, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,191,260.00

Digital Promise Global will join with the League of Innovative Schools to
design, investigate and improve inclusive computing pathways for K-12 students.
Most states have enacted computer science mandates and many districts have
started to integrate computer science and computational thinking into their
curriculum. But districts face obstacles that result in low participation of
underrepresented students. Building on its ongoing, long-term relationships with
the 93 districts in 33 states serving more than 3 million students, the League
of Innovative Schools has launched a Researcher-Practitioner Partnership to
design coherent curricular progressions for computer science and computational
thinking with an intentional emphasis on access and equity. Researchers join
with three Core districts in the League of Innovative Schools to focus on
districts' Hispanic and African American students, Title 1 schools and, more
generally, their girls and low-income students. These students need
intentionally designed pathways and supports to increase their participation in
computational thinking and computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will address three research questions, each with a deliberate focus on access
and equity. Due to the rapid expansion of computer science initiatives across
states and districts, the outputs of this project -- including (a) each
district's completed pathway and resources (addressing both the "why" and "how"
for access and equity), (b) the research instruments and processes used to
collect and analyze equity data in rapid cycles, and (c) case studies and
recommendations on how to build computing pathways that address challenges of
access and equity -- are expected to be broadly useful. The project will
directly serve 3 Core districts with 50,000 students (29% low income, 26% Black
or Latinx). To increase broader impacts, this project will involve an additional
9 Knowledge Sharing districts (91,000 students 53% low income, 41% Black or
Latinx). Results will be disseminated widely by engaging Digital Promise
Global's established practices and channels including short videos, social
media, webinars, and workshops, with an established reach of over 4000 schools
and 10,000 educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.