* 1837446
* Participating in Literacies and Computer Science: A research-practice partnership to explore new computational literacies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2024
* Jasmine Ma, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,244,882.00

This project focuses on computational thinking and computer science education
for emergent bilingual learners. The research will examine how emergent
bilinguals and others participate in language and literacy use in and outside of
school and use that knowledge to inform the development of computer science
curricula. One component of the project extends existing curriculum development
and learning research as emergent bilinguals learn computational thinking in
courses designed to leverage their language use. The second component engages
New York City educators, community groups, and adults in understanding how
computing can be integrated into larger multilingual education initiatives in
and outside of schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds on a theory of
social language use, known as translanguaging, to frame the design of curriculum
and professional development materials. The central research question asks how
translanguaging pedagogy can be used to integrate the literacy practices of
multiple human languages, computer code, and school disciplines (e.g., science,
language arts) in meaningful ways. Iterations of the curriculum and professional
development design will study the ways that students use language to talk about
computing in and outside of schools and how teachers learn with the professional
development materials. Case studies of students and teachers working in and out
of schools will be collected to illustrate the instructional units, how they
involve computational thinking, and how language use unfolds as students work.
The research will result in new models for 1) how translanguaging approaches can
support emergent bilinguals and other students to learn computational
literacies, 2) how computational literacy use outside of school can be connected
to school-based practices, and 3) how professional development can be designed
for teachers to infuse computational literacies into middle school curricula
that support students with diverse language
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.