* 1837895
* Conference: How do we determine that something is unknowable rather than merely not yet known? - New York, NY, December 2018
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Arien Mack, The New School
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This award provides partial support for a conference. It is an
interdisciplinary, two-day, public conference that addresses an important
scientific question: How we determine that something is unknowable rather than
merely not yet known? Experts across a range of academic disciplines (including
mathematics, cosmology, biology, medicine, economics, psychology, history, and
philosophy) will discuss the criteria used to determine that a deep question
cannot be answered and whether these criteria differ across fields. The
conference is to occur in March 2019 at the campus of The New School for Social
Research in New York City. The conference is likely to attract a large audience,
from 300 to 400 people, that will include members of the public, the media, and
policy makers as well as students and academics.

The questions that are to be addressed by conference participants are
fundamental and of perennial importance; they require revisiting from time to
time. A similar conference on this specific topic occurred at Columbia
University in October 2000; it was a workshop on the known, the unknown, and the
unknowable; and it was funded by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation. A generation
has passed, and it is both timely and important to address these questions
again. It is likely that the conference will attract a large and broad audience,
and that it will foster dialogue within and beyond the academy and serve to
enhance public understanding of important social, intellectual, and political
issues. Papers from the conference will constitute a special issue of Social
Research: An International Quarterly. The conference proceedings will have a
good chance of inspiring and affecting the discussion of the criteria that
define the limits of knowledge, perhaps even leading to changes in those
criteria.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.