* 1837959
* BIGDATA: IA: A Multi-phase Survey Strategy for Generalizing Inferences from Big Data
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Michael Robbins, Rand Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 991,127.00

Many researchers argue that commercial services that yield a high volume of data
have little scientific utility because their users are not representative of the
general population. This project develops methods for generalizing inferences
drawn from non-representative big data sources. The researchers are implementing
a multi-phase survey to compare survey results with online social networking
data. They will collect a nationwide probability sample and a separate sample of
online users, and use novel statistical procedures to combine them in a manner
will enable statistically valid estimators to be produced from the universe of
online users. The results of this project will be broadly applicable by enabling
more accurate statistical models of to be created for applications in medicine,
economics, and many other fields. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Statistical weighting
will be used to match the online media sample with the probability survey sample
across a set of auxiliary variables observed for both samples. The researchers
will then match the data in the universe of online users to the weighted sample
across a second set of variables that is measured for all users. Doing so will
enable extracting results from media users that are more representative of the
general population. To produce real-time forecasts, Bayesian models for mixed
frequency time series will be used to combine the weighted online-based analyses
with traditional polls.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.