* 1837698
* EAGER: ISN: Anticipatory Interdiction in Narco-Trafficking Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kendra McSweeney, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 09/30/2022
* USD 295,656.00

This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will promote
progress in scientific understanding of illicit supply networks by providing
insights into how processes designed to disrupt Central American cocaine
trafficking networks influence citizen security in the region and in the US.
Counterdrug interdiction efforts are designed primarily to seize or disrupt drug
shipments between South American source zones and US markets, and remain a core
commitment of US supply-side drug policy and national security strategy. In
response to these efforts, trafficking networks have fragmented existing
trafficking routes into new and more numerous locations, resulting in a
geographically diverse drug trafficking space. This research builds an
interdisciplinary understanding of the structure and function of narco-
trafficking networks and their co-evolution with interdiction efforts to
investigate how different interdiction approaches might impact traffickers'
spatial, organizational, and economic behavior. This research establishes new
intellectual bridges between operations engineering, geographic, and
criminological perspectives, leading to more comprehensive and spatially
detailed insights needed to inform effective drug policy. This award supports
outreach activities to increase public understanding about the current state of
drug trafficking in Central America as a consequence of US drug policy. The
accompanying education plan will push the boundaries of conventional graduate
education to meet the emerging needs of illicit support network research to
inform policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate temporally
and spatially adaptive behaviors of narco-trafficking networks in response to
various interdiction strategies within the cocaine transit zone of Central
America and associated maritime areas. An integrated agent-based model that
includes operational elements will be used to assess how the spatial and
structural relationships of cocaine flows and prices along trafficking routes
change in response to alternative interdiction strategies. This research
represents a new paradigm in which trafficker-interdiction interactions are
conceived of as a complex adaptive system and modeled as a co-evolutionary
phenomenon. The integrated models will test hypotheses about the factors that
explain the location and extent of emerging trafficking nodes in an expanding
transit zone. The models will be parameterized with a novel application of data
from the Consolidated Counterdrug Database (CCDB). Using a criminological lens,
we will map the vulnerability of spaces in the so-called "transit zone" to
enable a holistic analysis of the environmental and operational aspects of
locations of new narco-trafficking activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.