* 1837033
* The Fifteen (15th) International Symposium on Equatorial Aeronomy (ISEA); Ahmedabad, India; October 22-26, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Philip Erickson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 07/31/2019
* USD 29,848.00

This conference grant requests funds to enable 14 students and young
investigators to attend the 15th International Symposium on Equatorial Aeronomy
(ISEA) in Ahmedabad, India during October 22-26, 2018. The ISEA is a major
international conference held approximately quadrennially. Scientists from
around the world gather to exchange ideas, plan observing campaigns, and listen
to the latest scientific developments on the low-latitude atmospheric and
ionospheric physics. Since 1972, presentations from all past workshops are
published as part of special editions of peer-reviewed journals. Scientific
advances showcased at the ISEA advance understanding of ionosphere-thermosphere-
magnetosphere coupling, and impacts upon communication and navigation. The
location of the ISEA in India will encourage attendance from young researchers
in developing nations in the Indian and African subcontinents and connect them
to researchers from developed nations. Attendance of this conference can
potentially lead a global, diverse workforce in the atmospheric and space
sciences.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.