* 1837662
* EAGER: Modeling the Interaction Physics between Soft-structures and Granular Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Michael Tolley, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 10/31/2019
* USD 124,622.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project explores the
interaction between soft robots and commonly occurring granular media, like
sand, soil, or gravel. Soft robots constructed from compliant materials like
rubber or cloth are much safer than rigid robots for use with and around people.
Soft robots are also remarkable for their ability to use intrinsic structural
compliance to passively adapt to unknown and unexpected obstacles and terrain.
Yet analyzing the movements of a robot that makes intermittent contact with the
ground is difficult even for rigid robots moving on hard surfaces, and much more
so when both the robot structure and the terrain may deform in poorly understood
ways. Thus, in order to fully realize the potential of soft robots operating
reliably and predictably in unknown natural terrain, it is critical to construct
a systematic framework for modeling the forces and movements of soft structures
moving in or on granular media. This EAGER project creates such a framework in
two parts. First is a sequence of tests that measure the forces and deformations
associated with a set of standard objects moving in pre-defined patterns through
a granular medium. Next, mathematical models are used to capture the essential
features of the interaction, which may then be extended to more general motions
and geometries. Soft robotics is rapidly emerging as a new field, with the
potential to transform applications such as health care, search and rescue,
scientific exploration, and orthotics and prosthetics, much as rigid robots
revolutionized manufacturing. The results of this project will help advance the
national prosperity and welfare, and secure the national defense, for example,
by enabling the creation of soft robots that can move reliably through uncertain
terrain for search-and-rescue, exploration, environmental monitoring, or
construction. The project also supports providing a research experience to
undergraduate students through the UC San Diego Summer Training Academy for
research Success (STARS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this
project are to, 1) develop an experimental system to study the forces and
deformation of soft intruders in laboratory granular materials, and 2) develop
discrete element method (DEM) and resistive force theory (RFT) models of the
interaction between granular material and soft robot appendages. Locomotion of
mobile robots is challenged by complex, natural substrates such as sand, leaf-
litter, brush, and slopes. Effective movement and control of mobile robots over
real-world environments requires study of the failure modes of a model natural
substrate granular material. A recent study demonstrated that empirically
verified granular models can be used to design and control legged robots for
effective locomotion on unstructured terrain. However, this approach has only
been demonstrated for rigid intruders. Robots with soft bodies and appendages
present new opportunities for robot functionality, including resilience, passive
adaptation, and safe interaction. Mobile soft robots have the potential to
control the local interactions between complex substrates and soft appendages,
and to enable sensing and feedback control of foot stiffness and shape when
moving across complex substrates. However, this potential will not be realized
without accurate models of the interactions between soft robot appendages and
complex, natural substrates. The overarching goal of this one-year project is to
enable predictive understanding of how soft intruders interact with granular
material to inform soft robot design and control in future applications. These
efforts will enable the design and control of future soft robots. Additionally,
this work will be of interest to scientists and engineers interested in the flow
and failure of granular materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.