* 1837840
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Ceremonial Organization And Social Structure
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2020
* USD 25,187.00

More than 6000 years ago, small regional polities emerged for the first time in
what is now northeastern China. These Hongshan societies represented the early
stages in the evolution of forms of organization that integrated the people of
different local communities into networks of social, political, and economic
relationships. They thus represent the very beginnings of the much larger-scale,
highly integrated societies in which most of the world's population now lives.
These regional societies were still very small; each including only 1,000 people
or so in a territory about 10 km across. Some families clearly enjoyed more
social prestige and influence than others, attributable primarily to their
special religious and ritual roles. Dozens if not hundreds of such small
regional societies were connected with each other through a common focus on a
complex of extraordinary ceremonial structures in which very highly prestigious
individuals were buried. This complex at Niuheliang seems to have functioned
primarily as a religious pilgrimage center, with a relatively small community of
permanent residents, who lived in a hilly region with very little agricultural
potential. Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, doctoral candidate Weiyu
Ran will carry out fieldwork at the nearby Hongshan-period village of
Shangchaoyanggou to investigate how the provisioning of this pilgrimage center
was organized. Several villages, of which Shangchaoyanggou was one, were located
a few kilometers from the ritual facilities of Niuheliang in much more favorable
locations for farming and may have specialized in producing food to sustain the
nearby pilgrimage center. If this is the kind of organization that had emerged
in Hongshan times, it represented a major step toward more highly developed
economies and greater interdependence between households and local communities
than ever before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr. Ran will evaluate this hypothetical
reconstruction of early Hongshan economies and the organization that sustained
the pilgrimage center at Niuheliang by collecting data on the cultural remains
left behind thousands of years ago by the inhabitants of Shangchaoyanggou. The
parts of this refuse that have been preserved for so long are mostly fragments
of broken pottery vessels and stone tools. If Shangchaoyanggo focused heavily on
agricultural production then the data Mr. Ran collects will show high
proportions of agricultural tools and low proportions of the elaborate pottery
vessels that signaled social prestige (when compared to the artifacts of
ordinary Hongshan communities or to those remaining at residential locations
near the most important ritual structures). If this is what the research results
show, it will be clear that in at least some instances a very early focus on
religion and ritual as a principal means of social integration can lead to the
development of the more advanced economic systems upon which even larger-scale
political integration eventually was based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.