* 1837699
* Collaborative Research: CS4SF: A Scalable Model for Preparing High School Teachers to Provide Rigorous, Inclusive Computer Science Instruction
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Brian Beatty, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 467,993.00

San Francisco State University (SFSU) and the San Francisco Unified School
District (SFUSD) propose a Research Practitioner Partnership (RPP) to address
the lack of qualified computer science (CS) teachers at the high school level
and the lack of diversity among high school students in CS courses. The RPP will
develop and implement CS4SF, an innovative and scalable program for the
professional development (PD) and ongoing support of high school CS teachers,
supplying them with the knowledge and skills they need to teach this in-demand
subject in a more rigorous manner while engaging a broader swath of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CSforAll will implement a three-part program.
Firstly, a one-week summer professional development course will immerse high
school teachers in CS knowledge and evidence-based, inclusive pedagogical
strategies. Secondly, a Community of Practice will meet monthly to provide
teachers with their own inclusive learning community, offering support
throughout the year and the opportunity to regularly interact with SFSU CS
professors. Thirdly, teaching assistants, selected from the most talented CS
undergraduates at SFSU, will assist teachers in the classroom for 4 to 5 hours a
week, deepening their own CS knowledge as they collect student-generated ideas
for culturally relevant classroom projects. For this work, SFSU and SFUSD have
jointly developed an initial set of research questions: Does the CS4SF model
improve high school teachers' mastery of CS concepts and pedagogy, so that they
can teach beyond the curriculum and truly engage their students? Does the CS4SF
model improve the engagement of female and other students from other
underrepresented groups in high school CS courses? What is the potential for
sustainability and scalability of the CS4SF model? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
strategies identified will be of broad interest as the problems that SFUSD faces
today are similar to those faced by many other school districts as they try to
ramp up their CS offerings. Over the course of this grant, the RPP will reach
100 teachers, 72 teaching assistants, and 5,000+ high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.