* 1837129
* FMitF: Opening Up the Black Box of Probabilistic Program Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Todd Millstein, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,113,396.00

Probabilistic programming languages are an expressive means for creating,
maintaining, and understanding a wide range of machine-learning models, and they
have been successfully used by both researchers and major technology companies.
However, today's probabilistic programming languages impose strong limitations
on the kinds of programs for which they are effective, thereby precluding their
use for many machine-learning applications. This project adapts and generalizes
techniques from the formal methods community for reasoning about traditional
programs, in order to develop general-purpose algorithms for probabilistic
inference, which is the key task that a probabilistic programming language must
perform. The project is implementing these algorithms in the context of a new
imperative probabilistic programming language and is providing educational
opportunities in the burgeoning area of probabilistic programming for graduate,
undergraduate, and high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
three main technical thrusts. First, the project is developing exact inference
algorithms for discrete probabilistic programs by exploiting the connection to
techniques for symbolic model checking and weighted model counting. Second, the
project is developing techniques to automatically decompose a probabilistic
inference query into multiple simpler sub-queries, each of which can be solved
using the most appropriate inference method. The key enabler of this
decomposition is a novel abstraction process for probabilistic programs. Third,
the project is investigating the use of abstractions as proposal distributions
for probabilistic inference, resulting in new abstraction-guided approximate
inference algorithms. The results of this project will make probabilistic
programming more effective by making probabilistic inference and learning
tractable for a wider class of programs. The artifacts that result from this
research will be released open source, including a new probabilistic programming
language that leverages the newly developed inference
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.