* 1837023
* FMitF: Transplanting Syntax-Guided Synthesis to Computer Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Xiaokang Qiu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 12/31/2023
* USD 742,001.00

Computer networks are difficult to manage since there exists a wide gulf between
the high-level goals that operators have for their networks (e.g., security,
Quality of Service etc.), and the low-level configurations in heterogeneous
devices in which such intent must be expressed. While the advent of Software-
Defined Networking (an emerging technology that centralizes control decisions
regarding how traffic must be handled, and separates them from the devices that
actually forward each packet) helps, the process of designing networks is still
ad-hoc, leading to high operational costs, design faults that account for a
large fraction of network downtime, and costly security breaches. This project
is motivated by the vision of design automation for networking, inspired by the
success of the approach in other domains such as chip design. The project will
develop methods for network architects to express their intent at higher levels
of abstraction, and techniques to automatically synthesize low-level switch
configurations that realize this intent correctly and
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will tackle network automation
through syntax-guided synthesis, which has been a popular paradigm embodied in
many program synthesis systems. Rather than directly synthesize low-level switch
flow-table rules and switch configurations like current network synthesis
efforts, the project will explore how to synthesize code from user-provided
sketches and specifications, corresponding to a network programming language,
which may then be translated into low-level switch configurations. This approach
will enable human experts to convey their insights and hints, which are critical
for applying modern synthesis techniques. The project will develop a network
programming language that is expressive yet has the necessary formal semantics
to enable synthesis, explore the design space of sketches for network synthesis,
and develop ways to improve the performance of synthesis for computer networks.
The broader impact of this project is to raise the level of abstraction for
managing large networks, leading to much lower management costs, better
performance, security and reliability. The project will extensively involve
graduate and undergraduate students, and incorporate new curriculum material in
programming language and networking classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.