* 1837640
* CAPS: Hybrid Instruction for Equity in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Lien Diaz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 297,343.00

This project is an effort to address computing equity in Atlanta Public Schools.
The current national effort to deploy computing education in the K-12 space
across the United States is focused on in-service teacher professional
development. It is an effort to transform teachers who are not otherwise
computer science teachers into subject matter experts to teach high school
computer science courses. The Constellations Center for Equity in Computing
believes that there simply are not enough teachers in production or in-service
that can be trained to be effective computer science teachers, especially in
schools that are already distressed serving students of color and poor students
of all kinds. Expanding the number of course offerings to include quality high
school computer science courses, requires a hybrid instructional model where the
specialized subject content is delivered on-line and teacher expertise as
facilitator and student guide is maximized. This project will use this strategy
to provide highly effective hybrid Advanced Placement Computer Science
instruction across the traditional high schools in Atlanta Public Schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constellation Fellows, expert computer science teachers
who have experience teaching in high school, will implement Advanced Placement
Computer Science courses in the target high schools. Each high school will
designate a teacher who will assist with facilitation in the classroom. The
courses will be delivered online. Additional courses will be added in subsequent
years. The resident teachers will observe and collaborate with the Fellows to
acquire the knowledge and skills to teach the courses in future years. They will
also be provided with opportunities for professional development and continued
Fellow support so that they can become exemplary high school computer science
teachers. Constellation's hybrid instructional model is an effort to not only
transform the infrastructure of computer science education, but to directly
address the reality of inequity that disproportionately limits access for
students of color and poor students whoever they may
be.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.