* 1837202
* EAGER: Adsorptive separation of rare-earth elements in DNA grafted mesoporous carbons
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Dipendu Saha, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The specialty metals used in electronics, cathode ray tubes, optical devices,
permanent magnets, power sources and various military applications are from a
group of metals known as 'rare earth elements'. Rare earth elements are not
mined, processed or traded in large quantities. Over 90% of the world's supply
of these metals is controlled by foreign countries. Recent export restrictions
have interrupted the supply of these metals to the United States, and raised
concerns about their continued use in military and energy sectors. Recovery,
separation, recycle, and reuse of these rare earth elements is thus critical.
However, these metals are often found closely intermingled - and thus difficult
to separate from - other 'like' metals. Two rare earth elements, neodymium and
dysprosium, can be recovered from discarded iron magnets using solvents. Solvent
extraction can be hazardous, expensive, time and labor intensive, and
ineffective when the metals are found in low concentration. This project will
develop a novel material that will selectively recover low concentrations of
neodymium and dysprosium from iron without the use of solvents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop DNA-grafted mesoporous carbon to
selectively recover neodymium and dysprosium from iron. The high concentration
of oxygen and phosphorous on the DNA molecules will increase the selective
affinity for these metals, concentrating them on the solid substrate. The
mesoporous carbon will provide a high number of surface sites per gram of
material to facilitate the recovery. The exploratory project will covalently
graft specific nucleotide units on the mesopore carbon surface, explore the
penetration of the nucleotides into the pores, determine material stability, and
test the materials for both non-competitive and competitive adsorption of
neodymium, dysprosium, and iron. The anticipated outcome is a series of highly
tunable and stable DNA grafted carbons that can substantially enhance the uptake
and recovery of neodymium and dysprosium compared to currently available
materials. It is anticipated that the tunable phosphorous and oxygen content of
DNA grafted carbon will have additional applications in chemical separations,
sensing, fluoresce, or molecular electronics. The project will support both
undergraduate and masters-level research students, incorporate the research into
the undergraduate engineering curriculum, and presented the concepts to high
school students at an engineering summer camp.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.