* 1837864
* I-Corps:  High Efficiency Rapid Magnetic Erythrocyte Separator
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* David Erickson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable the
decentralization of diagnostic blood testing. Existing point-of-care clinics are
limited to a narrow range of diagnostic capabilities as they currently do not
possess simple methods to perform blood-plasma separation. High Efficiency Rapid
Magnetic Erythrocyte Separator (H.E.R.M.E.S) offers a highly efficient solution
to meet the needs of sample processing in point-of-care environments and its
commercialization will enable the translation of existing diagnostic tests from
traditional labs to more accessible clinical settings. Access to rapid sample
processing capabilities will also ensure retention of sample integrity and
reduce the incidences of inaccurate diagnosis that may result from poor sample
storage. Further, H.E.R.M.E.S is highly suitable to integrate into the
healthcare infrastructure of resource-limited settings as it can provide low-
cost sample processing capabilities. Successful deployment will result in an
increased accessibility to testing services and will potentially allow point-of-
care clinics to capture a greater percentage of the blood-testing market

This I-Corps project explores the commercial potential of a translational method
to perform blood-plasma separation. H.E.R.M.E.S uses magnetic bead-based
separation to obtain plasma free of red blood cells in a short amount of time.
H.E.R.M.E.S is a low-cost and standalone platform that has the potential to
augment the testing efficiency and translational ability of existing blood-based
diagnostic tests. H.E.R.M.E.S will address the lack of availability of low-cost
and efficient sample processing technologies; a barrier that prevents existing
point-of-care clinics from offering in-house blood testing services. Current
experiments show that H.E.R.M.E.S offers performance similar to that of a
centrifuge (near 100% plasma purity) at a fraction of the time and cost (process
time of 2 minutes at less than $2 per test). The underlying research complements
ongoing work in developing point-of-care medical technologies to perform
diagnostic testing in the field. The technology utilizes inexpensive raw
materials that are readily available, and the process flow has been designed to
ensure semi-autonomous operation ? key factors that indicate favorable scale-up
potential.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.