* 1837131
* FMitF: A Novel Framework for Learning Formal Abstractions and Causal Relations from Temporal Behaviors
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Yan Liu, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Formal methods consist of a collection of techniques that help developers
rigorously reason about the behaviors of software and hardware systems with the
help of mathematical logic. While formal logic has been used for articulating
system specifications for the purpose of verification or software synthesis,
this project introduces a logic-based framework to address machine-learning
problems such as classification (which category should a new datum be put
into?), clustering (how should a collection of data points be grouped together
into categories?) and discovery of causal relations (when should an earlier data
observation be deemed to cause the appearance of a later data observation?) for
time-series data, in which repeated observations are made over time. The use of
formal logic opens new avenues such as enhancing the interpretability of
machine-learning models, the explainability of learning results, and
articulation of formal guarantees on the behavior of learning algorithms. The
societal impact of this work targets discovery of latent information in time-
series data in diverse domains such as healthcare, autonomous systems, and
security. The research impacts education by providing cross-disciplinary
training of undergraduate and graduates students in areas of data science,
machine learning, formal methods, and introducing students to methods from
statistical physics on a number of real-world systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project explores the intersection between the logical inference based on real-
time temporal logics and statistical inference prevalent in machine learning.
The algorithms developed in this project allow users to express domain knowledge
in the form of signal predicates or chance constraints, and output the results
of classification, clustering or causal discovery as formulas in specific real-
time temporal logics. This allows the results of the machine-learning algorithms
to be human-interpretable, and also improves the explainability of learning
algorithms by answering the question of why a particular time-series datum is
classified or clustered in a specific fashion. These techniques are able to
model uncertainty in time-series data by creating a new class of non-parametric
learning methods that combine concepts from statistical physics, information
theory, and statistical inference. The use of a logic-based framework allows
providing formal guarantees on the learning process itself by applying ideas
such as probably-approximately-correct learning (from computational learning
theory) to the inference of real-time temporal logic formulas from
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.