* 1837577
* Encoding Geography: Building Capacity for Inclusive Geo-Computational Thinking with Geospatial Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Michael Solem, Association of American Geographers
* Standard Grant
* Fay Cobb Payton
* 10/31/2020
* USD 299,989.00

This project will initiate the formation of a researcher-practitioner
partnership (RPP) to articulate preK-14 pathways that will expand opportunities
for all students to develop spatial and computational (i.e., geo-computational)
thinking skills. This pilot RPP is composed of geographers, computer science
educators, and geospatial technology specialists experienced in serving
underrepresented minority students and communities. Under the coordination of
the American Association of Geographers, this RPP will collaborate on
exploratory research to inform educational standards and tested approaches to
help institutions understand the capacity they need to modernize geography
education and to broaden the participation of underrepresented minorities in
geo-computational curriculum. Building capacity for inclusive pathways in
computational geography will increase the potential of all students to
contribute to the national innovative ecosystem. This pilot will provide other
regions or states the foundational knowledge to design, develop, and implement a
strategy to modernize their pathways to computationally-intensive jobs and
college majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The value and intelligence gained from
geospatial innovations such as mobile Global Positioning System (GPS) is such
that the geospatial services industry creates approximately 4 million direct
jobs and generates 400 billion U.S. dollars globally in revenue per year. The
recent democratization of manufacturing geospatial hardware is a sign that this
industry continues to innovate and grow. More importantly, it will generate
enormous volumes of geospatial data, which will be generated at even higher
rates than we are already facing. The value of these spatial data, however,
hinges on a workforce that is equipped with both computational thinking and
spatial thinking. In 2015 the Government Accountability Office raised concerns
that "throughout the country, K-12 students may not be acquiring adequate skills
in and exposure to geography, which are needed to meet workforce needs in
geospatial and other geography-related industries". Graduates with a combination
of training in geography and computational thinking is in even shorter supply,
so employers across the public and private sectors are limited and forced to
choose between hiring a geographer with limited or no computational skills, or a
computer science graduate with limited or no expertise in geographic
information. Main questions driving this research are: (1) What are barriers
experienced by schools or departments to offer courses that involve geo-
computational thinking? (2) What are barriers experienced by students at
different levels to enroll or succeed in courses that involve geo-computational
thinking? (3) What new skills are necessary to be productive in today's
geospatial technology industry? (4) What needs to be done to expand access to
high-quality geo-computational education in K-12 schools? This RPP will initiate
the design of a long-term mixed-methods approach combining surveys with
qualitative data collection to allow other regions or states to design, develop,
and implement geo-computational curriculum at all educational
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.