* 1837262
* Integrate to Innovate: A Research-Practice Partnership to Integrate Computer Science into Maine Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Joseph Szakas, Maine Mathematics and Science Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 02/28/2021
* USD 299,956.00

This project will co-design a researcher practitioner partnership (RPP) in the
state of Maine consisting of academic and non-profit educational researchers,
three rural school districts, and business partners. The RPP will focus on
developing a vision for the types of professional development that will enable
the effective integration of computer science education in rural, K-8
classrooms. By building on the needs and unique characteristics of rural
communities, the RPP will form the foundation for a reform initiative that
exposes K-8 students to relevant experiential and real-world applications of
computer science. The researchers hope to empower students to see how computing
is used in their communities and provide opportunities for them to recognize
potential career opportunities available to them in rural
America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research question asks how to support
the integration of computer science into rural K-8 math and science instruction.
To answer this, the RPP will work to do the following: 1) identify when and
where computer science can be integrated with existing math and science
standards; 2) identify professional development structures for scalable computer
science learning; 3) develop models for rural states to establish RPPs that
create professional development for computer science teaching, and; 4) leverage
prior work to build a framework that provides equitable learning opportunities
in computer science for rural students. An iterative, design-based research
methodology will be used to study these questions and the development and growth
of the RPP. In particular, interviews and surveys will be used to understand the
progression of stakeholder's thinking and actions as the RPP
develops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.