* 1837866
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Impacts of Transnational Volunteerism on Economic Development and Labor Dynamics
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* David Lansing, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 02/28/2021
* USD 16,271.00

This doctoral dissertation research improvement project will examine how the
rise of volunteer tourism (a vacation with volunteering) alters the work of
people connected to development nongovernmental organizations (NGOs). Such
diversity includes both the social position of the worker and type of work they
do. The research will examine how diverse workers interact with volunteers in
their efforts to reduce poverty. The research will examine the extent to which
such interactions influence NGOs to change their project goals, and will examine
the new kinds of work these interactions produce. Volunteer tourism is a rapidly
expanding transnational phenomenon, and this study will provide insights into
how it transforms volunteers who travel abroad, NGO operations, and development
project outcomes. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
project will also provide support to enable a promising student to establish an
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a
geographic analysis of transnational voluntourism by shifting the scale of
development research from the typical macro level analysis of policies or trade
to the micro level, with a focus on people, homes, and offices. The study will
use an ethnographic approach to examine how daily work by diverse workers at an
NGO shape how such organizations function at multiple scales including
institutional, interpersonal, and at the project scale. The research will seek
answers to the following questions: (1) what is the relationship between labor
dynamics, NGO practices, and funding?; (2) what are the experiences of
volunteers, workers, and beneficiaries of NGOs?; and (3) how do the labor
dynamics and experiences impact both livelihoods and development outcomes of
poverty reduction projects?. The student will collect data through a multi-
faceted approach including participant observation, semi-structured and informal
interviews; content analysis of annual reports; and post-trip email surveys of
volunteers. While this research focuses on development projects in Guatemala, it
will provide new insights regarding the impacts of American volunteer tourism on
people and development NGOs, with implications for improving volunteer tourism
and development practices both in the US and
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.