* 1837848
* The Structure, Dynamics, and Expected Future Changes in Diablo Winds Over Central/Northern California
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Clifford Mass, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 486,371.00

Devastating wildfires in California are often aided by extreme wind conditions.
In Southern California these include the well-known, and well-studied, Santa Ana
winds. In Central and Northern California there is another kind of downslope
windstorm which has been termed the "Diablo" winds. The Diablo winds have aided
numerous wildfires including the recent 2017 Wine Country fires that resulted in
44 deaths and billions of dollars of damage. Despite the grave impact of Diablo
winds, there has been a relative lack of detailed research on the causes and
climatology of these events. This award will allow for a detailed
characterization of Diablo wind events, an assessment of weather model skill in
predicting the events, and an assessment of the projected trend of Diablo wind
events in future years. The main societal impact of the work will be to give
operational weather forecasters more confidence in their ability to forecast
these events, which may allow more preventative fire measures to take place. The
lead researcher is very experienced with outreach and will continue activities
to better inform the public of the relevance of scientific research. In
addition, the project will help to train the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will investigate the structure,
evolution, and underlying physical mechanisms of Diablo winds, which are strong,
dry offshore-directed winds occurring over central and northern California. The
project will involve both analysis and modeling approaches. The range of
deliverables to be expected include: 1) a comprehensive description of the
Diablo wind phenomenon, including its structure, evolution, dynamics and control
by the synoptic scale flow, 2) a detailed climatology of Diablo winds, including
their frequency, duration, annual modulation, and long-term trends over the past
70 years, 3) an evaluation of future trends in Diablo wind frequency, structure,
and amplitude based on dynamically downscaled high-resolution models, driven by
GCMs, and GCMs driving statistical models of Diablo wind occurrence, and 4) an
evaluation of the forecast skill of operational weather forecast model guidance
now currently available, and the appraisal of deficiencies in current modeling
systems with respect to the Diablo wind phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.