* 1837881
* EAGER: ISN: A New Multi-Layered Network Approach for Improving the Detection of Human Trafficking
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Louise Shelley, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 295,968.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will advance the
national health and security by addressing the supply chains that allow human
trafficking to function effectively. Human trafficking is one of the top revenue
generators for illicit traders and has devastating effects on its victims, many
of which are U.S. citizens. By aiding the detection and disruption of the
social, financial, and physical networks used by criminal organizations that
traffic individuals, this research will help to limit their operations and
funding, thereby enhancing national security. Combating human trafficking will
also have a positive impact on the lives of many youth, particularly females.
The research outcomes will significantly advance the state of the art in social
science and operations research. Insights from the research will be included in
classes on operations research, human trafficking, illicit trade and
transnational crime included in the programs of both the Schar School of Policy
and Government and the Volgenau School of Engineering at George Mason
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use a multi-layered network
approach that provides a systematic way to incorporate different types of data
sources and multidisciplinary models into a holistic approach. The project
combines social science methods with operations research methods to develop
quantitative models that describe the complex operations of trafficking
networks. The first phase will include analysis of existing and available data
on human trafficking supply chains, transport logistics and financial
transactions. To improve the detection of human trafficking, a new paradigm that
enables the analysis of these multiple overlapping networks will be developed.
The analysis of data on available human trafficking cases will be published on
the website of the Transnational Crime and Corruption Center at George Mason
University and widely disseminated within the larger community of government,
business and policy makers concerned with supply chains, human trafficking and
illicit trade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.