* 1837233
* EAGER:   Stage-structured predation between fish and aquatic insects
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Jeff Wesner, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2022
* USD 199,927.00

A fundamental challenge in ecology is to predict how extinction of some species
will impact other species that are left behind. It's complicated because all
species interact with a large number of other species. They eat or are eaten by
those species, creating what are called "food webs". Practically all studies of
food webs ignore the simple fact that interactions among species are likely to
change as individuals grow up. For example, a butterfly eats different things as
a caterpillar than as an adult. Likewise, different animals are likely to eat it
as a caterpillar than as an adult. Another problem with past studies is that
food webs in one habitat are treated as totally separate from those a nearby
habitat. The simple fact that animals often move between habitats is typically
ignored. This project overcomes both of these problems with past studies.
Researchers will test how fish in streams not only affect their prey under water
but also how those prey affect animals above water. Students will help collect
data, learning cutting-edge ecological techniques. All participants will share
their knowledge about food webs with school children and the general public.
Results from this project will be important for managing freshwater resources
and preserving their benefits for all. More generally, this project is in the
national interest because humans rely on properly functioning food webs for
recreation, food, and water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through field surveys
and manipulative experiments, this project will examine stage-structured
interactions between fish and their insect prey, and the consequences of those
interactions for linked aquatic-terrestrial ecosystems. Aquatic insects develop
as larvae on the bottom of streams and lakes. They then metamorphose and emerge
as winged adults in the terrestrial ecosystem. After emerging from the water,
aquatic insects become common prey for terrestrial predators. As a result, fish
predation on aquatic insects can affect terrestrial food webs. However, prey
life stages vary dramatically in ecological traits, which means they are
differentially susceptible to predation by fishes. This combination of cross-
ecosystem movement by prey and stage-structured predation means that the effects
of fish predation can not only extend beyond ecosystems, but could even be
stronger in the terrestrial ecosystem than in the aquatic ecosystem. Such
effects of predators would not be predicted based on current species-centric
food web approaches, making this a somewhat risky project with high potential
for changing how food webs are viewed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.