* 1837021
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Building Information, Inhabitant, Interaction and Intelligent Integrated Modeling BI5M
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ying Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2023
* USD 479,932.00

Each year the nation spends over $400 billion to power, heat and cool its
buildings. Moreover, buildings are a major source of environmental emissions. As
a result, even a modest improvement in energy efficiency of the nation's
building stock would result in substantial economic and environmental benefits.
In this project, the focus is on improving energy efficiency in commercial
buildings because this sector represents a substantial portion of the energy
usage and costs within the overall building sector. Enhancing the energy
efficiency of commercial buildings is a challenging problem, due to the fact
that centralized building systems -- such as heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC), or lighting -- must be synthesized and integrated with
individual inhabitant behavior and energy consumption patterns. This project
aims to design, analyze, and test a cyber-physical and human-in-the-loop enabled
control system that can drive sustained energy savings in commercial buildings.
It brings together expertise in computational building science, eco-feedback,
network theory, data science, and control systems to integrate physical building
information and inhabitants with cyber (building-human) interaction models to
enable intelligent control of commercial building systems. Specifically, this
project will: 1) design an integrated cyber-physical system (CPS), called
Building Information, Inhabitant, Interaction, Intelligent Integrated Modeling
(BI5M), aimed at reducing energy usage in buildings; 2) assess the complex
inter-relationships between and across physical building and inhabitant models,
cyber building-human interaction and intelligent control models related to
energy conservation behavior; and 3) empirically test and validate modules and
the overall BI5M system at test-bed buildings on Stanford's campus and Google's
office park.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research incorporates measurement
(geospatial building data, energy use data), dynamics (inhabitant social
networks), and control (enhanced user control of: plug-load devices, HVAC,
lighting) into the BI5M system. The BI5M system is centered on a cyber Building
Information Management (BIM) model of the building, and will encompass rigorous
systems engineering that will explore relationships across the cyber-physical
domains and develop new insights for how the scientific principles of cyber-
physical systems can be used to influence the energy efficiency of commercial
buildings through both occupant behavior and intelligent control. By integrating
physical building information and inhabitants with cyber interaction modeling,
the research aims to introduce an integrated human-in-the-loop control paradigm
for commercial buildings. In addition to a testbed and validated CPS system for
commercial buildings (BI5M), this project targets fundamental knowledge on:
ontological components required to integrate dynamic data streams and control
information into static building models; complex socio-spatial structures of
inhabitants; insights into how building-human and human-human interactions
impact inhabitant consumption behavior; and new control models that leverage
input on the energy usage, spatial, social and behavior dynamics of inhabitants.
The educational impacts of this project will extend to participants (students,
faculty, Google employees in the test-bed buildings), as well as a broader
student population through the integration of key insights from this work into
courses/projects at all three collaborating universities (Stanford, Georgia
Tech, and Columbia). The project team will also disseminate results to
practitioners/policy-makers working in the building management space through an
Outreach Workshop. Additionally, this project will broaden participation in
computing fields through a diverse team and by partnering with the Girls Who
Code nonprofit to integrate project data sets and tools into their
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.