* 1837239
* WORKSHOP: Support for the Academy of Management Organizational Communication and Information Systems 2018 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Jennifer Gibbs, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2019
* USD 28,950.00

This grant supports travel of a diverse group of approximately 25 dissertation-
stage students at U.S. institutions to participate in an international doctoral
consortium with distinguished research faculty. The Organizational Communication
and Information Systems (OCIS) doctoral consortium at the 2018 Academy of
Management (AoM) convention in Chicago, Illinois, will consist of one and a half
days of talks and interactions among OCIS students and researchers. The doctoral
consortium provides students with feedback on their work from other students and
faculty members, allowing them to enhance their own dissertation research
proposals. Additionally, because of the diversity of the business sub-
disciplines and communities involved in the AoM conference, the consortium will
allow students to establish research connections beyond their own disciplines.
Consequently, participation will allow students to develop a better
understanding of the different research communities, which will facilitate their
participation in future interdisciplinary research. In the past, the OCIS
doctoral consortium has been a successful venue at which students can take major
steps toward becoming professional researchers.

The OCIS division at the annual AoM meeting provides a leading international
forum for the presentation and discussion of research and practical issues
related to the use and impact of information and communication technologies in
organizations and society. The intellectual merit of this travel grant is that
it provides a forum for doctoral students to exchange insights and receive
feedback and guidance in order to enhance the quality of their dissertation
research, and its broader impact lies in facilitating the establishment of new
research collaborations and professional networks, as well as developing a
greater awareness of ongoing cutting-edge research in the field of
organizational communication and information systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.