* 1837808
* EAGER: Supporting Faculty Early Career Development in Engineering Education Research
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Allison Godwin, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2022
* USD 168,944.00

Despite the establishment of engineering education research as a field of
inquiry in the last three decades, the social infrastructure available to
engineering education researchers is not yet robust enough to consistently
support the development of early career faculty across different types of
appointments that exist within departments, as faculty in traditional
engineering disciplines, or as a part of centers. The purpose of this early-
concept project is to explore the development of an engineering education
specific community to support early career faculty in engineering education.
This project focuses on the National Science Foundation's CAREER award as a
particular indicator of early success in engineering education. Using an
untested approach to infrastructure development for early engineering education
researchers, the project applies theories from organizational change literature
in order to equitably provide CAREER application resources and support to early
career engineering education researchers throughout the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using collaborative inquiry, we will build a base
of existing CAREER awardees and explore particular advice, resources, and trends
that would be important to consider and include in developing an early CAREER
mentor network. This first phase will generate engineering education specific
(as opposed to general CAREER application advice that many universities provide)
resources that can be contributed to a change network. The second, and most
intensive phase of this project, focuses on extending the current network to
provide these EER specific resources equitable to early career engineering
education faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort addresses the concerns
around differential faculty support within different types of appointments and
provides leadership development to support engineering education faculty's
movement into core positions with the community. This work provides support and
resources for faculty who are often "lone wolves" or otherwise unsupported in
engineering education researchers at their institutions. These individuals play
an important role in the engineering education research community and equitable
access to resources for CAREER application development provides not only strong
development for researchers at engineering departments and centers but also to
those who connect into more traditional engineering spaces. By expanding who has
access to engineering education research resources and support, we can diversify
and improve the quality of CAREER applications. Finally, a focus on long-term
sustainability will embed the changes made by building this much needed
infrastructure to assist engineering education researchers nationwide and create
lasting change in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.