* 1837892
* I-Corps: A Cloud-based Wearable ECG Sensor on a Finger Ring
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Zhenyu Li, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
personalized monitoring of sudden cardiac events and heart arrhythmia by
combining a wearable device and cloud computing. The project will utilize a
patented cloud-connected ring sensor for long-term on-demand
Electrocardiographic (ECG) monitoring. Current ECG monitoring is a $4 billion
dollar market. However no existing product can provide on-demand multi-lead ECG
signals over long periods (over one month). Every year over 380,000 Americans
die from heart attacks, of which one third happen outside a hospital, motivating
a solution to a personalized cardiac monitoring device which can provide
actionable diagnosis on-demand and is connected with physicians for quick
intervention. This project will potentially enable a first-in-kind ring ECG
sensor to serve this unmet need. This I-Corps project will support extensive
customer discovery with cardiac patients, healthcare workers, cardiologists,
nurses, and telemedicine companies. In addition, through the NSF I-Corps Team
program, two engineering doctoral students will learn important entrepreneurial
skills such as the lean start-up model, go through an intensive and rigorous
customer discovery process, and network with potential investors and
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project integrates wearable devices
with cloud computing to enable personalized cardiac monitoring on-demand. The
intellectual merit of the project stems from the innovation of flexible
electronics based miniature ECG sensors and cloud-based informatics system. By
integrating wearable ECG sensors and cloud computing, on-demand cardiac
monitoring information can be shared with cardiologists and emergency
physicians. A smartphone can be used to receive physician-suggested actions for
early intervention. During this I-Corps project, the team will explore the
market potential for cloud-based wearable biosensors at point-of-care settings
for cardiac applications where long term on-demand monitoring is important. The
project will involve an extensive customer discovery process with potential
stakeholders, business model generation and potential partner identification.
More broadly, this platform technology is also applicable to other wearable
devices and chronic conditions such as high blood pressure, depression and
dementia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.