* 1837992
* BIGDATA: F: Collaborative Research: Moment Methods for Big Data: Modern Theory, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Amit Singer, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Modern scientific disciplines are increasingly faced with datasets of ever
larger size and complexity. Experimental observations may be marred by
inaccurate measurements and missing values, and the sheer volume of the output
of modern high-throughput experimental procedures in the life sciences makes
data processing an increasing challenge. Drawing accurate scientific inferences
from such data requires developing new tools that are both theoretically sound
and computationally efficient. This project aims to develop statistical
methodologies for uncovering the intrinsic structure in large, complex data. The
planned methods have the potential to become the default data science techniques
used in many scientific and engineering disciplines. Fast, user-friendly
software will be made publicly available, both for general purpose big data
analysis and specific scientific applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
pillar of the planned methodology is principal component analysis (PCA). The
investigators are extending the use of PCA to the setting of high-dimensional
observations with corrupted observations, non-Gaussian noise, and low signal-to-
noise ratios. These kinds of datasets arise in problems such as cryo-electron
microscopy and X-ray free electron laser imaging. This work will provide robust
tools for exploratory data analysis for these problems. The second pillar of the
research program is the method of moments, a classical technique for parameter
estimation that the investigators have repurposed for new problems. The
investigators will extend the range of applicability of the method of moments to
many big data problems that exhibit certain algebraic structure. For these
problems, the method of moments enables scalable and near-optimal statistical
inference. Finally, the novel extensions of PCA and the method of moments will
be combined to derive new near-optimal and scalable statistical inference
procedures for high-dimensional problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.