* 1837352
* CPS: TTP Option: Medium: Collaborative Research: Trusted CPS from Untrusted Components
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Aditya Mathur, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 37,200.00

The nation's critical infrastructures are increasingly dependent on systems that
use computers to control vital physical components, including water supplies,
the electric grid, airline systems, and medical devices. These are all examples
of Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) that are vulnerable to attack through their
computer systems, through their physical properties such as power flow, water
flow, chemistry, etc., or through both. The potential consequences of such
compromised systems include financial disaster, civil disorder, even the loss of
life. The proposed work significantly advances the science of protecting CPS by
ensuring that the systems "do what they are supposed to do" despite an attacker
trying to make them fail or do harm. In this convergent approach, the key is to
tell the CPS how it is supposed to behave and build in defenses that make sure
each component behaves and works well with others. The proposed work has a clear
transition to industrial practice. It will also enhance education and
opportunity by opening up securing society as a fascinating discipline for K-12
students to follow. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed project
is to produce, from untrusted components, a trusted Cyber-physical system (CPS)
that is resilient to security attacks and failures. The approach will rely on
information flows in both the cyber and physical subsystems, and will be
validated experimentally on high fidelity water treatment and electric power CPS
testbeds. The project brings together concepts from distributed computing,
control theory, machine learning, and estimation theory to synthesize a complete
mitigation of the security and operational threats to a CPS. The proposed
method's key difference from current methods is that security holes will be
identified and plugged automatically at system design time, then enforced during
runtime without relying solely on secure boundaries or firewalls. The system
will feature the ability to identify and isolate a malfunctioning device or
cyber-physical intrusion in real-time by validating its operation against
fundamental scientific/engineering principles and learned behavior. A combined
mathematical/data science approach will be used to generate governing invariants
that are enforced at system runtime. Invariants are a scientific approach
grounded in the system's physics coupled with machine learning and real-time
scheduling approaches embedded in the CPS. Robust state estimation will account
for errors in measurement and automated security domain construction and
optimization to reduce the cost of evaluation without sacrificing coverage. The
successful outcome of this research will lead to improved national security
across various CPS infrastructures which, in turn, will improve economic and
population health and security. The work can be taken to industry for deployment
in critical infrastructures. The project will stimulate interest in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) through the development of a
water-themed tabletop exercise for K-12 and helping current college students
develop an interest in outreach through the experiential learning aspects of
developing the tabletop exercise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.