* 1837125
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: Models and System-Level Coordination Algorithms for Power-in-the-Loop Autonomous Mobility-on-Demand Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Mahnoosh Alizadeh, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 12/31/2022
* USD 200,000.00

The goal of this project is to investigate how self-driving, electric vehicles
transporting passengers on demand (a system referred to as autonomous mobility-
on-demand, or AMoD) can enable optimized, coupled control of the power and
transportation networks. The key observation is that the AMoD technology will
give rise to complex couplings between the power and transportation networks,
namely couplings between charging demand and electricity prices as people move
around a city. The hypothesis is that by exploiting such couplings through
control and optimization, AMoD systems will lead to lower electricity generation
costs and higher integration levels of intermittent renewable energy resources
such as wind and solar, while providing more convenient transportation. The
results of this project will provide guidelines to transportation stakeholders
and policy-makers regarding the deployment of autonomous vehicles on a societal
scale, benefitting the U.S. economy by fostering clean and efficient future
transportation systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will devise
theoretical models and optimization tools for the characterization of the
aforementioned couplings and for the system-level control of AMoD with the power
network in the loop. The key technical idea is to cast the coupled power and
transportation networks in the formal framework of flow optimization, whereby
city districts, charging stations, and roads are abstracted as nodes and edges
of a graph, and the movements of customers, vehicles, and energy are abstracted
as flows over such a graph. This project will then devise a control framework to
optimize over the decision variables, e.g., vehicles' routes, charging
decisions, and power generation schedules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.