* 1837286
* Collaborative Research: ECS Fellows 2.0: Broadening Participation of Teachers and Students in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Joanna Goode, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2022
* USD 342,488.00

Teach for America (TFA), in collaboration with the Exploring Computer Science
(ECS) project team based at the University of Oregon, proposes to build on an
existing collaboration -- the ECS Fellowship 1.0 -- that prepared in-service
teachers from TFA's network to both advocate for broadened access to CS
learning, and to teach an inquiry-based introductory CS course at high-need
secondary schools. To date, the ECS Fellowship 1.0 project has prepared 46 TFA
teachers from 11 urban and rural regions to teach the ECS course. That project
also identified a number of barriers and obstacles that teachers face in
advocating for CS instruction including principal de-prioritization of CS, and
counselor bias. With the ECS Fellows 2.0 project, the team will shift its focus
to understanding how best to recruit teachers of color to teach CS, support them
in navigating the identified obstacles associated with advocating for CS in
their schools, and help them to create equitable CS learning environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ECS Fellows 2.0 will develop a networked improvement
community (NIC) that centers on the experiences of teachers of color and their
students while interrogating issues teachers consider central to broadening
participation efforts. The project's goals are to: (1) establish a NIC made up
of TFA staff, ECS staff, and teachers of color from TFA's network that
constantly evolves to address problems of practice related to broadening
participation in computing for teachers and students; (2) develop and share
strategies that lead to increases in the number of CS teachers that identify as
people of color from TFA's network; (3) identify necessary supports that help CS
teachers introduce and expand CS learning opportunities for underrepresented
students in high-need schools; and (4) identify strategies that CS teachers can
use to create equitable CS learning environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.