* 1837607
* CPS: Medium: Secure Computing and Cross-Layer Anomaly Detection in the Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Jose Moura, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project tackles the following question: "Can a network of mutually-
distrusting devices perform resilient inference and computation while detecting
anomalous behaviors despite heterogeneity in the types of data they sense, the
networking technologies they use and their computational capabilities?" The
context is the increasingly pervasive Internet of Things (IoT) with low-power
end users or sensors relying on edge devices to process their data, and possibly
the cloud. However, IoT brings forth a unique challenge, namely, the extreme
heterogeneity at multiple levels: data sensed, communication technologies used
(WiFi, Bluetooth, Zigbee), and computational capabilities, making it
particularly vulnerable to security threats. The goal of this project is to
develop a resilient IoT system and applications, with a focus on distributed
inference and computing in the presence of threats, from injection of anomalous
data to impersonation of the sensors themselves. The system will be demonstrated
at scale through a heterogeneous and sensor-rich campus-scale IoT deployment.
The proposed testbed offers a rich platform to engage Masters and undergraduate
students as well as high-schoolers through outreach programs at the Carnegie
Mellon University, e.g., Engineering@CMU, SPARK Saturday, and Project
Ignite.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project aims to develop novel
methodological foundations and a cross-layer system design for secure
distributed computing and inference and anomaly detection in the IoT. The
proposed approach exploits heterogeneous sensing data at the end-user agents and
their interaction with edge devices, to provide resilience to broad classes of
Byzantine adversarial scenarios and Sybil attacks. The proposed distributed
algorithms yield guarantees on attaining desired computation and inference
objectives under broad conditions on the data and sensing models and inter-agent
connectivity. To defend against Sybil attacks that violate standard assumptions
for Byzantine fault tolerance, the project aims to develop a technology-agnostic
wireless fingerprinting based solution to detect anomalous devices and
transmissions. The proposed solution involves a novel design of a deep neural
network to extract wireless fingerprints cutting across radio
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.