* 1837240
* Collaborative Research: Developing a Systemic, Scalable Model to Broaden Participation in Middle School Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Mary Lou Maher, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 11/30/2022
* USD 502,822.00

African-American, Latinx and students from low socio-economic households too
often do not have opportunities to learn computer science and computational
thinking (CS/CT), concepts that are crucial for participation in the 21st
century workforce and citizenry. These limited opportunities are often the
result of systemic practices in schools that impact a wide range of connected
parts of the school including leadership, access to CS/CT resources for students
and teachers, CS/CT learning opportunities for students and teachers, and prior
experiences and encouragement to participate in CS/CT. This project will build
on a long-standing Research-Practice Partnership (RPP) between NC State
University's Friday Institute for Educational Innovation and a middle school in
Wake County Public School System to deepen the RPP to further develop
conceptual, theoretical, and applied frameworks for CS/CT. Additionally, the
project will scale this RPP work to another newly-forming CS/CT focused magnet
through a developing partnership with UNC Charlotte and Charlotte-Mecklenburg
Schools to replicate the RPP for a new "Computer science and coding" magnet
program. Since mathematics and science classes are taken by all middle school
students, the project will use this academic context as the focus of the
project's work. This proposal specifically targets middle schools in both
Charlotte and Raleigh with relatively high African-American and Latinx
populations, and free and reduced lunch percentages, to scale the existing RPP.
The project goals are to provide equitable access to underrepresented students
in computing; to prepare middle school students for computing curriculum in high
school; to develop and test effective CS/CT modules that integrate in existing
math and science curriculum; to investigate CS/CT-focused systemic barriers and
supports; and to propagate RPP findings to other schools and
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The STEM ecosystems framework is an emerging
model for framing the barriers and support structures students have in STEM
learning, including CS/CT that recognizes that effective CS/CT learning is the
product of the entire connected academic enterprise--with elements including
school leadership, teacher and student CS/CT resources, and available CS/CT
learning opportunities, along with prior experiences, encouragement, and
training in CS/CT. The project will adapt the STEM ecosystem model as a
scalable, generalizable approach for systematic, school-wide integration of
CS/CT into required math and science courses. Within the context of two magnet
middle schools seeking to integrate CS/CT across their curricula, this work will
be guided by the following overarching research questions: 1. What are the
barriers to developing a STEM ecosystem that supports CS/CT for every student
through integration into middle school science and math courses? 2. What factors
or interventions are needed to support the development of a CS/CT focused STEM
ecosystem that supports everyone in a school? 3. What are the indicators of
success for a CS/CT focused STEM ecosystem in a school? 4. How does the
ecosystem prepare and engage all students, especially those from
underrepresented student groups, for CS/CT work in high school? To address the
first two research questions, data will include meeting notes for thematic
analyses from RPP leadership teams, interviews with teachers and school leaders,
observational and self-report survey data from teachers and school leadership.
Additionally, professional development workshop data will be included to
triangulate responses from interviews and surveys. To address the third research
question, data will include student demographic data, participation in STEM
activities, classroom observations, student engagement as measured by
demographics exposed to CS/CT within and external to the curriculum, activity
observations of engagement levels, self-report data of attitudes, learning and
future interest in CS/CT, teacher observations of learning and engagement,
activity/module ratings from students, teachers, observers, class artifacts
(portfolios or projects), and End of Grades science and math performance. For
Question 4, members of the project and RPP teams, with input from the Advisory
Board will perform an annual review of NC high school CS course syllabi against
emerging K12 CS standards. Lesson plans and artifacts of student work from Reedy
Creek and Northside will be sampled and compared against current high school
expectations for CS academic work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.