* 1837986
* BIGDATA: IA: Automating Analysis and Feedback to Improve Mathematics Teachers' Classroom Discourse
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* James Martin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,998,505.00

This research project will develop and study an innovative application -
TalkBack - for addressing a significant challenge in education: providing
teachers with personalized feedback on classroom discussion strategies. The
TalkBack application builds on advances in deep learning for natural language
processing and speech recognition to automatically analyze classroom discussions
and reliably generate information about specific classroom dialog between
student and teacher that occur in active learning. This research will
significantly extend existing machine learning from simple descriptions, and
automated classification, of dialog to more complex descriptions, and automated
classification, of dialog using deep learning. TalkBack will be a cloud
application available to any teacher who has classroom video and who wants to
improve active learning in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TalkBack
application will consist of three interrelated components: a cloud-based big
data infrastructure for managing and processing classroom recordings, deep
learning models that reliably detect the use of talk moves, and an innovative
interface that provides teachers with personalized, feedback on their use of
discussion strategies during individual teaching episodes and longitudinally
over multiple episodes. Two user studies will be conducted to gather information
from math teachers related to the design and impact of the application. These
user studies will include a pilot study in year 2 (n = 20 teachers) and a field
study in year 3 (n = 100 teachers). The TalkBack application will provide an
exemplar for a new type of translational activity enabled by big data: the
reification of existing, well-researched theoretical frameworks in deep learning
models. Building on NSF's investment in research on talk moves, including the
Accountable Talk and the IQA frameworks, this work demonstrates how analyses of
teaching practices using these frameworks can be fully automated and scaled up
to support large numbers of teachers longitudinally over time. Furthermore, this
effort will demonstrate how a cloud-based infrastructure supporting the detailed
analysis of classroom recordings using speech and language processing can be
used to develop next generation learning environments (in this case,
personalized feedback on teaching practices) and to uncover new insights into
teaching practices at scale. Specifically, this research will provide
unprecedented insight into the ways that classroom discussions and student
participation changes as teachers develop and expand their use of talk moves
over time. This study will develop the big data application, TalkBack, providing
immediate and actionable feedback to teachers based on self-recordings of their
mathematics lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.