* 1837661
* Broadening Participation in Computer Science Through Programming and the Arts Across Learning Spaces
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jason Freeman, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,865.00

This proposal builds on an existing researcher-practitioner partnership between
Northwestern University and Evanston/Skokie School District 65 in Illinois to
develop a shared platform and professional development framework that supports
computational learning across a network of schools, community centers,
libraries, and homes. The current proposal seeks to develop ways to curate and
structure learning activities in and outside of schools in ways that engage
youth in long-term projects, demonstrate both the personal and professional
value of computer programming, and exemplify computation as a means to achieve
creative and personally fulfilling goals. The project explores a model for
broadening participation in computer science and related fields through a three-
pronged approach involving programming, music, and dance. First, the researchers
will provide learners with tools that engage them in computational projects that
are personally, socially, and culturally meaningful. Second, the project will
develop a continuum of music-themed computer science learning opportunities
designed to work between and across school and out-of-school spaces. Finally,
the project will create and study innovative ways for learners to document their
emerging understandings of both computer programming and music by adopting the
computational notebook paradigm that is increasingly popular in data science and
computational science communities (e.g., Jupyter, Wolfram
Notebooks).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One premise of the research is that music is a
dominant cultural form of literacy with many direct parallels to computer
science concepts. Emerging genres in the digital arts have the potential to
provide a motivational context for youth from groups chronically
underrepresented in computing fields. The researchers will introduce students to
computational thinking through two programming environments developed at Georgia
Institute of Technology. A set of activities and programs across a network of
learning spaces will also be designed to immerse students in computer
programming. The researchers will use a variety of methods, including
interviews, surveys, and artifact analysis, to document student learning across
contexts and over time. By engaging with multiple partners in the researcher-
practitioner partnerships, the researchers will develop a rich understanding of
youth engagement and the ways that learning can be supported and reinforced
across contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.