* 1837811
* Impact of Aerosol and Boundary-Layer Interactions on the Development of Convective Clouds
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2022
* Zhanqing Li, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 11/30/2022
* USD 596,812.00

Aerosols strongly affect the thermodynamics of the planetary boundary layer
(PBL) and the development of convective clouds from shallow boundary-layer
clouds to deep convective clouds via aerosol-PBL interactions (API), aerosol-
radiation interactions (ARI), and aerosol-cloud interactions (ACI). While the
individual effects have been known, little has been done to account for their
joint effects during the complete course of a convective process. Fully
understanding and accounting for these joint effects is key for both climate and
weather applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The
following research will be carried out in this project:&lt;br/&gt;- Validation
and application of novel research products;&lt;br/&gt;- Quantification of
aerosol-induced changes in radiative heating and latent heat release associated
with cloud condensation and freezing;&lt;br/&gt;- Gaining deeper insights into
the effects of API, ARI, and ACI from the perspective of their joint
influences;&lt;br/&gt;- Enhanced capability in simulating the various complex
processes of boundary-layer and convective-cloud
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;Weather and climate
models have systematic biases in rainfall simulations both in magnitude and
timing associated with convective clouds: often overestimation and
underestimation of light and heavy rainfall, respectively. While the individual
impacts of aerosols on the development of PBL, shallow boundary-layer clouds,
and deep convective clouds have been tackled, a systematic study here is likely
to lessen, if not solve, the problem. The study is also helpful in understanding
and forecasting air pollution by accounting for the feedback between aerosols
and the PBL, and severe weather events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.