* 1837226
* NSF Student Travel Support for the 51st IEEE/ACM Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO)
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Xiaochen Guo, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Yuanyuan Yang
* 06/30/2019
* USD 25,000.00

The IEEE/ACM Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO) is a flagship conference in
the area of computer architecture. The 2018 annual conference, along with
several collocated workshops on related topics, will take place in Fukuoka,
Japan. The conference is an important venue for reporting current research on
important topics addressing grand challenges in computing resulting, e.g., from
the impending Moore's law slowdown of performance of computing machines. The
topic is the main focus of the program area of the SHF cluster of the CISE/CCF
division at NSF, and thus MICRO is a venue where major results of research
supported by the program gets presented, discussed, debated and future direction
of research are charted.

This award will support approximately 50 students by defraying part of their
cost for travel and attendance for MICRO 2018. Since attendance to MICRO can be
viewed as an integral part of computer systems design education and research in
academia, the proposal would go a long way towards supporting workforce
development in the important area information technology. The conference is also
attended by leading researchers from technology companies (e.g., IBM, Intel,
Microsoft etc.), and provides a basis for interaction between academia and
industry, thus potentially enhancing technology transfer on problems of current
and future societal needs. The grants to 50 students seek to enhance the
diversity of the attendees, thus maintain a balance between underrepresented and
other groups among the participants supported from the grant. Upon completion of
the project, the awardee will submit a report to NSF with details of student
experiences and the details of the expenditures towards supporting them to
attend the conference and workshops collocated with it.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.