* 1837544
* EAGER: Exploring a community driven data-model framework for testing the stability of the Greenland Ice Sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Beata Csatho, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 278,843.00

In the wake of devastating flooding related to recent hurricane strikes on
densely inhabited areas, the potential impact of sea level rise has never been
more evident. Rising sea level is challenging societies around the globe, but
current predictions of future sea level rise contain uncertainty. Greenland's
ice, if fully melted, would raise global sea levels more than 7 m. However, at
present, we do not have data or models that allow for a definitive consensus
view of Greenland Ice Sheet vulnerability to climate change, and our sea level
predictions are only as good as our ability to model Greenland Ice Sheet change
using computer simulations and the data driving those simulations. Vast datasets
of observations and increasingly sophisticated computer models are being
employed to solve this problem. Yet, significant knowledge and disciplinary
barriers make collaboration between data and model groups the exception rather
than the norm. The PIs propose to establish a community-building scientific and
educational cyber hub to enable seamless access to data, and coordination and
synergy between different scientific disciplines. The overarching goal is to
increase the accuracy of predictions of the Greenland Ice Sheet contribution to
sea level rise by 2050, 2100 and beyond. The project will support two female PIs
(one of which is a young investigator) and partial funding for two graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Observational datasets of Greenland Ice Sheet
change, both from the satellite era and the recent geologic past, are rapidly
expanding. Some of these observations have been used for calibration and
validation of ice sheet models thereby improving the physical understanding of
ice sheet behavior and estimates of future sea level rise. But substantial data-
model gaps remain due to the knowledge barrier of understanding and using
satellite- and paleo-data and the lack of a standard framework for using
available observational datasets in ice sheet modeling experiments. There is
significant potential to generate a long-lasting cyberinfrastructure framework
with ice sheet data, software tools, online cloud-based execution and
educational materials. When combined, this would lead to rapid progress in
improving ice sheet modeling capability and decreasing uncertainty in sea level
rise forecasting. The PIs will bring together experts in ice sheet observation,
data analysis and modeling to guide the creation of a community hub that will
enable two-way communication between data generators and modelers. The PIs will
pilot software tools necessary to facilitate interoperability among the various
data sets and modeling tools and investigate new metrics for model-data
intercomparison and model assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.