* 1837034
* EAGER: Predictive Micro Mobility Management in mmWave Cellular Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Tao Shu, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2022
* USD 314,021.00

Due to its huge capacity benefits, mmWave communication has been envisioned as a
promising high-capacity low-latency solution for 5G systems and beyond, for both
indoor (static) and outdoor (mobile) applications. Lagging behind this vision,
however, existing research on mmWave communication is mainly focused on static
users, while the case of mobile users that move in small scale at pedestrian
speed, a.k.a. micro mobility - a typical scenario envisioned for outdoor mmWave
applications, has been largely ignored. The challenge of micro mobility stems
from the fact that mmWave communication heavily relies on line of sight (LOS)
communications, which could be frequently blocked by obstacles during the course
of user movement, leading to loss of the received signal and causing link
outage. The resulting intermittent connection significantly undermines the
performance of higher layers. This project will address the fundamental
challenge of micro mobility in outdoor mmWave networks by systematically
exploring a suite of prediction-based, cross-layer, seamless, and efficient
micro mobility management solutions for realistic multi-obstacle mobile mmWave
environments. The research outcome will contribute to the successful development
of the nation?s next-generation high-speed cellular communication
infrastructure, and hence will create a stronger driving force and carrier for
the nation?s economy. This project will also carry out a comprehensive education
plan to broaden its impact, with a special emphasis on underrepresented and
minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In contrast to the conventional proactive
and reactive mobility management methods, the novelty of this project lies in
the development of a new class of predictive link/network-layer designs that
enables reaction to an outage before it happens, overcoming the low-efficiency
and long-delay weaknesses of existing methods. In particular, an outage
prediction mechanism will be proposed to accurately predict when the mmWave LOS
will be blocked and how long the blockage will last in realistic multi-obstacle
outdoor environment. Taking advantage of the predicted blockage information, the
project will propose a multi-scale just-in-time (JIT) predictive outage handling
framework. For outage of short durations, cross-layer predictive link/network-
layer designs will be proposed to hide outages from upper layers. For outages of
long durations, a JIT optimal-stopping sequential handover mechanism will be
developed to maximize the handover efficiency and quality of service (QoS) while
accounting for the handover overhead and deadline. A mmWave test-bed will also
be developed at Auburn University to evaluate all proposed
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.