* 1837812
* BIGDATA: IA: Collaborative Research: Data-Driven, Multi-Scale Design of Liquid-Crystals for Wearable Sensors for Monitoring Human Exposure and Air Quality
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Emmanouil Mavrikakis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,243,464.00

Liquid crystals are responsive materials that can be used to manufacture low-
cost and highly selective chemical sensors. Liquid crystals provide a
potentially scalable approach toward deploying millions of wearable chemical
sensors (e.g., in mobile phones or attached to clothing) that collect high-
resolution data on human exposure to toxic contaminants in the air. This
information is key to understanding health-risks associated with air quality,
developing industrial practices that minimize workers' exposure to hazardous
environments, and detecting point sources (e.g., fabrication of explosives).
Liquid crystal sensors work by amplifying events that occur at the molecular-
level into an optical signal when the sensor is exposed to a chemical
environment. The amplification process involves a sequence of tightly coupled
phenomena spanning multiple length and time scales. This span in scales lies
beyond what is currently possible to characterize, model, and predict directly
from first principles. This project seeks to combine first-principles and data-
driven methodologies to overcome this technical challenge. The methods developed
will enable the prediction of the influence of liquid crystal design variables
on the information content of optical signals and will lead to a revolutionary
impact on chemical sensing technologies and on the design of functional
materials. The multidisciplinary nature of this project will train a new
generation of engineers in the integration of data science into the design and
analysis of advanced functional materials. K-12 students and the public will be
engaged through development of hands-on liquid crystal sensors that respond to
model target chemicals (e.g., carbon dioxide from
sodas).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate scalable machine
learning techniques that enable the efficient use of large sets of experimental
and first-principles simulation data to uncover and understand multi-scale
phenomena that govern the performance of liquid crystals. Specifically, the
project goals are to: i) Investigate the use of density functional theory and
molecular dynamics simulations to identify nanoscale descriptors of the
underlying spatiotemporal events occurring within and at liquid crystal
interfaces (e.g., binding energies), ii) Establish feature extraction techniques
to identify suitable macroscale descriptors of liquid crystal optical signals
(e.g., optical response times and texture fields), and iii) Develop machine
learning techniques that enable the creation of multi-scale models capable of
mapping nanoscale and macroscale descriptors. These capabilities will be
combined in a reinforcement learning framework that will help guide experimental
data collection and identification of innovative liquid crystal system designs.
The ultimate engineering goal of the project is to design LC sensors to infer
exposure events involving carbon monoxide, ozone, and nitrogen and sulfur
oxide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.