* 1837780
* SCALE-CA Supporting Computing Access, Leadership, and Equity in California
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jane Margolis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,000,000.00

The University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) proposes a project, called
Supporting Computing Access, Leadership, and Equity in California (SCALE-CS),
that will create a Networked Improvement Community (NIC) to scale teacher
professional development, build the capacity of education leaders for local
implementation, and contribute to the research base on expanding equity-minded
computer science (CS) teaching and learning opportunities across the state.
California is the sixth largest economy in the world and a "majority minority"
state with over 60% of its six million public school students identifying as
students of color. The state's size and diversity require a systemic approach to
increasing CS opportunities for low-income students, LatinX, African American
and Native American students, English language learners, and students with
special needs. The focus of this project is to build leadership capacity to
ensure that equity is kept at the core of CS education expansion efforts and
those efforts involve interventions that are scalable and sustainable.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCALE-CA will use a three-pronged strategy that includes
interlocking interventions at the classroom, district and state levels. The NIC
will collect data that supports continuous improvement of the following
resources and activities: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Offer a prototype CSPDWeek
for teachers, counselors, and administrators including equity-minded curricula
and PD from Exploring Computer Science, Computer Science Principles, and
Counselors4Computing that can be replicated and customized at the regional
level.&lt;br/&gt;2) Design and develop a state-wide district implementation
toolkit and accompanying workshop for administrators to consider the equity
implications of district-wide CS education implementation. This will include the
co-design of equity indicators for implementation of CS education.&lt;br/&gt;3)
Collect evidence from the field that can be used to inform policy makers
regarding statewide expansion that responds to the challenges of scalability,
equity and long-term sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NIC founding
partners include 5 local education agencies (LEAs) representing the
demographics, geography and size of California's diverse school system --
Sacramento, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Riverside, and Compton -- along with the
Alliance for California Computing Education for Students and Schools (ACCESS,
which serves as the backbone organization for CSforCA), UCLA researchers and
American Institutes for Research (AIR). The NIC will expand to include 5
additional districts relatively new to CS education who will be mentored by the
founding 5 districts, potentially reaching a total of 650,000 high school
students. The LEAs will engage with SCALE-CA over a four year period learning
and sharing data-driven practices while collaboratively addressing challenges of
broadening participation in computing such as teacher preparation and support,
credentialing, developing college and career pathways, and
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.