* 1837931
* BIGDATA: F: Computationally Efficient Algorithms for Large-Scale Crossed Random Effects Models
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Art Owen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 08/31/2023
* USD 800,000.00

The problems of deciding what to buy, where to eat, which movie to watch, and so
forth are of enormous economic value to consumers, sellers, and the people
employed making those goods and services. Companies try to match people and
products using vast data sets recording purchases and opinions. Even with a
large data set it is a challenge to get reliable results. Measurements on the
same or similar products are correlated, as are measurements by the same or
similar people; however, correlated data yield less information than
uncorrelated data. Properly accounting for the correlation requires too much
computation, even on modern large computers, because the amount of computation
grows as a power of the size of the data. Ignoring those correlations will
produce an analysis that becomes overconfident and findings that are not
reproducible, leading to inefficiency and wasteful decisions. This project will
develop computationally efficient and reliable methods to handle data of this
kind as well as more complicated data structures. The results of this research
will benefit both industry and individuals making purchasing
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems described above are known as
crossed random effects in the statistical literature. The statistically proper
tools are linear mixed models and generalized linear mixed models. The usual
ways to fit linear mixed models have a cost that grows faster than linearly in
the size of the data set. The exponent is three halves. The same cost arises in
a Bayesian approach. With large modern data sets these costs are completely out
of reach. Some recent solutions work with the method of moments at a cost that
scales linearly with the data size. This project will develop a backfitting
method that starts with the moment method and then iterates towards the maximum
likelihood solution. It will also extend to the generalized linear mixed model
case in order to handle binary outcomes, such as whether the customer did or did
not buy a particular item. While crossed random effects are prevalent in
electronic commerce, they can arise in any setting where there are many to many
relationships connecting one sort of entity to another. Any place where we have
observations on the edges of a bipartite graph is a place where crossed random
effects may arise. This work will also include random slope
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.