* 1837305
* Addressing Issues of Equity and Engagement in Computer Science (CS) through a Research Practice Partnership: The CS Teaching and Learning Collaboratory
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Thu Nguyen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Rutgers University proposes a research practice partnership (RPP) -- the
Computer Science Teaching and Learning Collaboratory (CS-TLC) -- that brings
together computer science (CS) educators, educational researchers, and industry
partners to provide targeted, differentiated professional development (PD) and
ongoing virtual support to high school CS teachers and schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, CS-TLC will (a) develop and deliver high-
quality CS PD for teachers that enhances their ability to deliver instruction
that is responsive to their students' abilities, motivation, and cultural
backgrounds; (b) invest in building the capacity of school and district leaders
to plan, implement, manage, and evaluate programs and policies that can support
rigor and equity in CS education; and (c) engage in research and community-
building activities that can improve the performance, effectiveness, and
sustainability of the RPP as well as expand the size and diversity of its
membership. This proposal directly addresses the issue of equity in CS education
as the collaborating school districts serve many students who have been
traditionally underrepresented in CS including rural students, students living
in poverty, and Hispanic and African American students. By working in
collaboration with a network of teachers and administrators who serve these
students, the team well tailor activities and pedagogy of content to addresses
the different needs and experiences of students, providing them with
opportunities for rigorous and engaging CS
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.