* 1837922
* I-Corps: Non-Silane Coupling Agents
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Li Jia, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project 'Non-Silane
Coupling Agents' rests on the environmental advantage of a new technology
platform of coupling agents with potential performance advantages for tire
applications. The global tire and rubber companies consume $325 million in
silane coupling agents each year. About half of the weight of the silane
coupling agents (i.e., ~10 kTon or ~1-5% by weight of the tire) is converted to
ethanol and, if not captured, released into the atmosphere as a volatile organic
compound (VOC). By replacing the silane moiety in the conventional silane
coupling agents with a catechol functional group, the non-silane coupling (NSC)
technology completely eliminates the VOC generated during tire manufacture. If
other industrial sectors that currently use silanes also adopt the catechol-
based technology, ~50 kTon of annual VOC emission will be eliminated. The NSC
technology introduces a disruptive replacement for the mature silane-based
coupling technology, whose intellectual properties have long expired and whose
manufacture is exclusively based in Asia. The NSC technology will also level the
playingfield for US rubber and tire manufacturers against their competitors in
developing countries, where the environmental regulations are
relaxed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project 'Non-Silane Coupling Agents'
is a clean intellectual departure from the current silane-based technology,
taking advantage of the exceptional ability of the catechol motif to form
chelation on the surface of silica. The approach is fundamentally novel. The
technology is the outcome of a research program sponsored by the NSF I/UCRC
Center of Tire Research. The activities encompassed by the I-Corps Teams program
will allow us the deep dive necessary to truly understand the customer
opportunity, tailor the novel disruptive technology to meet these needs at an
early R&amp;D stage and enhances the probability of success. The R&amp;D and
business team bring together extensive experience working in the areas of rubber
chemistry, technology, marketing, and business
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.