* 1837920
* Workshop: Fostering gender and work-life inclusion for faculty in Business Schools and Understudied Contexts: An Organizational Science Lens - West Lafayette, IN - Oct 1-2, 2018
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ellen Kossek, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,604.00

Work-life demands are a critical barrier to the career advancement, inclusion,
and retention of women and minority faculty and research scientists; yet
implementation gaps have received less scientific attention than other equality
areas. Although some research has been conducted on these issues in STEM
(Science, Technology, Engineering, Math) departments, little knowledge has
transferred over to professional schools and other disciplines, which play a key
role in economic growth, such as in "big data" and entrepreneurial jobs.
Addressing these gaps, this workshop will gather interdisciplinary experts to
discuss the state of organizational science regarding gender equality, career
success, and work-life inclusion in business schools and understudied contexts.
The results of the workshop will help advance gender diversity, and women?s and
minorities' career success in universities, business, and society by identifying
scientific gaps, prioritizing studies; and addressing an under-researched
critical area of organizational science. The research agenda developed will
encourage future interdisciplinary scholarship on gender equality and work-life
inclusion that can help policymakers to engage in evidence-based practices. New
insights will be fostered on the organizational science regarding how to foster
more gender and work-life inclusive businesses and universities and will advance
scientific knowledge on strategies enhancing the attraction, advancement,
retention, and career longevity of women faculty; and addressing societal
inequality. The workshop products include a website and publications that will
be disseminated to the public and policymakers. This workshop addresses a
critical national policy area related to increasing labor market equality for
women and minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite growing scientific attention
to advancing women and minorities in universities generally, and in professional
schools specifically, the gender and related work-life inclusion picture remains
bleak. Addressing gender inequality requires greater dual scientific inquiry
into the science of organizations involving the more effective implementation of
formal work-life policies such as extending the tenure clock or dual career hire
incentives, and the creation of "work-life inclusive climates." A work-life
inclusive climate is defined as one where a faculty member would not feel s/he
would have to sacrifice their family and non-work identities in order to succeed
in the job role. The goals of this interdisciplinary workshop is (1) to assess
work-life and career issues and linkages to faculty gender inclusion and
diversity in business schools and understudied contexts from an organizational
science perspective; (2) to define the scientific terrain of faculty gender and
work-life inclusion and intersectionality linkages; (3) to increase knowledge of
the science of fostering gender, work-life inclusion, career success and
organizational change in understudied faculty contexts; and (4) to foster
interdisciplinary conversation with thought leaders, researchers and exemplary
key decision-makers in order to identify scientific antecedents, outcomes and
future research gaps. The results of the workshop will be widely distributed to
inform the public, researchers, university decision-makers, and policymakers
including a workshop website with thought paper abstracts and a workshop report;
national presentations, an open-access peer-reviewed
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.