* 1837646
* NNA: Collaborative Research: Navigating the New Arctic; Advanced Technology for Persistent, Long-Range, Autonomous Under-Ice Observation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Brian Williams, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 01/31/2023
* USD 65,000.00

This project advances the national health, prosperity, and welfare by developing
and demonstrating a new robotic technology for persistent, autonomous
observation of under-ice marine environments over large (&gt;1000 km) spatial
scales. The Arctic is undergoing rapid change, with dramatic shifts in the sea
ice cover and upper ocean. Monitoring and understanding these changes is
critical to improving our ability to predict ongoing change and variability on
seasonal to decadal timescales. Current observational capabilities are severely
hampered by the logistical challenges of operating in this environment -
observations are sparse, infrequent, and expensive to obtain, especially for the
under sea ice observations. As a low-cost, easy to deploy platform, the unmanned
underwater vehicle developed by this project will be transformative in our
capability for effective widespread and continuous monitoring of the Arctic
Ocean and its ice cover. Under-ice missions to monitor ice-ocean properties
across a retreating ice edge in spring will provide a proof of concept for a
unique capability to efficiently address a wide range of scientific questions
under the Arctic ice cover that can benefit from measurements over large spatial
and temporal scales. This project supports the NSF Big Idea on Navigating the
New Arctic. As a future component of an Arctic Observing Network, this
innovative technology can provide a critical cog in our ability to effectively
monitor the Arctic and inform management of increased Arctic commercial, mineral
extraction, and fisheries activities, as well as planning for resilience of
Arctic coastal communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and
demonstrate a highly modified autonomous underwater glider (AUG) equipped with a
dual-use active sonar for characterizing ice thickness distribution, as well as
for real-time terrain-aided navigation. This will enable under-ice observation
across extended distances without the need for external navigation aids such as
acoustic beacons. The AUG will also encompass an automated mission
planner/replanner wherein the vehicle can autonomously adapt its mission plan in
response to evolving mission goals and environmental or vehicle state changes,
such as data-driven adaptive sampling, changing surfacing locations based on ice
drift, or in the event of a component failure impeding vehicle progress and
decreasing expected range. Finally, a new variable thrust hybrid propulsion
system will be developed for operation in both shallow coastal waters with high
currents and deeper waters, enabling efficient transit from coastal to remote
science locations, while enabling the vehicle to conduct water column profiling,
as well as close-range ice survey. These characteristics will facilitate long-
term unattended under-ice observation with reduced cost and logistical
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.