* 1837515
* CPS: Medium: Information based Control of Cyber-Physical Systems operating in uncertain environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Nash
* 08/31/2023
* USD 896,030.00

Most cyber-physical systems have operated in comparatively benign environments,
often engineered to meet the needs of the system. For instance, in many settings
robots operate in closed-off environments in manufacturing. However, as these
systems are deployed in increasingly isolated environments (such as search and
rescue efforts, automation in surgical devices, collaborative manufacturing)
these robots will need to operate while reasoning about substantial uncertainty.
Moreover, actions taken by the system impact that uncertainty. The proposed work
will develop algorithms that enable a cyber-physical system to reason about what
actions it must take to manage its uncertainty. A simple example of this is
understanding that one must look behind and under things when searching for an
object. The goal of this project is to automate the process of managing that
uncertainty, however it arises. For instance, interacting with humans (such as
physically interacting with a person while assisting her motion, or tracking a
person during a search effort) involves uncertainty about what the person is
going to do. Enabling a robotic system to actively test a person's intent, and
then act according to her subsequent behavior, is key to the robot's ability to
be an effective partner. This essential point, that action on the part of a
cyber-physical system can be used to explicitly manage its understanding of the
world, is the core purpose of the proposed work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will leverage recent results in information-based real-time
nonlinear control. Specifically, ergodic control (controlling the ergodicity of
a trajectory relative to some reference distribution) enables one to specify an
objective using a density function to describe the desired spatial
characteristics for a trajectory. In the context of Hidden Markov Models (HMMs)
and Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes (POMDPs), this allows a
system to actively probe multiple states, simultaneously considering process
uncertainty, measurement uncertainty, and uncertainty associated with the Markov
process itself, even when the HMM is changing over time because of new states or
processes being introduced into the ambient environment. The apparent reason for
the effectiveness of ergodic control in the context of reactive planning under
uncertainty is that it always computes plans in the continuum, avoiding the
combinatoric complexity associated with POMDPs. Moreover, the needs of the
dynamic system and the cyber system are inter-related during physical motion, so
the work will additionally develop methods that maintain stability with respect
to both state and information. This inter-dependence creates a trade-off between
the physical ability to act and the computational load on the cyber system,
enabling a cyber-physical system to reduce the load on its cyber system through
physical action. The research will develop algorithms capable of real-time
information-based control in response to constantly changing data. One of the
motivating examples will be aerial vehicles tracking unknown numbers of targets
on the ground in a highly occluded environment such as a forest or an urban
setting. Additionally, a robotic arm, already used for assistive device
research, will be used to implement and assess the proposed
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.