* 1837224
* Developing board games and learning materials to support 5th grade students' connected learning around computational thinking and coding
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Victor Lee, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 12/31/2021
* USD 323,999.00

The nation is seeking ways to engage more students, particularly girls, in
computer science and computational thinking (CS/CT) in schools. Current models
often focus primarily on students working with computers at earlier ages and
teachers as the primary instructor. This project presents an alternative model
that allows for schools and districts to implement CS/CT education for all
students, particularly girls, by focusing on "unplugged" gameplay in school
libraries as a foundation for CS/CT lessons with computers in classrooms. The
objectives of this project are to iteratively codesign, develop, and pilot
instructional materials and sequences that deeply integrate CS/CT using board
games and coding into upper elementary school classrooms in ways that
specifically broaden participation, especially from girls. A unique feature of
the approach is that while the project will focus on 5th grade classrooms and
practicing teachers, the team will also mobilize a critical but often under-
appreciated resource within the district: the school library and its librarians.
The partnership between Utah State University and Cache County School District
will involve developing custom computer science board games. Students will play
these games in the school library and have synthesis lessons when they return to
class to build upon the computational ideas encountered. The tabletop games will
be in the library for students to play before and after school as well as during
recesses; they will also be available for checkout for students to take home.
The project team will also build digital versions of the board games that
students will then revise, remix, and share using block-based coding in Scratch.
This will enable students to further collaboratively explore, build upon, and
code CT ideas first foregrounded and experienced in the board game. This project
will also yield design principles related to tabletop board games for computer
science, classroom and school library collaborations, and how coding skills can
be better developed through encounters with both unplugged and screen-based
media. Results of the project will include a model of how a lower threshold form
of computer science education can be successfully enacted at the elementary
school level coupled with evidence on how it impacts student learning and
interest. More generally, findings will contribute to a wide range of efforts
intended to bring more girls into computer science. It raises awareness of the
many design and collaboration activities that researchers can pursue with
respect to a new model of unplugged computing with librarians who play key roles
in their schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds upon the field's
growing understanding of how gameplay experiences that go beyond the screen can
be utilized in service of computer science education. The two years of design
and research partnership to build tabletop board games, curriculum materials,
and digital instantiations will advance knowledge about the effective design of
resources for computer science education. It also utilizes school libraries and
organic tabletop gameplay activities that are popular among youth in those
spaces, thus drawing upon existing youth interests and the expertise and skill
of educational professionals who are often overlooked in discussions about new
curricula. The games will emphasize computational concepts such as algorithmic
thinking, sequences, loops, decomposition, and iteration foundational aspects of
computational thinking. Research questions that have been jointly developed and
will be addressed throughout this project include examining how transitioning
from tabletops to screens 1) can be effectively implemented by school librarians
and classroom teachers in ways that support classroom activities around
computational thinking and coding, and 2) can increase interest in and learning
of coding and computer science for elementary students, especially girls. The
project will collect data including: (1) transcripts and audio or video
recordings of clinical interviews, interviews, focus groups, and game sessions;
(2) surveys characterizing participant interest; and (3) observation notes of
the game play. The project team will analyze the qualitative data using open and
axial coding techniques to establish design scenarios and cases. The project
will use regression models to understand changes in students' interests,
intrinsic and career, with gender as a potentially mediating
covariate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.