* 1837583
* RoL: FELS:  EAGER:  Exploring the adaptive possibilities of 'redundancy' in a plant defense hormone signaling pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Eric Klavins, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Among the challenges facing global agriculture is the increased frequency of
crop disease outbreaks as a result of increasing global temperatures. Molecular-
genetic studies of the 20th century yielded benefits for agriculture, by showing
the roles that genes play in crop biology, guiding the hands of plant breeders
to produce better crops for farmers. In the 21st century far more information is
available about the DNA sequences of plant genomes, but this wealth of
information still requires experimental analysis to understand how it can be
used to proper effect in plant breeding. This project will develop new
approaches to studying sets of genes from the model plant Arabidopsis thaliana,
measuring the way that slight differences in individual gene functions can lead
to broad effects on plant health. Specifically, this project addresses genes
involved in the plant immune response to herbivores and microbial pests. Plant
immune responses are directed by a small set of chemical messengers, known as
plant hormones, and the genes studied in this project convert this chemical
message into an immune response. Conceptual approaches and laboratory methods
developed during this project may form the foundation for future work in crop
plants, providing material for plant breeders to develop disease resistant
crops.

This project combines approaches from systems and synthetic biology to
characterize functions of genetic regulatory networks composed of seemingly
redundant signaling components. Specifically the Jasmonic acid (JA) receptor
system of Arabidopsis thaliana will be studied. Mathematical models of JA
signaling based on differential equations will be used to guide design of
minimal synthetic systems in budding yeast able to convert JA inputs into
transcriptional outputs according to a range of predetermined transfer
functions. Using this information CRISPR-Cas9 based transcription factors will
be designed to target particular subsets of the JA network in planta. Guide RNA
target genes will be chosen to carry out specific changes to the emergent
properties of the system, as informed by our models. All this work relies on
first being able to generate experimental data to fit parameters for relevant
interaction strengths, and to do this the SynAg method, recently developed in
the Klavins lab, will be adapted and expanded. SynAg relies on yeast surface
display and next generation sequencing to quantify entire interaction networks
in a single experiment. By developing models of JA signaling and testing the
predictive power of these models for the construction of new genetic circuits in
yeast, or to perturb existing circuits in planta, this project aims to elucidate
the emergent properties encoded in apparent redundancy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.