* 1837985
* BIGDATA: F: Algorithms for Tensor-Based Modeling of Large Scale Structured Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Harm Derksen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,434,872.00

The project aims to develop efficient algorithms for big data applications by
exploiting its rich structure. Big data often contains higher-dimensional
arrays. One dimensional arrays are vectors and two dimensional arrays are
matrices. Arrays of dimension three or more are called tensors and have a
complex structure. Some of the challenges that the research team will address
are noise removal, recovery of missing data by inference and data size reduction
by distilling relevant information. The resulting methods will be applied to
early detection of sepsis, which contributes to the death of 200,000 people in
the United States every year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most algorithms for low rank
structured tensors are based on the Canonical Polyadic decomposition (also known
as CP, Parafac or Candecomp). These algorithms may converge slowly, are
numerically unstable and are difficult to scale to big data. The theoretical
framework for tensor decompositions that is used is based on an algebraic
graphical calculus that utilizes colored Brauer diagrams to obtain explicit
formulas. The graphical calculus will also be used to give accurate estimates
for the computational and memory complexity of these algorithms. The
investigators will design efficient, numerically stable and computationally
feasible algorithms for crucial tensor operations that are widely applicable to
big data applications. Specifically, the project isexpected to create fast,
scalable and reliable algorithms for tensor analysis, and apply them to crucial
big data tasks including noise removal, dimension reduction, imputation of
missing data and classification in a variety of applications with structured
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.