* 1837915
* PEPIG: Empowering Academic Partnership with Federal Safety and Security Priorities
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Renata Rawlings-Goss, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2022
* USD 120,650.00

There is a growing shortage of people with data science expertise working in
federal agencies. This project will help overcome this problem, by providing
fellowship opportunities to faculty, postdocs, research scientist, graduate
student, and senior undergraduates to carry out research in data science
priority areas within the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). Participant
will be co-located with DHS mentors and staff. The program broadly benefits the
data ecosystem by serving as a backbone for research collaboration on pressing
United states safety and security concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this program are to support academics in developing industry and government
relationships for research collaboration and career success; prepare students
for the workforce landscape in data science, computing, and Big Data research;
and create a diverse Big Data pipeline from university research through to real-
world impact in government service. The proposed program is modeled after the
innovative and successful Big Data Regional Innovation South Hub's Program to
Empower Partnerships with Industry and Government (PEPI-G)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.