* 1837828
* I-Corps:  Advanced Biofabrication of Vascular Tissue Constructs
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Jordan Miller, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will provide the
pharmaceutical industry with a predictive biological assay for drug screening to
improve the quality of human life. Currently, testing the toxicity of new drug
compounds on cultured cells and in animals has not been able to predict the
response in human patients, leading to significant consequences for human
patients and the pharmaceutical development process. One potential solution is
so-called ?lab-on-a-chip? devices which are small devices that can be used to
work with human cells in a laboratory testing environment. However, these
devices are inherently limited and result in inaccurate drug dose response
measurements due to the material properties of the silicone chambers within
which cells are cultured. The adoption of advanced 3D cell culture environments
which are composed of water-based materials and containing architectural
features of normal tissue, such as multiple cell types and perfusable blood
vessels, will enable improved predictive toxicological screening of new drug
candidates. A reduced time and cost of testing compounds will be advantageous
for the pharmaceutical market, while the expected improved predictive response
in human patients is expected to usher in a new paradigm for human therapies.
Furthermore, this project has the potential to scale 3D cell culture toward
therapeutic value for human implantation to repair or replace damaged tissues
and organs.

This I-Corps project will explore commercial opportunities of our platform 3D
cell culture system. This project is based on years of hardware, biomaterial,
and tissue design development and validation for fabrication of advanced cell
culture systems via 3D printing. We have demonstrated generation of various
tissue models for lung, liver, and bone tissue applications and demonstrated
long-term survival and function of human cells. The pursued approach for
generating tissues has a high commercial potential by filling an essential need
in preclinical drug compound testing for improved predictive tissue models.
Additionally, utility of this technology can span into other unexplored markets
for generation of complex tissue structures. Through exploration of
commercialization routes for this innovation during the I-Corps project, we
propose to investigate and validate new and emerging markets that could best
utilize our platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.