* 1837499
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Human-on-the-Loop Control for Smart Ultrasound Imaging
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Wilkins Aquino, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2022
* USD 599,995.00

Due to low operating cost and patient safety, ultrasound is widely accepted as
one of the best forms of medical imaging compared to similar technologies, such
as Computer Tomography (CT) scans or Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). Still,
there can be large variability in image quality obtained by different experts
imaging the same patient, which can affect successful diagnosis and patient
treatment. This problem becomes even more pronounced across patients.
Consequently, to decrease this variability this project will develop imaging
techniques that are not passive but are based on real-time ultrasound beam
control and adaptation, while facilitating best use of operator expertise to
obtain the most informative images. Such new active ultrasound systems, where
expert users with varying levels of training interact with a smart ultrasound
device to improve medical imaging and facilitate diagnosis, will provide
significant performance gains compared to present systems that are only manually
controlled. This project will also have a significant societal impact in
accurate, safe, and cost-effective diagnosis of many medical conditions, such as
cancers or liver fibrosis. For instance, the use of such systems for breast
cancer diagnosis will significantly reduce the number of unnecessary biopsies,
which currently cost more than $1 billion annually in the US alone. At the same
time this technology can enable a variety of other imaging applications that
rely on different forms of ultrasound, such as mapping of the heart chambers
using Doppler ultrasound or identifying the mechanical properties of materials
in structures for failure prognosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the goal
of this project is the development of an active ultrasound system where user
expertise is employed to refine the control process, while autonomous elasticity
(or viscoelasticity) mapping improves image quality and allows human operator to
best use their skills for both optimization and diagnosis. The project's
research products include: (i) data fusion techniques for ultrasound
elastography; (ii) methods for interactive ultrasound elastography; and (iii)
framework for safe and efficient device implementation. The ultrasound system
will be validated on a test-bed based on suitable laboratory phantoms and real-
time control of existing ultrasound devices. Investigators will focus on the
unique aspects of this novel paradigm that, compared to existing methods,
include: (1) new active, user-machine, imaging techniques improving on the
characterization of the mechanical properties of tissue; and (2) the systematic
transition of algorithms and user interfaces to embedded computers for safe
execution by the device. This requires overcoming intellectual challenges
related to the integration of visco-elastography mapping and human-on-the-loop
ultrasound control, as well as synthesis of new theoretical results drawing from
computational mechanics, controls and estimation, and embedded systems design.
The project also has extensive education and outreach components, including
curriculum development focused on design of safety-critical medical cyber-
physical systems that exhibit highly dynamical system behaviors and plant
uncertainty, human interactions, and the need for real-time implementation. The
outreach component of this project will also improve the pre-college students'
awareness of the potential and attractiveness of a research and engineering
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.