* 1837359
* CPS: Small: Collaborative Research: CYDER: CYbersecure Distribution systems with power Electronically interfaced Renewables
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Chen-Ching Liu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2022
* USD 220,000.00

The research goal of this project is to design a comprehensive methodology for
cybersecurity monitoring and mitigation of the electric power distribution
system with a multitude of dynamical devices that are prone to cyberattacks as
well as power electronically interfaced renewable generation units. The power
electronics interfaces complicate the control and operation of the distribution
system because of their sensitivity to undesired disturbances. By promoting a
more secure power system, this work helps increase the resiliency of the
distribution system to extreme events, which is in line with the U.S. national
priorities. Moreover, this work promotes teaching and learning by (i) educating
and training graduate students through several programs including a week-long
practicum hosted at an industry site; (ii) disseminating the results of our work
via conference presentations and publications; and (iii) introducing significant
updates in the syllabi of two courses. This work also increases participation of
underrepresented minorities via active recruitment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching research goal of this project is to design a comprehensive
methodology for cybersecurity monitoring and mitigation in systems with a
multitude of dynamical devices that are prone to cyberattacks. To demonstrate
the performance of our proposed algorithms, we study their application for an
electric power distribution system as a critical cyberinfrastructure, which
includes substations, feeder devices, and smart meters. The electric power
grid's growing dependency on information and communication technology (ICT)
significantly increases its vulnerability to cyber attacks. A major area of
concern is the security of supervisory control and data acquisition (SCADA)
systems that the power grids rely upon for monitoring and control functions. To
address these challenges, our specific objectives are (i) detection of
cyberthreats on the distribution system, (ii) mitigation of and response to
cyberintrusions especially with power electronically interfaced renewables via
multiagent-based algorithms as well as trajectory shaping and frequency
regulation strategies, and (iii) preparing the next generation of cyber-aware
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.