* 1837280
* Equitable Computer Science Implementation in All New York City (NYC) Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* June Mark, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,576,088.00

The Education Development Center (EDC) and the New York City (NYC) Department of
Education (NYCDOE) propose a research-practice partnership (RPP) to enhance and
study the implementation of Advanced Placement(R) Computer Science Principles
(AP CSP) courses in low-performing NYC high schools. This partnership will build
on the prior Beauty and Joy of Computing in New York City project, a partnership
in which EDC and the University of California Berkeley created, tested, and
refined the Beauty and Joy of Computing (BJC) high school AP CSP course. In that
project, NYCDOE partnered with EDC and UCB to recruit and train more than 100
BJC teachers from a demographically representative set of NYC high schools. This
new project focuses more intentionally on assisting low-performing NYC schools
in implementing and sustaining engaging AP CSP courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team of New York City public school administrators and classroom
teachers will collaborate with researchers, curriculum developers, and
professional learning and support specialists with the goal of improving Black
and Latino/a student participation, learning, and engagement in computer science
(CS). Methodologically, a Design-Based Implementation Research (DBIR) approach
will be employed to address three overarching research
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.What organizational conditions, processes, and
supports are associated with improved participation by Black and Latino/a
students in CS, as measured by the diversity of students enrolling in CS
courses? &lt;br/&gt;2. What kinds of project-based instructional strategies,
materials, and interventions are associated with improved student learning in
UTeach CS Principles among Black and Latino/a students, as measured by student
scores on projects according to standard project rubrics and unit and AP exam
scores?&lt;br/&gt;3. What kinds of non-cognitive approaches (e.g., teacher
messaging, classroom routines, recruitment strategies, etc.) are associated with
improved engagement and motivation by Black and Latino/a students in UTeach CS
Principles and retention in CS based on enrollment in following CS
courses?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will advance what is known about
effective organizational conditions, as well as instructional interventions to
promote participation, engagement, and learning across diverse groups of
students, among Black and Latino/a students in
particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.