* 1837518
* TWC: Small: Collaborative: Wearable Authentication Solutions for Ubiquitous and Personal Touch-enabled Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Tam Vu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 09/30/2018
* USD 91,062.00

This project for Wearable Authentication Solutions for Ubiquitous and Personal
Touch-Enabled Devices (WASUP) studies and designs models and techniques to
identify, authenticate, and audit touches on touch-sensing devices using a small
wearable token. The token, such as a bracelet or ring, embeds a security code in
the capacitive touch signature of a user, which is detected with the existing
capacitive sensors used in many touch screens. This offers a number of distinct
and desirable properties. First, the code is clearly associated with a touch,
even if multiple potential users are nearby. Second, one can expect attacks on
the communication channel to be more difficult to execute, since virtually no
over-the-air signal propagation is involved. Owing to these unique security
properties, this project supports a broad range of applications with significant
societal impact. For example, a security token based on this proposed technology
could lead to authentication solutions that progressively or continuously
authorize users and are more robust than current techniques such as PIN codes,
Bluetooth, and Near Field Communications (NFC). The underlying primitives of
WASUP could also allow unobservable and direct contact communication, for
example in tactical scenarios, when the detection of communication can
compromise mission security. Given the significantly growing use of capacitive-
touch interaction, there exists great potential for widespread applications of
these techniques. The WASUP project will also include a variety of exciting and
appealing educational activities involving K-12 and undergraduate students, such
as developing applications that make use of WASUP through research internship
programs. The team will first model the generation, propagation, and detection
of capacitive touch communication signals and explore relevant design trade-
offs. The expected outcomes include the environment model, through-body signal
propagation model, and touch propagation time model, which will provide the
foundational understandings of the capabilities and limitations of capacitive
touch communication channel. Informed by these models, the team will investigate
design alternatives of the hardware transmitter and the corresponding receiver
software in order to achieve the data rates necessary for many real-world
authentication and identification scenarios. In the third thrust, the
researchers propose to design, analyze, implement, and evaluate WASUP-based
security devices and protocols for compelling and practical use cases. The team
plans to bootstrap the WASUP ecosystem by demonstrating practical wearable
hardware tokens with sample applications on current off-the-shelf devices.