* 1837806
* NNA: AON: ASSP: Facilitating increased engagement between the research communities of Greenland and the U.S.: Nuuk, Greenland - August 27-28, 2018
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Ross Virginia, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Mercer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 47,957.00

Greenland is an important research site for scientists from around the world.
Because of its unique physical environment and geographic location between North
America and Europe, the United States has a significant research presence in
Greenland. This presence provides opportunities to strengthen bilateral
cooperation with the research community of Greenland. At the ''Facilitating
Engagement'' workshop leading Arctic researchers from the U.S. and Greenland
will discuss and develop guidelines and frameworks for cooperative work,
including knowledge co-production, community engagement, Indigenous
perspectives, and student training and education. This workshop has the
potential to build the national capacity of the U.S. for conducting ethical
research in domestic and international locations, particularly when work is
undertaken in Indigenous homelands. Outcomes also include an international and
diverse network of Indigenous and non-indigenous scientists from the U.S. and
Greenland. This will facilitate cross-cultural and interdisciplinary Arctic
research that includes Indigenous perspectives and meets the needs of Arctic
communities at home and abroad. This workshop aligns with NSF's Strategic
Objective 1.2: Advance the Practice of Research, which states ''NSF will promote
a research culture that is broadly inclusive in its demography and range of
intellectual ideas,...is globally engaged, with increased opportunities for
exchanging ideas and collaborating on an international scale. NSF will increase
opportunities for broadening the training of U.S. graduate students and early-
career researchers through international exchanges and partnerships with
industry.''&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, many U.S. scientists pursue a
Western model of research, for which they conduct science but have little, if
any, contact with Greenlandic researchers and communities. To explore a new
model for research in Greenland, 20-24 researcher from the U.S. and Greenland
will meet for two days in Nuuk, Greenland to co-develop a bilateral model for
collaborative research, outreach, and education that involves: 1) knowledge co-
production by members of the U.S. and Greenlandic research communities and 2)
increased community engagement and student education. Participants will
represent a range of research disciplines, experiences, and backgrounds. The
workshop will include presentations and discussions about research
infrastructure in Greenland and U.S. government agency support of Arctic
research. Participants will share and discuss personal experiences within the
workshop topics. In addition to forming a bilateral network of researchers who
have an interest in future collaborations, these activities will lead to a
report that includes a set of recommendations from the U.S. and Greenlandic
research communities about priorities and needs for increased research,
outreach, and education collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.