* 1837627
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Security vs. Privacy in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Alvaro Cardenas, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2019
* USD 634,818.00

This research examines the scientific foundations for modeling security and
privacy trade-offs in cyber-physical systems, focusing in particular on settings
where privacy-protection technologies might be abused by malicious parties to
hide their attacks. The goal is to provide both security and privacy guarantees
for a variety of cyber-physical systems including intelligent transportation
systems, smart energy, and autonomous vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Privacy and
security in cyber-physical systems have been studied independently before, but
often they have not been addressed jointly. This project will study privacy-
protection mechanisms such as differential privacy, and explore how using such
mechanisms can affect the state-of-art integrity and attack-detection
mechanisms. The project will also develop novel defenses including: 1)
Identifying fundamental trade-offs between privacy and security based
theoretical analyses of privacy, control theory, and optimization methods, with
applications such as traffic-density estimation and smart grids; 2)
incorporating game-theoretic considerations in analyzing adversarial strategies;
and 3) Proposing new privacy-preserving techniques applicable in cyber-physical
systems and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.