* 1837891
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Ozone-Ecosystem Controls and Feedbacks across Landscapes through Leaf- and Canopy-Scale Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Manuel Lerdau, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 10/31/2022
* USD 366,619.00

This research will help to develop a better understanding of the processes that
influence tropospheric ozone variability in forested regions. New analytical
tools will be used to collect comprehensive observations of the atmosphere-
canopy exchange of gases and the associated ecological response to ozone. The
interdisciplinary team of scientists who are leading this effort have expertise
in atmospheric chemistry, landscape and organismal ecology, and land-atmosphere
exchange, as well as broad experimental expertise in advanced instrumentation
design and use in field and laboratory settings. The results of this project
have the potential to improve air quality modeling by better representing
ecosystem feedbacks to ozone pollution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of
scientists plan to collect two years of continuous data at the Virginia Forest
Laboratory (VFL) in central Virginia, coupling ozone flux measurements with
observations of canopy-level photosynthesis by solar induced fluorescence (SIF),
isomer-resolved ozone-reactive biogenic organic compounds (BVOCs), and critical
ecosystem parameters of canopy conductance and carbon dioxide exchange. These
same variables will be measured by analogous instrumentation in leaf-scale
laboratory experiments using plant species prominent at the VFL under the range
of typical local environmental conditions, in which perturbations will be
induced to test for ecosystem feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three
hypotheses to be tested are: (1) Interactions between ozone flux to the canopy
and the SIF technique, that directly detects fluorescence of chlorophyll
molecules, are directly measurable, are independent from interactions between
ozone flux and stomatal conductance and have a distinguishable effect on the
ozone lifetime; (2) Ozone flux to the canopy is often controlled by sparsely
measured but highly reactive BVOCs. Variability in ozone flux to the canopy
caused by these BVOCs can be quantified by their molecular identities and
concentrations; (3): Uptake of ozone by plants leads to one or more of 3
detectable and significant ozone-ecosystem feedbacks: (a) ozone uptake reduces
stomatal conductance, leading to longer ozone lifetimes against plant uptake;
(b) ozone uptake reduces canopy BVOC concentrations by impairing photosynthesis,
leading to longer ozone lifetimes against within-canopy chemical oxidation; and
(c) ozone uptake enhances BVOC emissions, leading to shorter ozone lifetimes
against within-canopy chemical oxidation. The results of this research are
expected to produce new observational constraints on relationships between
atmospheric composition and ecosystem function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.