* 1837476
* Adapt, Implement and Research at Nebraska: A Statewide Implementation Study of a Researcher-Practitioner Partnership for K-8 Computer Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Leen-Kiat Soh, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2023
* USD 2,000,000.00

This project extends a successful researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP)
between the University of Nebraska-Lincoln and the Lincoln Public Schools to
other school districts in Nebraska. The primary goal is to study how a computer
science (CS) curriculum for K-8 students is adopted by school districts with
different strengths and challenges to broaden participation in computing. The
project will also develop instructional capacity for K-8 CS education with
diverse learners. The specific aims are to support new, partner districts by 1)
adapting and implementing the existing CS curriculum, learning progression
models, and assessment metrics for their needs; 2) customize the current
professional development model to their educators; (3) create a teacher virtual
network support model for ongoing logistical and content support; and 4) adapt,
develop, and validate instruments to measure CS knowledge and self-
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted as part of a
research-focused networked improvement community (NIC) grounded in design-based
research. During the project's iterations, the researchers will study 1) how the
K-8 curriculum/resources implemented in diverse partner districts, and 2) how
useful are the curricula and resources in supporting teacher and students CS
knowledge, attitudes, and practices. The studies will pay particular attention
to the similarities and differences that occur between various subgroups (i.e.,
underrepresented minorities, male/female). The project will result in case
studies of rural, highly underrepresented, and Native American schools that
guide other states and districts seeking to infuse computer science into K-8
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.