* 1837779
* CPS: Small: Novel Algorithmic Techniques for Drone Flight Planning on a Large Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Sven Koenig, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Good algorithmic foundations for flight planning on the scale required for
managing dense urban drone traffic we can expect to see in the future are
currently still missing. This project provides prototype algorithms for managing
this dense drone traffic. The project develops a concept for a coordination
system that is able to find collision-free paths for a large number of flying
unmanned air vehicles of different size and capability. It uses a hierarchical
approach, combining centralized and local coordination, to manage complexity for
a large-scale problem. The approach developed here can scale up to handle
thousands of drones and lead to conflict free flight. It demonstrates the
concept using mixed-reality simulations and using existing helicopter-like
robots on a smaller scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current multi-robot trajectory-
planning algorithms typically operate on a single level (which limits their
scalability) and assume holonomic robots that can hover motionlessly (which
limits their applicability). The core of the project is the development of a
novel hierarchical system that addresses these limitations, combining
centralized methods with a divide-and-conquer approach. The hierarchical
approach allows the system to negotiate collision-free trajectories on a local
level, while ensuring that robots complete their tasks on the global level.
Additional research integrates several speed-up techniques into the hierarchical
system and generalizes its functionality, for example, to accommodate robots of
different priorities (such as drones that deliver blood to hospitals). The
research involves not only graduate but also undergraduate students and trains
them in cross-disciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.