* 1837867
* I-Corps Teams: Dynamically Tunable Reversible Dry Adhesives for Soft Grasping
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Wanliang Shan, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project, based on
robotic gripping systems, is multifaceted and has societal, economic, and
educational potential. From a societal and economic standpoint, it contributes
to addressing the national need for increased automation in multiple application
domains, including advanced manufacturing, agriculture such as fruit picking, as
well as rehabilitation and elderly care of an aging population in the US. The
soft grasping approach proposed to be commercialized here is based on a recently
patented dynamically tunable reversible dry adhesion technology, which can help
resolve pain points in electronics assembly and advanced manufacturing processes
such as irregular-shaped parts manipulation on automotive assembly lines. The
commercialization potential is estimated to be on the order of one billion
dollars. From an educational standpoint, this project not only helps train the
senior personnel on the project about entrepreneurship, but also helps instill
entrepreneurship principles and practices among students and researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to identify the technical
challenges faced by the industry on robotic gripping systems, which could help
formulate ensuing application-driven fundamental problems pertaining to soft
grasping. Soft grasping of objects with various shapes and stiffness has been a
longstanding challenge in the robotics field. The approach proposed here is a
spinoff of an ongoing NSF project, where novel smart materials and adhesion
mechanics are integrated to realize a "core-shell" composite structure featured
with dynamically tunable reversible dry adhesion. By modulating the stiffness of
the "core" made of smart materials, the manner in which force is distributed to
the interface between the composite and the adhered object is altered, and as a
result, the effective adhesion strength of the adhered interface is
changed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.