* 1837680
* CPS: Small: Scalable and safe control synthesis for systems with symmetries
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Necmiye Ozay, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,997.00

Complex engineered systems that can adapt to their environments while
maintaining safety guarantees are crucial in many applications including
Internet-of-Things, transportation, and electric power systems. The primary
objective of this project is to develop a scalable design methodology to control
very large collections of systems to achieve common objectives despite cyber and
physical constraints. As an application, the electric load control problem, in
which the goal is to coordinate the power consumption of thousands of small
electric loads like air conditioners and refrigerators to help the grid balance
supply and demand without inconveniencing electricity consumers and while
respecting the physical limitations of the power distribution network, will be
considered. The research results will support the integration of more wind and
solar power, improving the grid's environmental and health impacts. Education
and outreach activities will involve K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students
along with stakeholders from local power companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key
characteristics of the problems considered are a large number of dynamically
almost decoupled systems. Each system has their local requirements and
constraints and they are coupled through requirements about their collective
behavior. A bi-level control architecture will be developed that can handle soft
performance requirements and allow adaptability at the upper-level, and that
guarantees the satisfaction of hard safety requirements at the lower-level. The
lower-level will exploit structural properties symmetries of the systems and
requirements, in particular, permutation invariance, to enable highly scalable
synthesis methods to ensure safety. The upper-level will leverage
adaptation/learning to improve system performance when control inputs are
overridden for the purpose of safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.