* 1837146
* CPS: Small: Mechanical Vibration Based Prognostic Monitoring of Machinery Health with Sub-millisecond Accuracy Using Backscatter Signals
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Guoming Zhu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2021
* USD 87,976.00

This project aims to develop non-intrusive and universal vibration sensing
schemes that can detect the abnormal vibrations of a running machine. Towards
this goal, the researchers propose a system that first uses the backscatter
signals in commercial off the shelf RFID systems to accurately measure machine
vibrations, and then uses machine learning and signal processing techniques to
detect abnormal machine vibration patterns so that machine operators can be
alerted to take actions before the machine fails. This project represents an
emerging space driving new CPS and Internet of Things concepts for machinery
safety. It can be used for the prognostic monitoring of not only indoor
machines, but also outdoor appliances and civil infrastructures, such as
drilling system monitoring, pumping system monitoring, pipeline system
monitoring, and bridge monitoring. The proposed system is expected to impact
manufacturing and economy. This project will bridge the communities between
Computer Science and Mechanical Engineering; and foster interaction and
communication among them. It will also facilitate the effort of the researchers
on attracting and mentoring undergraduate students and underrepresented graduate
students in research. Furthermore, the researchers will integrate the research
results from this project into both undergraduate and graduate curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two key technical objectives: to develop
vibration measurement schemes using RFID systems and to develop abnormal
vibration pattern recognition schemes based on the measured vibration signals.
For vibration sensing, the basic idea is to measure the machine vibrations
through random and low-frequency readings of the tag using the RFID reader,
where each reading is viewed as one sampling of the vibration. For abnormal
vibration pattern detection, the basic idea is to build base line models based
on the measured vibration readings and then classify real time vibration
readings of a running machine as being either normal or abnormal. The proposed
system would have several advantages over prior art in machine health monitoring
, e.g., nonintrusive, inexpensive, accurate, and easily deployable including in
non-line-of-sight scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.