* 1837917
* Adaptive Training of Representational Flexibility for Adolescents with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Fengfeng Ke, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,310.00

Cognitive representational flexibility is the ability to use multiple external
representations, switch flexibly between them, and select or generate
appropriate representations for particular tasks. This cognitive capability is
critical for the practices of computational thinking and problem solving across
STEM and computing domains. However, the development and enactment of
representational flexibility in cognitive processes is effortful and demanding
for most learners, but particularly so for students with autism spectrum
disorder (ASD). Evidence suggests that students with ASD enrolling in colleges
are more likely than members of the general population or other disability
groups to gravitate toward STEM-related majors, but their need for training in
representational flexibility has been identified as a barrier to their college
enrollment. This project aims to study individualized training of
representational flexibility for STEM and computational reasoning and problem
solving among adolescents with ASD, hence addressing a significant barrier to
college enrollment of this learner group who otherwise have the potential to
become future sources of STEM talent. Researchers will utilize 3D virtual
reality (VR) with body sensory technologies to create an adaptive,
representational flexibility training program that helps participants learn how
to design and code simulations and games in a 3D virtual-reality context. This
program, called Force and Motion-Adaptive Representation (FM-AR), will
facilitate participants' ability to select, connect, convert, and construct
multimodal representations of physics and mathematics problems while practicing
and experimenting with computational concepts during VR-based simulation design
and programming. As a result of the powerful innovation and application of
computing in STEM disciplines, the STEM+C program supports research and
development of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the
integration of computing within STEM teaching and learning for preK-12 students
in both formal and informal settings. This interdisciplinary project will
advance the research and practice of STEM+Computing education by investigating
representational flexibility as the critical threshold for integrating
computational thinking in and across STEM domains, and specifying the conditions
that lead to the development and manifestation of representational flexibility,
especially for learners with special needs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Via a design-
based, mixed-method research of the computational behaviors of adolescents with
ASD and their learning outcomes in the FM-AR program, the following research
questions will be investigated: 1. What representational practices will
adolescents with ASD implement during FM-AR-supported simulation design and
programming? 2. How and under what circumstances will adolescents with ASD
demonstrate representational flexibility for computational reasoning and
scientific/mathematical problem solving? 3. How will adolescents with ASD
interact with adaptive representational-practice support in FM-AR? What is the
effect of the adaptive support on participants? development of representational
flexibility during physics- and math-related computational practices?
Researchers will study the above research questions with (a) individualized
selection and presentation of representational-practice tasks in variant types
and flexibility demands; (b) representational performance assessment via real-
time learner data mining and modeling; and (c) assessment-driven cues and
prompts to scaffold representation interpretation, comparison, coordination, and
adaptation during physics- and mathematics-related computational practices. This
project aims to generate a conceptual and design framework governing the design
and research of a STEM+Computing learning environment that scaffolds
representational flexibility for a heterogeneous learner
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.