* 1837687
* UTeach and NYC: A Design Research Partnership to Expand and Improve High School Computer Science Education for Underrepresented Urban Youth
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Anthony Petrosino, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2023
* USD 999,953.00

The University of Texas Austin (UT Austin) proposes a research-practitioner
partnership (RPP) between and across six New York City public school districts
to examine the degree to which co-design of curriculum, instructional practices,
and teacher supports can build organizational capacity to support equitable
computer science (CS) teaching and learning as called for by the CSforAll
national movement. The project builds on the prior work of the UTeach Computer
Science Program) which included creation of the UTeach CS Principle course and
associated teacher professional development (PD). This work focuses on remaining
questions about the organizational conditions and instructional practices that
encourage broad student participation in CS, looking at underrepresented urban
youth in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team of New York City
public school administrators and classroom teachers will collaborate with
researchers, curriculum developers, and professional learning and support
specialists with the goal of improving Black and Latino/a student participation,
learning, and engagement in CS. Methodologically, a Design-Based Implementation
Research (DBIR) approach will be employed to address three overarching research
questions:&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1. What organizational conditions, processes,
and supports are associated with improved participation by Black and Latino/a
students in CS, as measured by the diversity of students enrolling in CS
courses? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. What kinds of project-based instructional
strategies, materials, and interventions are associated with improved student
learning in UTeach CS Principles among Black and Latino/a students, as measured
by student scores on projects according to standard project rubrics and unit and
Advanced Placement (AP) exam scores?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. What kinds of non-
cognitive approaches (e.g., teacher messaging, classroom routines, recruitment
strategies, etc.) are associated with improved engagement and motivation by
Black and Latino/a students in UTeach CS Principles and retention in CS based on
enrollment in following CS courses?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance will contribute to knowledge about effective organizational conditions,
as well as instructional interventions to promote participation, engagement, and
learning across diverse groups of students in AP CS Principles, the professional
learning and support necessary to prepare teachers with diverse content
backgrounds to teach CS, and the strategies employed to address problems of
practice through collaborative, iterative design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.