* 1837489
* Increasing Urban Youth Participation in Computing through Mentorship and Coding Resources
* EHR,DRL
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* James Geller, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 02/28/2022
* USD 296,339.00

Engaging underrepresented and underserved students in computer science is an
important goal for the development of the future workforce. The primary goal of
this project is to create a sustainable ecosystem of young programmers
(primarily middle school students), mentors, and teachers in the city of Newark,
NJ. To achieve such an ecosystem, the project will: 1) Provide computing
education to underrepresented and underserved middle school students; 2) Involve
parents in and educate them about the importance of computational thinking and
computing for their children's education, career, and future life; 3) Develop
and maintain mentor-mentee relationships in coding; 4) Teach practicing (and
potential future) teachers introductory programming concepts and how to pass
them on; and 5) Fully involve teachers in the research problem-solving cycle. To
accomplish these tasks, the project will run 10-week Saturday programs for
middle school students each semester at participating middle school campuses.
Before the start of the program, the project will have a parents' night at a
local middle school to educate parents about the program, computing, and why
their children should participate in the program. Each Saturday will consist of
a 7-hour day, split into a morning session (building a website with HTML and
CSS) and an afternoon session (learning text and block programming languages).
Every other week, a guest speaker from the community will give a brief
presentation of her/his career and how it was advanced by computing. Each class
will have a minimum of one teacher from the middle school and a minimum of two
university students who will co-teach the class and learn from each other. Once
the students have finished their 10-week program, the project will invite them
to join the Coding House of the Urban League of Essex County, a designated space
in central Newark for local K-8 and university students to continue with their
coding activities. Here, the students can learn from each other, work on
projects, and develop mentor/mentee relationships. This research and development
project has the potential to inform other communities about integrating
computing education into their schools, involving parents, providing
opportunities for practicing teachers to learn about computing topics, and
giving university students practical teaching experience (who may also become
interested in becoming alternate path K-8 teachers themselves). This project is
supported by the Information Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
and Computer Science for All programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
contribute new insights into parental motivation/education, how to effectively
train practicing teachers in computational thinking, how to facilitate the entry
of university student co-teachers into the teaching profession (if they wish),
and how to create an ecosystem to keep students engaged with programming through
a community coding space. The project will address the following research
questions: What are the specific needs of our community's parents (or
guardians), and how can the project assist them to help their children succeed?
How can the project train practicing (and potential future) teachers in a non-
invasive, safe environment? How can middle school teachers formulate pedagogical
content knowledge targeted towards computing in the context of an equitable
Research-Practice Partnership with the project team? How can the project provide
and prepare accessible, relatable, and effective near-peer mentors and role-
models who are knowledgably in computing to NJ middle school students? Data will
primarily consist of: responses from questionnaires; written notes from Parents'
Night events, teacher interviews, and teacher observations; attendance records
from Newark Kids Code's participating middle schools; visitor logs from the
Urban League (Parents' Night events and Coding House participation); server logs
from Gidget website and online repositories of Newark Kids Code Student Scratch
and code.org projects. The project will use pre-post analysis and coding of
qualitative data to describe the impacts of the
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.