* 1837940
* RoL:FELS:EAGER: Linking physiology, morphology, and genomics to investigate adaption to rapid environmental change
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Kristen Ruegg, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 311,873.00

Understanding the link between genetics, traits, and the environment will help
predict how organisms respond to long-term changes in their environment. Many
organisms are adapted to their local environments and advances in DNA sequencing
have allowed the discovery of genes responsible for these adaptations. The
migratory songbird, Willow Flycatcher, is broadly distributed across the US
during the summer breeding season and therefore different populations occupy
very different climates. An important example is the endangered Southwestern
Willow Flycatcher, which occupies regions of the southwest US that experience
intense heatwaves. This project will examine the question: How do Willow
Flycatchers inhabiting different regions adapt to different climates? By
measuring differences in heat tolerance and body shape and coupling these
measurements with DNA sequencing, the project will provide important information
about how these birds are adapted to their current environments as well as how
they might respond in the future. The project will broadly impact society via
public outreach and the training of young
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Standing genetic variation associated with
climate has now been observed in a wide range of taxa, suggesting that
adaptation could mitigate some negative effects of climate. The major knowledge
gaps in understanding the evolutionary response to climate are: which traits are
under selection and how will standing genetic variation change over time? In
Willow Flycatchers the discovery of standing genetic variation associated with
summer maximum temperatures could suggest adaptive potentials, but accurate
prediction is limited by a lack of understanding of the selective mechanisms.
This project will examine the genetic basis of morphological and physiological
traits with known roles in thermal tolerance. Once putatively adaptive genetic
variants have been identified based on their associations with relevant traits,
the project will examine the distribution of these genetic variants in both
contemporary and historic samples. This will build an understanding of how
selection shapes adaptive genetic variation across contemporary environmental
gradients, as well as explicitly test the common space-for-time
substitution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.