* 1837543
* Collaborative Research: Identifying Participation Barriers to Computer Science Education in Rural Mississippi
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Marcus Golden, Mississippi Valley State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 26,700.00

The primary goal of the small strand, K-14 project "Collaborative Research:
Identifying Participation Barriers to Computer Science Education in Rural
Mississippi" is to develop a researcher-practitioner partnership (RPP) to
identify barriers to participation in computer science education in high
poverty, rural areas of Mississippi. In the past two years, a collaborative
effort between the Mississippi Department of Education (MDE) and Mississippi
State University's (MSU's) Research and Curriculum Unit (RCU) implemented a
statewide computer science pilot offered free of charge to K-12 schools.
Entering the third year of the pilot, 74 of 148 school districts in the state
are now offering computer science courses; however, it has been observed that
districts situated in the most rural, highest poverty, and lowest income areas
in the state (primarily the Delta region) are not participating in the
opportunity to provide their teachers free computer science professional
development and thereby offer students access to courses that would begin
preparing them for jobs in a very high-demand, high-salary career. Through a
RPP, issues and perceptions will be investigated to determine why these
districts are not taking advantage of this opportunity to offer computer science
education in the classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project
between MSU and Mississippi Valley State University (MVSU), a four-year
institution of higher learning located in the Delta, will form a partnership
with teachers, administrators, and counselors from six districts in the area
surrounding MVSU, as well as the local community college, business owners,
community leaders, and parents, to identify issues acting as barriers or
constraints to computer science education opportunities. Identifying and
addressing the root causes of the lack of participation in these types of
demographic and geographic areas will give a voice to those who are most
directly involved, while also transforming perceptions of computer science and
broadening participation in the field based on contributions from more diverse
groups, primarily African American teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.