* 1837886
* I-Corps:  Chlorite and Chlorite Dismutase Mediated Continuous Bioprocessing Hygiene Control
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* John Coates, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to eliminate
antibiotic use during biomanufacturing in the chemical and biotechnology
industries, and to enable robust, contamination-free continuous processes that
reduce upstream costs by 20-50%. Currently the biotechnology industry is growing
at an astounding 7.5% per annum with a predicted value of $760B by 2025.
However, industrial fermentation plant failure data collected over a 15-year
period suggests that 1 in 10 process cultures are subject to microbial
contamination and associated production failure. Furthermore, while continuous
bioreactor processes significantly improve productivity and reduce unit
operation costs, most biotechnology industries shy away from them because of the
inherent sensitivity to contamination. Reduced bioreactor failure rate and
operational cost is essential for the economic viability of bio-commodity
chemicals such as biofuels, as production costs are a big impediment to large-
scale manufacture; and their market demand depends primarily on their price
competitiveness with petroleum-derived counterparts. Our technology can increase
the productivity and profit margin of these companies. With our technology,
large-scale bio-commodity chemicals production could become economically
feasible. In addition to reduced operational costs, antibiotic-free production
alleviates antibiotic misuse in industries to promote a positive environmental
and public heath impact.

This I-Corps project comprises a novel biocide/biocide-resistant system that
could be used to treat and prevent microbial contamination in bioreactors. This
technology allows bioprocessing engineers to eliminate the microbial
contamination problem by addition of a biocide into the bioprocessing hosts'
growth medium. The biocide prohibits the outgrowth of accidental contaminants
while a biocide-resistant enzyme protects the bioprocessing host. The system
also contains an on/off switch that allows easy removal of the biocide as
needed. Preliminary data demonstrates that heterologous expression of the
biocide-resistant enzyme in Escherichia coli and subsequent directed evolution
resulted in a biocide-resistant Escherichia coli with a half maximal inhibitory
concentration (IC50) approximately 16 times higher than the negative controls.
We further demonstrate that this biocide in combination with the expression of
biocide-resistant enzyme can be used to successfully treat a contaminated
bioreactor.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.