* 1837413
* RCN: Applied Privacy Research Coordination Network: An Industry-Academic Network to Transition Promising Privacy Research to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Jules Polonetsky, FPF Education and Innovation Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2021
* USD 499,379.00

The Future of Privacy Forum Education and Innovation Foundation (FPF EIF) is
establishing the Applied Privacy Research Coordination Network (Applied Privacy
RCN) to support the transition of academic privacy research to commercial
practice by providing ongoing, structured networking and opportunities for
privacy scholars to meet industry leaders involved in their research areas and
develop working partnerships. The Applied Privacy RCN will promote new
knowledge, techniques and practices to better protect individual privacy.
Cutting-edge privacy research can lead to cutting-edge commercial applications
-- but only if privacy researchers and corporate privacy leaders are connected.
This RCN offers targeted mechanisms to bridge the gap between scholarship and
industry practice. The RCN will bring researchers together with privacy leaders
from the world's top companies and innovators across business sectors, engage
the world's largest privacy professional association and top industry trade
associations, and expand reach to international audiences and markets. The RCN
will accelerate industry action and help transition promising privacy research
to real-world practice where personal information is handled in a manner that
respects individual privacy.

To accomplish these goals, the RCN will organize academic participation in and
presentations to monthly meetings of FPF industry-specific working groups and
direct communications and introductions with FPF EIF's corporate members. It
will organize a series of presentations of academic researchers to industry
practitioners at the annual in-person meeting of the FPF Advisory Board, the
global summit conference of the International Association of Privacy
Professionals (IAPP), a new event at the FPF EIF's marquee annual event, Privacy
Papers for Policymakers, and at an international workshop designed to build
international collaborations of privacy researchers and industry. The events
will attract graduate and doctoral student participants, support junior scholar
publishing opportunities, and develop internship opportunities. Through its
strategies and methods, the RCN furthers the development of a community of
privacy researchers and builds the wider field of practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.