* 1837755
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (ACM CCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Daniel Takabi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2018
* USD 25,000.00

This award provides travel support for students attending the 25th ACM
(Association for Computing Machinery) Conference on Computer and Communications
Security (CCS), to be held in Toronto, Canada from October 15, 2018 to October
19, 2018. This conference is the flag-ship annual conference of the Special
Interest Group on Security, Audit and Control (SIGSAC) of the ACM, and brings
together information security researchers, practitioners, developers, and users
from all over the world to explore cutting-edge ideas and results. Today's
students are tomorrow's leaders, and providing them with an opportunity to
enhance their skill sets is a direct investment towards a better future.
Students benefit from the opportunity to showcase their research and to network
with established researchers in the area. The conference organizers actively
encourage women and underrepresented minorities to attend CCS, aiming to foster
diversity in the community.

ACM CCS facilitates quick and wide dissemination of cutting-edge research
results and ideas in computer and communication security. CCS achieves this by
hosting several technical sessions, poster and demo sessions, tutorials, and
workshops. Leading researchers are invited each year for keynote talks.
Researchers also present seminars on some of the most intriguing and pressing
challenges in the discipline and open up avenues for further work in these
areas.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.