* 1837941
* I-Corps:  Customer discovery for microsensor platforms in the management of hydrocephalus
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Ellis Meng, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercialization potential of this I-Corps project involves
the application of multi-sensor technologies to improve the management and
treatment of patients with implanted catheters. Catheter blockage and failure
results in ineffective treatment, leading to life-threatening symptoms.
Hydrocephalus patients are particularly vulnerable due to their life-long
dependence on implanted catheters and suffer significantly due to high implant
failure rate (&gt;40% in year 1, &gt;80% within a decade). Over one million
Americans currently live with hydrocephalus, and require constant drainage of
cerebrospinal fluid via implanted catheter. Repeated imaging studies and
invasive procedures are used to monitor catheter performance, but these methods
are expensive and inadequate. MRI/CT imaging can identify catheter failure in
fewer than 50% of cases. Even when combined with invasive tests, patients are
often misdiagnosed and undergo unnecessary surgery. Noninvasive monitoring of
hydrocephalus catheter status could eliminate expensive tests and unnecessary
operations, saving the US healthcare system $2 billion annually and immeasurably
improve patient quality of life. Numerous other diseases in the cardiovascular,
urinary, and renal spaces also require chronically implanted catheters and would
benefit from noninvasive catheter monitoring. Improving catheter monitoring
would also increase scientific knowledge of chronic diseases, providing an
important tool for research and therapy development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project explores the commercialization potential for a multi-sensor
catheter which can be implanted in the human body. Few sensors exist on the
market that can operate for long periods in the human body. There are no
suitable sensor technologies for chronically implanted catheters. This team
developed a new sensor technology based on microscale electrodes that are low
profile and eliminate the need for encapsulation or protection against the harsh
environments found in vivo. They are made only of inert biocompatible materials,
such as platinum and Parylene C, which have long been used in FDA approved
medical implants. The pressure sensor operates by monitoring the response of a
microbubble to changes in pressure. The flow sensor uses a microscopic heater
and electrodes to measure heat transfer via flowing fluid. The sensor measures
the electrical signal between electrodes inside and outside of a catheter to
measure blockage. Clinical tests of these sensors are currently underway in
pediatric patients with external ventricular drains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.