* 1837030
* FMitF: OpenRDC: A Framework for Implementing Open, Reliable, Distributed, Network Control
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Aarti Gupta, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,039,740.00

Computer networks, whether connecting servers across a data center or users
across the globe, are an important part of society's critical infrastructure.
However, existing network protocols and services are simply not worthy of the
trust society now places in them. Today's networks suffer from poor performance,
cyberattacks, configuration errors, software bugs, and more, leading to serious
consequences for consumers, businesses, and governments alike. The goal of this
project is to enable the design and operation of better networks which requires
enabling both innovation (to create better protocols and services) and
verification (to ensure these services work correctly). A major part of the
functionality of the network depends on the software running in the control
plane, which computes routes, collects and analyzes network measurement data,
balances load over multiple paths or servers and even hosts in-network
applications. This project involves the theory, design, and implementation of
OpenRDC, a new platform constructed for programming reliable, distributed
network control planes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical core of OpenRDC
centers around computations of Stable Information Trees (SITs) that communicate
information (e.g., traffic conditions, failure information, available external
routes, end-host job statistics, etc.) across a network, and then perform local
actions to change network functionality or record information gathered. These
structured computations suffice to express core control plane algorithms and yet
can also be converted into logical representations that can be used to verify a
variety of important properties of operational networks ranging from
reachability to access control to multi-path consistency. The OpenRDC platform
will simultaneously: (1) allow researchers to develop new control-plane
algorithms, (2) enable automatic verification of network properties, and (3)
make use of emerging programmable switch capabilities. The project involves
acceleration of the development of new control-plane algorithms, via new
abstractions for network programming. The project will also define new compiler
technology for translating these abstractions to programmable network hardware.
In addition, its open source infrastructure will lay a foundation for academic
and industrial engagement and for the training of students. The project will
also have impact on formal methods, with new algorithms for the verification of
graph-oriented programming languages based on abstraction and modular
decomposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.