* 1837086
* A Researcher-Practitioner Partnership to Design, Implement, Assess, and Scale Integrated Computer Science for All in K-5 Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* W Richards Adrion, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,998,924.00

Computer Science for All (CS for All) initiatives are increasingly present in
districts nationwide, however there is much to be learned from new approaches,
particularly at the elementary level. The CS for All Springfield Researcher-
Practitioner Partnership (RPP) proposes a four-year plan to integrate standards-
based computer science and computation thinking (CS/CT) concepts, learning
progressions, and practices in core curricula across all Springfield
Massachusetts K-5 public schools. The Partnership's primary intended long-term
outcomes are (1) to prepare a diverse student population, including English
learners, students with disabilities, underserved race and ethnicities, and
students experiencing poverty, "to effectively use and create technology to
solve complex problems" that they need post-high school for college and career,
and (2) to grow the expertise for CS/CT teaching and learning within the
District. Springfield has the second largest public-school district in
Massachusetts and includes 33 elementary and other schools that serve almost
12,000 K-5 students, staffed by more than 1,000 teachers. Reaching 1,000
teachers and 12,000 students is a significant challenge. "Gateway" cities, such
as Springfield are important incubators of innovation. By focusing on K-5, the
partnership has an opportunity to design curricula that includes all students in
CS/CT teaching and learning and, if successful, create a sustainable model that
will influence other, diverse, medium-to-large urban districts. The Partnership
will develop an innovative, collaborative instructional support network for
teachers implementing the new curricula pilots and district-wide implementation
and provide professional development for teachers and school leaders on the
fundamental concepts, standards, curricula, tools and pedagogy for computer
science and computational thinking, and on evidence-based collective inquiry and
improvement of practice. CS for All Springfield will enable teachers to gain the
skills and confidence to create an effective and equitable learning environment,
which will reach Springfield's large number of underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged students and put them on a path that prepares them to use
technology and computational thinking in middle school, high school, college and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The established CS for All Springfield researcher-
practitioner partnership of learning science, educational policy, social science
and computer science researchers, experienced evaluators, teachers, school and
district leaders, instructional and IT specialists, and curriculum coordinators
will undertake an ambitious and innovative approach. The project will couple
Design-Based Implementation Research; a series of agile, iterative and
collaborative pilots and at-scale implementations informed by and informing
research and evaluation; a strategy for using external and embedded professional
development; and cross-school professional learning communities (PLC) linked
with current school-based PLCs. The research questions will focus on the
characteristics and challenges and opportunities in implementation of the dyadic
PLC; changes in students' learning, interest, and skills; and the barriers to
and opportunities for a successful CS for All
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.