* 1838514
* I-Corps: Elastomeric Passive Transmission for Dynamic Adjustment of Mechanical Advantage
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Robert Shepherd, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is based on a
device which passively adjusts the mechanical advantage of a motor-driven
actuator. This device, known as the Elastomeric Passive Transmission (EPT),
improves the force and speed of tendon-driven actuation systems with minimal
impact to their size, weight, and cost. Approximately 40,000 people per year
suffer from major upper limb loss in the United States. The grip strength,
grasping speed, and active degrees-of-freedom of even the most advanced
prosthetic hands used by these patients pale in comparison to those of a human
hand. User studies have shown that 90% of patients with myoelectric prostheses
consider their prosthetic hand to be too slow and 79% consider it to be too
heavy. By incorporating the EPT into their designs, prosthetic limb
manufacturers can increase the force and speed of their devices with reduced
cost and weight. In addition to improving the performance of prosthetics, the
EPT has the potential to bring performance benefits to grippers and manipulators
in the field of robotic automation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
leverages advances in additive manufacturing to produce simple, low-cost
components to improve the performance of electromechanical systems. Each EPT is
a composite consisting of both hard and soft polyurethane sections. The hard
polyurethane serves as the core of the EPT ensuring that it does not slip on the
motor shaft. This core is surrounded by a ring of soft, stretchable struts which
give the system its dynamic spooling radius. The EPTs are 3D-printed in two
parts and bonded together during the final curing stage. This leads to a single
component transmission system which can passively sense the environment and
adjust the output of a motor to improve performance and control. The benefits of
EPTs have been demonstrated through integration into a 3D-printed prosthetic
hand which demonstrates high speed and high force in an inexpensive and
lightweight package.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.