* 1838977
* Topology Driven Flows in Chromonic Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Jorge Vinals, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 10/31/2023
* USD 327,451.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research, and education on defects in liquid
crystals.&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are made of rod like molecules that display
complex spatial arrangements, though intermediate between perfectly ordered
crystals and completely disordered liquids. Their combined ability to flow like
a fluid, while transmitting directional forces and possessing direction
dependent properties like a crystal, make them suitable for a wide range of
applications. However, because of their weak crystallinity, defects are abundant
in laboratory samples. Although this property has long been considered
deleterious for applications, recent research has uncovered a host of new and
unexpected properties of these materials that follow precisely from the
existence of defects, and from their manipulation. Examples include guided
transport of other molecular species or biological agents, the development of
mechanical switches activated by light or electric fields, and even analogies
involving biological response. This project is aimed to improve existing
theoretical models that describe defected liquid crystals, and any accompanying
transport. New models detailing the structure and motion of defects will be
developed, including their interaction with transport of mass or fluid flow. The
aim is to develop a predictive framework that describes the response of the
liquid crystal to operating conditions or external influences. The specific
focus of the research is on lyotropic chromonic liquid crystals, substances in
which the liquid crystalline behavior is induced by using an appropriate
dilution solvent to change the concentration of the rod like molecules. They
have been known for a long time as dyes (including food dyes), and are analogs
of lung surfactant agents. They are also bio-compatible liquid crystals, and are
currently being developed for live cell steering or sorting. This class of
liquid crystals features unusually large defect features that make them amenable
to optical analysis, and comparison to theory.&lt;br/&gt;The research will be
used to further develop and enhance an interdisciplinary course on computation
in the physical sciences. Students participating in the project will benefit
from substantial training and collaboration opportunities at the Minnesota
Supercomputing Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
research, and education focused on the systematic study of topological defects,
equilibrium morphologies, and dynamical evolution of nematic-isotropic
interfaces in lyotropic chromonic liquid crystals. Configurations considered
include a pure nematic phase, or the biphasic region of coexistence between
nematic and isotropic phases. This study is motivated by ongoing experiments
that show that the characteristic microscopic scale of chromonics is on the
order of microns, much larger than the 10 nm size in conventional thermotropic
liquid crystals. Such large scales allow modern optical imaging techniques to
resolve defect cores and two-phase interfaces, and hence to extract the
parameters of mesoscopic free energy models down to an unprecedented spatial
scale. This information opens the door to critical and quantitative tests of
current nonlinear, gradient theories of nonequilibrium for nematics. In
addition, the unusual morphology of nematic domains (tactoids), and their
nonequilibrium evolution, are expected to lead to novel behavior due to the
complexity of interactions at this scale, including strong anisotropy, nonlocal
elastic interactions due to topological defects, and mesocale biaxiality. Defect
driven flows and the dynamics of biological matter suspended in the chromonic
are among planned investigations. These are under active scrutiny because of
potential applications in flow control in microfluidics and optobiological
devices, in the biomedical field for cell sorting and bio sensing.&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be used to further develop and enhance an interdisciplinary course
on computation in the physical sciences. Students participating in the project
will benefit from substantial training and collaboration opportunities at the
Minnesota Supercomputing Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.