* 1838330
* EaGER: Inclusions of fluid-related minerals in diamonds from the transition zone or lower mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Oliver Tschauner, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2020
* USD 40,366.00

Although the surface of the Earth can be easily observed at many scales, the
interior of the Earth is opaque and not accessible. There are only a small
number of samples of minerals and rocks that derive from depths greater than 100
km. Natural diamonds are not only the hardest natural materials we know but also
our most valuable resources for direct interrogation of greater depths in the
Earth's interior. This Early Grant for Exploratory Research (EaGER) will support
the study of a few precious diamond inclusions that are rich in fluid-bearing
minerals, such as ice and calcite. The project will explore new methods in the
study of unusual diamond inclusion, using state-of-the-art spectroscopic tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this EaGER is to expand on recent studies
that have reported the occurrence of inclusions of ice-VII in diamonds from
locations in Africa and China. Other inclusions of fluid-related crystalline
precipitates such as magnesian calcite and halite have been identified and are
expected to have residual pressures of 5-12 GPa and up to 25 GPa. Other
inclusions of minerals of high residual pressure such as ilmenite and taenite
have also been identified as inclusions that might have formed within the
Transition Zone and lower mantle. This EaGER will extend the preliminary study
to constrain pressure- and temperature regimes of fluid occurrences in the
Transition Zone by analyzing a larger number of diamond inclusions using
synchrotron micro-XRD and-XRF, optical spectroscopy, and subsequent EPMA
wherever applicable. The results should contribute to to our understanding of
the global water- and carbon budget by using an entirely combination of
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.