* 1838379
* Meeting: Cnidofest: A workshop on cnidarian model organism biology, September 6-9, 2018, St. Augustine, FL
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Christine Schnitzler, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Evan Balaban
* 06/30/2019
* USD 24,000.00

The Cnidarian Model Systems Meeting (Cnidofest 2018) will take place September
6-9, 2018 at the University of Florida's Whitney Laboratory for Marine
Bioscience in St. Augustine, Florida. This meeting will focus on cnidarians, a
group of mostly marine animals that includes jellyfish, sea anemones, and
corals, with a focus on animals that are considered "emerging model systems"
species that are particularly well-suited for answering important biological
questions. Recent breakthroughs in technology have allowed researchers to answer
a greater diversity of biological questions using cnidarians, and rapid progress
is occurring in many fields, especially developmental biology, neurobiology, and
physiology. The growing North American cnidarian research community will meet at
Cnidofest 2018 to discuss their latest research findings, exchange ideas, learn
about new technologies, and form collaborations. The meeting emphasizes
interactions between experienced scientists and trainees, with a focus on
increasing diversity. The ultimate goal of the meeting is to foster the growth,
intellectual diversity, and collaborative spirit of the cniderian research
community at a time when it is rapidly expanding (in both size and diversity of
research questions).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cnidarians are excellent laboratory
models for making fundamental biological discoveries, including in neurobiology,
developmental biology, physiology, and biomechanics. Many qualities make
cnidarians great laboratory models: 1) They have simple, well-understood body
plans as well as fascinating life cycles. 2) They hold an informative
phylogenetic position as the clade that is sister to bilaterians; discoveries
made in cnidarians are often reflective of deeply conserved processes. 3) Many
life stages of cnidarians are transparent, making them amenable to live imaging.
4) Some cnidarians are models for studying self/non-self recognition and others
are used to study intracellular symbioses, such as those found in reef-building
corals. 5) Many cnidarians are great models for studying regeneration, stem
cells, and aging. These topics will be the major scientific focus of the
meeting. In addition, the meeting will emphasize new technological approaches
that will greatly enhance cnidarian research. Two technology speakers will
present seminars on emerging technologies 1) microfluidics for measuring neural
circuit activity and behavior and 2) single cell RNA sequencing for
understanding development. Providing a platform for the interaction of cnidarian
scientists at all levels will greatly benefit the community. Interactions will
be fostered among participants through a dynamic schedule that includes
traditional oral presentation sessions, lightning talks, poster presentations,
and plenty of time to encourage informal discussion over breaks and meals, which
are all done as one group. The ultimate goal is to grow and diversify the
community in terms of breadth of research topics and broadening participation by
multiple groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.