* 1838576
* Collaborative Proposal: Strong Stochastic Simulation of Stochastic Processes Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Jose Blanchet, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 200,871.00

High performance computing of continuous random structures arises in a large
body of scientific and engineering investigations. For example, these structures
are used in environmental models for floods in different geographical areas,
which are subject to random measurement errors. They are also used in the
prediction and mitigation planning of potential disasters. However, these random
structures are impossible to capture in a computer without incurring bias, due
to their continuous nature. This research project investigates a new framework
for the numerical analysis of continuous random structures. It achieves stronger
error control, compared to current state-of-the-art methods, at basically the
same computational cost. If successful, the framework and algorithms to be
investigated will facilitate analysis and performance evaluation of fundamental
random structures of interests to a broad community of scientists and engineers.
To enhance the broader impact, the Principal Investigators will train graduate
students through research and integrate the results from this research into new
graduate courses in scientific computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates a new Monte Carlo framework for continuous stochastic structures
(such as differential equations and random fields). The main innovative feature
of the framework is the ability to approximate a continuous random object by a
fully simulatable (typically piece-wise constant) object with a uniform error
bound in the path space with 100% certainty. The error bound is user-specified
and can be sequentially refined. Research projects involve developing simulation
algorithms for fundamental random structures of interests. These include:
Gaussian random fields, Levy processes, fractional Brownian motion, max-stable
fields, etc. The algorithms are scalable in the sense of being easily extendable
to more complex models by applying the continuous mapping principle with
quantifiable error analysis. An important aspect of the methodology is the
connection established between Monte Carlo simulation and the theory of rough
paths in the setting of stochastic analysis.