* 1838083
* BIGDATA: IA: Enabling Large-Scale, Privacy-Preserving Genomic Computing with a Hardware-Assisted Secure Big-Data Analytics Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* XiaoFeng Wang, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Advances in DNA sequencing technologies are expected to make available a massive
amount of human genomic data in the years to come, which need computation of a
tremendous scale to process. This demand cannot be met by today's commercial
clouds, since they do not provide strong privacy guarantees, or by using
existing cryptography techniques, since they still cannot achieve the
performance required for big-data analytics. The emergence of the new-generation
hardware support for trusted execution environments presents a new opportunity
for scalable data protection, through the processors designed to withstand the
attacks even from a fully compromised operating system. To seize this
opportunity, this project aims at developing a distributed, parallel computing
framework critical for executing data-intensive tasks on trusted execution
environment-capable systems. This research will be performed in collaboration
with Intel, which will transfer the new methods developed for large-scale data
protection to industry and genomic researchers. Students from historically black
colleges and universities will participate in the work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on developing a big-data analytics framework built on Intel
Software Guard Extensions (SGX) and applying it to support privacy-preserving,
large-scale genomic data analyses and other computing tasks. Based upon the
understanding of unique performance impacts of SGX systems, including those
incurred by enclave creation, management, trust establishment, cross-enclave
communication and others, a new MPI-based cluster computing framework is built
to automatically optimize the deployment of computing nodes across enclaves and
CPU packages under resource constraints. This new framework supports a set of
fundamental genomic computing tasks, ranging from reads-mapping to peptide
identification, as well as machine-learning based models. Also, its potential
risks, side-channel leaks in particular, are analyzed and effectively controlled
to provide high privacy assurance. The work will enable broad sharing of
previously inaccessible data and help drive the new insights of individualized
health care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.