* 1838916
* Equitable Computer Science for All Learning Ecosystems: Developing Underserved Students' Computational Making Literacies Through Community-Embedded Out of School Time Programming
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Shirin Vossoughi, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 06/30/2021
* USD 359,999.00

At its core, the National Science Foundation's CSforAll initiative has the goal
of creating the&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure, pathways, and incentives that develop
ecosystems for supporting and motivating all youth&lt;br/&gt;to become
computationally literate and pursue computer science-related degrees and
careers. This&lt;br/&gt;proposal makes a case for the extension of the CSforAll
infrastructure to include the integration of out-of-school time (OST) learning
projects into existing CSforAll funded grants by asking two questions:
How&lt;br/&gt;can we foster a community learning environment that recognizes,
supports, and promotes computational&lt;br/&gt;literacies as a desirable and
accessible form of social capital by mentors, youth, and families? And
how&lt;br/&gt;do these community-level connections impact youth computational
making learning opportunities,&lt;br/&gt;participation, social networks,
knowledge, and understanding? In Evanston, a partnership
between&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern University, the district, and the Evanston YMCA
will work together to understand and answer these&lt;br/&gt;questions by
designing and operating a community-based computational making OST hub that
provides&lt;br/&gt;the learning activities and peer community needed to create
an inviting and relevant environment for&lt;br/&gt;students, caring adults, and
educators to reorient their perception towards computer science-
related&lt;br/&gt;careers as desirable and achievable for youth in the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to take advantage of a
unique opportunity - the launch of a 1:1 middle grades
tablet&lt;br/&gt;initiative in a racially and socioeconomically diverse
community actively engaged in addressing their&lt;br/&gt;expanding achievement
gap - to implement a community-based computational making OST hub
and&lt;br/&gt;reimagine how a community-embedded approach to OST designed to
support youth and caring adults&lt;br/&gt;(parents and mentors) can ignite
youths' computational making participation. Specifically, this
proposal&lt;br/&gt;seeks to create a learning community that uses the
computational thinking guided design process to&lt;br/&gt;motivate and support
students in the systemic creation of interactive objects that require
the&lt;br/&gt;integration of coding, digital fabrication, and visual design
literacies to produce aesthetically powerful&lt;br/&gt;and socially conscious
solutions to student and community defined design
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.