* 1838808
* SCH: INT: Adaptive Partnership for the Robotic Treatment of Autism
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Dan Popa, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,228,361.00

This project targets research on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI) between children
with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) and engineered, autonomous, facially-
expressive, human-like robots that can assess and adapt to personalized
therapeutic goals. Adaptive partner robots specifically targeting ASD hold the
potential to revolutionize treatment and improve the lives and productivity of
millions of Americans. We envision that the next generation ASD robot will be
used primarily in the home, in addition to specialized treatment facilities. The
envisioned robotic partners will serve as therapists, instructors, passive
observers, or active learning peers, thus supplementing the role of important
individuals: parents, caregivers, or teachers. The further exploration of the
application of groups of robots and children in therapy will enrich and deepen
our research understanding and could produce meaningful future outcomes for
individuals with ASD and their families. The proposed interactions represent a
unique opportunity to capture and objectively measure the natural behavior of
ASD children in multiple contexts, irrespective of the age, language or
cognitive ability, because it is based on both motor and emotional responses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research undertaken in this project has several novel
components, including formulating new quantitative, non-invasive markers,
eventually integrated into a new ASD scale for diagnosis and treatment based on
real-time evaluation of motions and emotions during interaction between robot
and child. The ASD severity scale will be based on a dynamic time-warping motion
metric and on a continuous emotion metric assessed by the robot during
interaction. The scale will be used by the robot to adapt therapeutic activities
in a personalized manner for each child in one-one one therapy sessions, and for
several children and robots in group therapy sessions. With the help of industry
partners, we will embed the resulting novel motor and cognitive behaviors into a
nonthreatening, partner robot, specifically designed for children with ASD,
endowed with a friendly appearance, behavioral switching and neuroadaptive
controllers. The robot will be capable of collecting large amounts of data that
may be useful to elucidate unique connections between the motor, sensory and
emotional brain functions of the ASD population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.