* 1838456
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Nanoengineering of Two-Dimensional and Twisted Ferromagnets Towards Room-Temperature Quantum Logic
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Eugene Mele, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 341,035.00

Nontechnical description: This EAGER project focuses on developing a new family
of ultrathin, practically two dimensional magnetic materials using layer-on-
layer stacking of atomically thin films of magnetic materials. Specifically,
this work is focused on making nanoelectronic devices with ultrathin magnetic
materials, where the active region is only a few atoms thick. The goal is to
better understand the magnetic and electronic properties of these materials and
devices. We develop experimental and theoretical tools to manipulate and model
these magnetic materials, guided by a vision for these systems as platforms for
efficient information storage and quantum information processing technologies.
The research engages the participation of one graduate research student and one
postdoctoral associate. The broader impacts of this project include activities
to present cutting edge concepts in nanoscience to high school students through
the Penn Experimental Research Physics Academy and Penn Summer Prep program, as
well as to the general public through the annual Philadelphia Science Festival.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project focuses on the two-
dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides vanadium disulfide and
vanadium diselenide, shown to exhibit ferromagnetism with in-plane magnetic
moments and Curie temperatures around room temperature, and are thus promising
candidates for room-temperature quantum applications. Through theory,
computation, and experiment, the research team is studying two main aspects of
these materials: (a) their properties through the transition from 2D to 1D
behavior in patterned structures, and (b) the emergent phenomena induced in
rotationally misaligned multilayer stacks. The experimental component of the
project combines growth by chemical vapor deposition, mechanical exfoliation and
transfer, and electrical, optical, and magnetic measurements. In task (a) the
project aims to develop controlled and scalable growth and fabrication
techniques to create high-quality 2D materials and quasi-1D sculpted
nanostructures with room temperature functionality in nanometer-scale
architectures for spintronic and other device applications. Concurrently, the
team aims to optimize structural properties such as atomic edge configuration,
defect types and density, and relative lattice orientation to maximize
performance. In task (b) the project seeks to discover and exploit the emergent
quantum effects of rotational stacking of these materials and investigate the
spin textures arising from the spatially modulated interlayer magnetic coupling.
These spin textures may provide a rich variety of new physical effects and
provide a platform for quantum information processing manipulatable by spin
transfer torques. The broader impacts of this project include activities to
present cutting edge concepts in nanoscience to high school students through the
Penn Experimental Research Physics Academy and Penn Summer Prep program, and to
the general public through the annual Philadelphia Science
Festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.