* 1838282
* RoL:  FELS:  EAGER: Landscape Phenomics: Predicting vulnerability to climate variation by linking environmental heterogeneity to genetic and phenotypic variation
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Cameron Ghalambor, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 03/31/2023
* USD 348,209.00

Biodiversity is critically important, however unprecedented losses are occurring
in response to environmental change and human development of the planet. Since
many species have survived past and present changes, understanding how they do
so can provide clues for conserving biodiversity. This project seeks to address
this question by evaluating different factors that contribute to a species'
survival within its natural range. The research team will focus on the tailed
frog, which lives only in cold, fast-flowing mountain streams in the U.S.
Pacific Northwest. Within this region, many populations of frogs live in low
elevation habitats that are warmer than high elevation habitats. These
populations are likely to be the first to experience temperatures higher than
what tailed frogs can tolerate as climates warm. It is possible, however, that
frogs from these populations may also be able to tolerate warmer temperatures
relative to those that live only in colder, high-elevation streams. This project
will examine the implications for how tailed frogs or similar species might
survive in the face changes in temperature. Uncovering these rules for how
species may persist requires understanding how differences in the environment
affect thermal tolerance and other traits that can allow species to survive as
conditions are altered over time. This project will provide research training
and mentoring for a postdoctoral scholar, and graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will uncover rules for spatial
patterns of vulnerability using a four-pronged integrative framework. This
research links environmental heterogeneity to genetic and phenotypic variation
in resilience traits. First, the study will characterize variation in the
thermal environment and food resources in tailed frog streams. Second, it will
test the effects of landscape heterogeneity on genome-wide variation and
microevolutionary processes (selection, drift, and gene flow) using a landscape
genomics approach. Third, it will estimate the contributions of genetics and the
environment in generating variation in key resilience traits related to thermal
performance using quantitative genetics, a genome-wide association study, and
acclimation experiments. Finally, they will predict current and future
temperature tolerance and population vulnerability by modeling changes in stream
temperature, food resources, traits, and population
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.