* 1838986
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Systems, Programming, Languages and Applications: Software for Humanity (SPLASH)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Jonathan Bell, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2019
* USD 30,000.00

The ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Systems, Programming, Languages and Applications:
Software for Humanity (SPLASH) embraces all aspects of software construction and
delivery to make it one of the premier conferences at the intersection of
programming languages and software engineering. This grant provides travel funds
to support student attendance to the conference. The support will focus on
students who are attending the several mentoring events that have been planned
at SPLASH. The grant will be used for US citizens/residents and other US-based
students and will give priority to underrepresented groups, first-time
attendees, and those in need of economic support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is
intellectual merit in the technical exchange of information and research
conversations/collaborations made possible by the conference, as well as
advances in the field made possible by these interactions. The proposal also
provides education, training and mentoring received by the participants. The
international nature of this conference helps develop a globally-aware workforce
of research and educators within the US and helps build the community of
researchers in the field of Software Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.