* 1838497
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Temperature dependence of optical nonlinearities of monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Hideo Mabuchi, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project contributes to efforts to develop a new class of optical quantum
computing devices that are constructed using solid-state thin film materials and
can operate at room temperature. Such new devices have the potential to
revolutionize information technology, with applications ranging from
cryptographic code-breaking to ultra-secure communication over networks. One of
the most exciting features of the solid-state thin film materials investigated
in this project is their potential to enable quantum information processing
devices that require neither cryogenic nor high-vacuum environments, which add
substantial bulk and complexity to prior approaches. This project specifically
addresses a set of open questions regarding the room-temperature optical
properties of monolayer thin films of the material molybdenum diselenide, the
answers to which are crucial for predicting the best achievable performance of
practical computing systems. Although bulk crystals of molybdenum diselenide
have long been studied, the recent development of methods to prepare and
characterize monolayer specimens - just a few atoms thick - have sparked new
interest in this material because the properties of these thin films are
markedly different from those of bulk samples. Above and beyond its implications
for the development of practical quantum information technology, this research
contributes to the interdisciplinary training of Ph.D. students and to the
development of state-of-the-art educational materials for classroom teaching in
emerging areas of quantum engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on experimental and theoretical studies of the nonlinear optical responses and
background optical absorption of monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides over
the temperature range from 4K to 300K. The project leverages recent advances in
the use of laser annealing to prepare high quality large-area homogeneous
samples of molybdenum diselenide, as well as recent theoretical calculations of
Kerr-type nonlinearities associated with transitions among bound exciton states.
The project aims to extend prior measurements and calculations to assess
decoherence associated with exciton-phonon and exciton-exciton interactions at
finite temperatures, and to arrive at quantum optical input-output models of
transition metal dichalcogenide-based quantum photonic devices at room
temperature with experimentally validated parameters. The project also aims
specifically to assess the feasibility of constructing nonlinear photonic
resonators based on stacks of multiple transition metal dichalcogenide
monolayers, and to predict the best possible performance of such devices for
quantum photonic information processing. Broader impacts of the project include
interdisciplinary training of graduate students and the development of
interdisciplinary material for graduate-level teaching at the intersection of
quantum optics and quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.