* 1838401
* Monitoring Sea Ice Evolution with Ultrawideband Microwave Radiometry in the MoSAIC Campaign
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Kenneth Jezek, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 12/31/2022
* USD 630,683.00

The evolution of the Arctic is a key question for the future of our planet. One
key aspect is to understand how processes in the atmosphere, ocean, and sea ice
interact and affect Arctic ocean sea ice behavior and distribution. As part of
the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate
(MOSAiC) campaign, this project is deploying an ultra-wideband microwave
radiometer to improve the ability to remotely determine sea ice thickness
information. The long term measurements of sea ice available from MOSAiC's one
year deployment of the RV Polarstern into an Arctic ice floe, combined with the
extensive ice, ocean, and atmosphere in-situ measurements to be acquired,
provide an optimal environment for sea ice monitoring studies, which in turn
enable better models of sea ice evolution. Those models are criticall important
to advancing Arctic system science and predicting the future of the Arctic.
Student training will also provide societal impact by preparing the next
generation of researchers in polar science and
observation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The difficult conditions of the Arctic along
with its spatially heterogeneous forcing motivate remote Earth observations from
satellites or airborne platforms. Remote sensing systems have proven to be
effective in monitoring sea ice extent and fractional cover, as well as sea ice
thickness and type to a lesser extent. Current L-band (1.4-GHz) microwave
radiometers and laser altimeters have limited sensitivity to ice thickness in
the range from 0.5 to 2 meters, which is increasingly common as compared to
thicker multi-year ice. An ability to sense sea ice temperature and salinity
properties, and particularly their variations within the ice itself, could also
provide important new benefits for understanding ice formation and
dissolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is deploying a four channel ultra-
wideband microwave radiometer observing from 0.5 to 2 GHz as part of the MOSAiC
central observatory in order to acquire a unique dataset of ice thermal
emissions and their variations with thickness and other ice properties. By
measuring thermal emissions from sea ice at multiple frequencies, and
frequencies lower than 1.4 GHz, more information on ice properties, and to
greater depth, will be possible. The measurements acquired will further play an
important role in bridging between the point in situ measurements to be acquired
by other MOSAiC program investigators and the approximately 9 m x 26 m
instrument footprint that will provide ice properties averaged over the
"intermediate" scales associated with ice floes. The three year project includes
instrument preparation and planning in year one, campaign participation in year
2 (including staffing by project personnel during MOSAiC legs I and II), and
extensive data analysis in year 3.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By advancing
understanding of the spatial scaling between sea ice properties at point (in
situ) and floe scales, the project will provide an important link to enable
"sub-grid-scale" phenomena parameterization in sea ice forecast models. The time
histories of thickness, salinity, and temperature acquired will also represent
important datasets for characterizing the sea ice energy budget over relevant
spatial scales. The advancement achieved in the use of passive microwave remote
sensing will also provide new insights into the electromagnetic properties of
sea ice for use in future development of new instrumentation and satellite
observation methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.