* 1838259
* Student Travel Grant for 2018 Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning Conference and Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Madalina Croitoru, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This award will support US students to attend the 16th International Conference
on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR&amp;R) and its
Doctoral Consortium, which will be held in Tempe, Arizona from October 29 to
November 2, 2018. The Principles of KR&amp;R conference series, established in
1989, is driven by some of the key researchers in the field of knowledge
representation, and attracts a substantial number of highly visible researchers
and submissions each year. In response to the high demands for graduate students
in this area, the conference has established a practice of the Doctoral
Consortium event during the conference, where students can deeply interact with
the researchers, and is pursuing options to further enhance the educational
aspect of its events. This year there will be 7 workshops and 8 tutorials prior
to the main conference. A dedicated mentoring program and other student-centered
events will be put in place for the maximum benefit of the participating
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The KR&amp;R Doctoral Consortium provides an
opportunity for student education in the field of knowledge representation and
reasoning. The conference is a premier event attended by prominent researchers
in the area. The principal investigators are among the main drivers of the
conference series, and established researchers with high visibility and proven
track record of successful student mentoring. The planned activity furthers
technological advancement in the emerging area of knowledge representation and
reasoning -- which is currently seeing substantial industrial interest and
uptake -- through the enhancement of next generation computer scientists, with
long-term benefits both to industry and academia. Actions will be implemented in
order to broaden visibility, by trying to attract students from new research
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.