* 1838276
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Manipulating polariton entanglement for room-temperature quantum logic
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Carlos Silva, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 01/31/2022
* USD 299,258.00

Quantum computing offers a tremendous advantage over traditional computing
because it exploits quantum mechanical phenomena that can in principle carry out
logic tasks much faster and more efficiently than even the best computers at
present. Nevertheless, quantum computing is still in its infancy. Quantum
computation exploits entanglement - a key peculiarity of quantum particles -
where it is fundamentally impossible to distinguish between the properties of
two identical particles, regardless of how far they are from each other.
Achieving robust entanglement at room temperature remains one of the most
important challenges in realizing a quantum computer. The present project
overcomes existing fundamental limitations to room-temperature entanglement by
designing and fabricating optical devices that produce entangled particles that
are hybrids of light and matter, termed polaritons. Entangled polaritons are
manipulated and controlled by applying an electrical voltage to the device.
Polariton entanglement is designed to be stable over sufficiently long time to
perform quantum computing operations at room temperature. In addition to the
scientific and technical innovations involved in this research, it serves as a
training platform to contribute to the intellectual capital and scientific
infrastructure of the US, in which quantum technologies is growing in
significance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The key objective of
this project is to demonstrate a universal quantum gate operating at room
temperature, harnessing polariton entanglement in semiconductor microcavities
that are designed to be addressable by an external electric field. Exciton
polaritons are half-light, half-matter quasiparticles that are produced by
strong (non-perturbative) coupling of photons and excitons. Because of their
hybrid identity, exciton polaritons promise opportunities for quantum-optical
gates by manipulation of entanglement in matter, since matter interactions can
evolve the entangled state. An important task is thus to demonstrate the ability
to map photon entanglement onto matter in microcavities. The entangled bi-
polariton state can be manipulated by an applied electric field to independently
control both photon and matter components. By this external control, universal
two-qubit quantum gates are tested. Two-dimensional metal-halide hybrid
perovskites are chosen as the active material because of their high oscillator
strength, high exciton binding energy, and strong multi-exciton interactions.
Fabry-Perot microcavities are based on a combination of versatile inorganic-
organic hybrid materials that are readily index-tunable via composition and
post-deposition procedures, and metal oxides that can be deposited by sol-gel
methods. The successful outcome of this EAGER project entails a demonstration of
a universal quantum gate, which lays the platform to pursue its implementation
in quantum computation. Beyond the primary outcome of demonstrating a universal
quantum gate, this endeavor requires innovation in addressable microcavities and
thus advances knowledge of materials processing protocols for scalable room-
temperature quantum optoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.