* 1838502
* RAPID: Tracking magmatic and volcanic changes in the May 2018 Kilauea Eruption.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Michael Garcia, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2021
* USD 119,821.00

This Rapid Research Response (RAPID) award will enable a detailed study of the
May 2018 eruption in an effort to reconstruct lava emplacement within and
between several sites spread out over about 10 km of the volcano's east rift
zone. By coupling this information to lava and crystal cargo compositional
analyses, the study will aim to answer questions about the magmatic system and
magma migration pathways leading to this unanticipated eruption. Microtextural
analysis of samples that are contextualized with aerial imagery will permit
critical evaluation of existing flow emplacement models and thus engender
improved quantitative understanding of lava flow dynamics. By comparing
geochemical and petrologic results to the geophysical signals, the project will
enhance understanding about how and why volcanoes
erupt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award will support short-fuse, high
resolution geochemical studies of lava flows from the Kilauea volcano eruption
in May 2018. It is planned to use 210Po-210Pb-226Ra, petrologic analysis of
eruption products, and rheological evolution of basaltic lava, all in a tightly
constrained spatio-temporal context. Despite the unfortunate interaction of
eruption fissures with personal property and infrastructure, this eruption
represent an excellent opportunity to investigate magmatism at one of Earth's
most active volcanoes, with implications for why, when, and how volcanic
activity occurs at a particular location. The unprecedented geophysical record
of events leading to and during the eruption from the US Geological Survey's
Hawaii Volcano Observatory (HVO) dense observational network, and strong
partnership and collaboration with HVO colleagues for sample collection and
eruption parameter observations, and the excellent lava sample suite that is and
will be collected for this study, makes this a truly unique opportunity to
address fundamental scientific questions about magmatic processes within a
volcanic rift zone and flow emplacement mechanics during opening phases of
fissure-fed lava effusion. Volcanic products from the new/ongoing rift zone
eruption have been sampled for us by the USGS, with more collections
forthcoming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.