* 1838381
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Award: Characterization of Complex Forager Society
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Nancy White, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 28,842.00

When and why humans chose to depart mainlands in favor of islands are
fundamental questions asked by anthropologists. Decision-making is shaped by
issues still faced today, such as intra- and inter-group conflict or
environmental conditions. Prehistoric archaeological deposits are particularly
well suited to examining the incipient colonization of island landmasses, as
well as the nature of early habitation, because they typically offer the first
and only physical records of past human activity. Within a broader context of
island settlement and use, Ryan Harke will study native fisher-gatherer
populations who inhabited the only subtropical small-island ecosystems in North
America. This research project will also have specific outcomes relating to
public interest, including pre-modern seawater temperature data and new
interpretive signage to educate visitors on the cultural and environmental
history of the region. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientific evidence demonstrates
that tropical archipelagoes are the sum of interconnected terrestrial,
nearshore, and pelagic habitats, many of which provided suitable marine
subsistence resources, shelters, and trading grounds throughout human history.
Thus, the archaeology of "marginal" small-island ecosystems offers the
foundation to model human lifeways at and journeys to such places across the
globe, and compare culturally and/or biologically distinct populations. This
research will focus on the historical, ethnohistorical, and zooarchaeological
datasets of the island of Key West, to determine when prehistoric Native
Americans reached the island, and whether they constructed year-round villages
there. These questions will be addressed using a method similar to
dendrochronology (the study of tree rings) called sclerochronology. Using this
technique on modern clam shells and those discarded by ancient peoples will
reveal annual cycles of seawater temperature and salinity contained in their
isotopic (geochemical) signatures, indicating season of habitation. By sampling
a large collection of midden shells and evaluating the seasonality of other
associated animal remains, this research will determine whether a fishing
economy could be based on freshwater-deficient coral islands year-round. The
Keys are a vital case study for worldwide colonization models in human island
biogeography, as their indigenous peoples offer a rare circumstance of non-
agricultural groups relocating to small islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.