* 1838574
* RAPID: Cascading effects of rapid and widespread mortality of a foundation tree species on animal communities in Hawaii
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Patrick Hart, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 12/31/2019
* USD 197,056.00

Forests cover a third of all land area on Earth, providing numerous ecological,
economic, and social benefits. However, forests worldwide are increasingly
vulnerable to large-scale tree mortalities as the frequency rises of invasive
pest and pathogen outbreaks. The near elimination of dominant tree species such
as American chestnut trees in North America and elm trees in Europe and North
America, as a result of introduced pathogens, highlights how diseases can
fundamentally change the species composition of forests and lead to cascading
effects on dependent animal communities. This project will measure how animal
communities reliant on native Hawaiian forests change in response to a new
fungal disease causing rapid and widespread mortality to the most ecologically
important and abundant native tree. This research provides a unique opportunity
to measure in real time changes to animal communities as a response to rapid and
ongoing tree mortality, whereas most other studies documenting the effects of
widespread mortality of tree species provide retroactive data long after
declines. In this project researchers will directly involve underrepresented
groups including Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islanders through the direct
training of undergraduate students on the research project. This project will
also convene educational events throughout Hawaii Island to communicate the
research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Few studies have quantitatively
documented how ecological communities in terrestrial ecosystems respond to the
large-scale loss of a foundation species that mediates ecosystem processes and
creates stable conditions for inhabitant species. Recent changes in forest
structure are expanding across the Hawaiian landscape as a result of rapid,
disease-induced mortality of ohia lehua (Metrosideros polymorpha), the
foundation tree species of Hawaiian forests. The spreading fungal pathogen
(Ceratocystis spp.) poses an immediate and serious threat to the diversity,
structure, and function of Hawaii's remaining native forests and reliant plants
and animals. Using advances in recording technology and soundscape analysis
tools developed within the growing field of soundscape ecology, the researchers
will rapidly assess changes in the biodiversity of audible birds, insects, and
amphibian species in areas with different baselines and rates of change in ohia
mortality across the landscape. The researchers will also evaluate whether the
diversity and composition of other plant species within the understory mediates
how animal communities respond to structural changes in the forest canopy. The
simplified island ecosystem in Hawaii allows research to more directly tease
apart the interactions that support community composition and function within
forest ecosystems, which will have wide application to more complex and diverse
systems that are experiencing large-scale forest tree
mortality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.