* 1838154
* BIGDATA: F: Big Data Analysis via Non-Standard Property Testing
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Xi Chen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 910,000.00

In the modern era truly enormous amounts of data are constantly being generated
across a wide range of domains: these include ongoing large-scale scientific
experiments, ubiquitous smartphones and sensors, the continuous production and
evolution of content on social media, and many others. How can this flood of
data be efficiently processed and analyzed? A branch of computer science called
"property testing" seeks to develop ultra-fast algorithms for analyzing massive
data sets to quickly determine whether or not the data has some property of
interest. However, the standard theoretical models that have mostly been
considered in property testing are not well suited to many real-world data
analysis scenarios; these standard models prioritize mathematical elegance, but
the resulting assumptions they make do not align well with the abilities of
actual data analysis algorithms or with the nature of many actual data sets. (As
one example, these models typically assume that a data analysis algorithm can
synthesize arbitrary data points and query them to receive accurate information
about how such data points should be labeled, but such queries are impossible in
many real-world settings where data points "come as they are" and cannot be
synthesized to meet the specifications of a data analyst. As another example,
these models typically can only deal with data which is assumed to follow
certain highly structured probability distributions, but real-world data is
messy and rarely possesses such a high degree of structure.) The high-level goal
of this project is to develop and analyze non-standard models of property
testing, with the explicit goal of developing algorithms which align with the
realities and constraints of real-world data analysis problems. An important
related goal is to foster human resource development by performing outreach and
training graduate students, including members of historically under-represented
groups, in the analytic and algorithmic techniques that are central to this
project. Planned activities to achieve broader impacts also include new courses,
survey articles, and the continuation of outreach activities aimed at students
at the elementary and middle school levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail,
the project will focus on three different aspects of property testing algorithms
for big data, all of which are motivated by considerations arising from real-
world data analysis:(1) The first focus of the project will be on developing
flexible algorithms for testing whether a massive high-dimensional data set has
been labeled according to a "junta" --- this is a labeling rule which depends
only on a very small but unknown set of data features out of a huge set of
possible features. Building on their previous work, the investigators will work
to develop junta testing algorithms which can handle arbitrary data
distributions and noisy data, and can succeed even given only a limited form of
access to the data set being analyzed. (2) The second focus of the project will
be on transferring ideas and techniques from theoretical machine learning
algorithms to the domain of property testing of massive data sets. Previous work
of the investigators gave a proof-of-concept for how (certain relatively
inefficient) machine learning algorithms can be modified to yield far more
efficient property testing algorithms for data analysis, but this transfer went
through only in the relatively constrained standard models of property testing,
alluded to above, which assume highly structured data distributions. In this
project the investigators will work to extend these earlier results so that the
machine learning techniques will yield algorithms for more flexible property
testing models that are of greater real-world applicability.(3) Finally, the
third focus of the project is to develop property testing algorithms which do
not need to make queries on synthetic data points but instead use only random
samples, and which can be applied to high-dimensional continuous data sets. Data
of this type arises commonly in settings where sensors or measurements of
different sorts are generating the data, but most property testing algorithms
are designed for discrete binary-valued data rather than continuous
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.