* 1838139
* BIGDATA: F: Privacy in Unsupervised Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Raman Arora, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 911,398.00

Modern data sets are largely unlabeled. Unsupervised learning of useful
representations to better understand the structure in data is a critical
challenge in data science and machine learning; it finds application in
computational and social science, including information retrieval, web mining,
and recommendation systems. As we progress further into the age of Big data, and
the amount of data to be processed grows faster than the growth in our
computational resources, better and faster ways for performing unsupervised
learning and data analysis on such big data sets become ever more necessary.
Furthermore, with the advent of the internet of things, private data is
collected rather ubiquitously and seamlessly through devices such as
smartphones, cameras, microphones, radio-frequency identification (RFID)
readers, and social networks, raising serious concerns about an individual's
privacy. Therefore, in this project, we initiate a formal investigation into
privacy-aware unsupervised learning for Big data
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Taking a stochastic optimization view of
unsupervised learning, we capture more general learning problems than previously
studied in the privacy literature. One such class of learning problems is non-
convex problems, such as matrix learning, tensor factorization, deep learning,
and many more. While most of these problems are NP-hard, in practice we find
that we can efficiently find solutions to these problems. We conjecture that
noisy stochastic gradient descent updates that have recently been shown to
efficiently find local minima for a large class of non-convex problems also
guarantees privacy implicitly. Finally, we consider extensions of the privacy
model from that of a single curator to those to distributed learning, continual
release model, streaming model, and a novel sliding window
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.