* 1838833
* ECDI: Secure Fog Robotics Using the Global Data Plane
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Anthony Joseph, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,074,977.00

This project investigates new ways of structuring and securing information by
using cryptographically hardened bundles of data, called DataCapsules. The need
for a new approach stems from the proliferation of data-driven technology and
cyber-physical systems that control physical devices, such as robots and
manufacturing machines, and use information from widely disparate sources. The
consequences of data exposure, breach, or corruption can lead to identity theft,
property loss, or (increasingly) bodily harm. Unfortunately, common approaches
to protecting information are ad-hoc, buggy, and subject to a variety of attacks
and failure modes. In contrast, the DataCapsule infrastructure provides a
standardized approach to sequencing, securing every bit of information while
also including explicit provenance (stating who generated it). DataCapsules may
move freely from place to place in the network while retaining their integrity,
thereby enabling secure computation at the edge of the network. Further, this
project investigates techniques to ease the transition of application writers
from current practice to use of the DataCapsule infrastructure. The benefits of
standardization around DataCapsules are many fold, including (1) more uniform
application of best practices for data security; (2) secure edge computing
infrastructures that fluidly interact with authorized entities in the core of
the network (cloud); and (3) an opportunity for new networking environments that
respect information privacy and security while optimizing for performance and
quality of service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the use of
DataCapsules to improve the security and performance of robotic and machine-
learning applications operating in edge computing environments. DataCapsules are
secured bundles of information with unique, self-certifying names that are
transported over a data-centric 'narrow-waist' infrastructure called the Global
Data Plane (GDP). This project investigates the design of DataCapsules as well
as an architecture for the GDP that provides flat-address routing from
authorized clients to DataCapsules, allowing DataCapsules to be replicated and
reside anywhere within the GDP. DataCapsules consist of standardized metadata
wrappers anchoring hash-chain-linked histories of transactions labeled by
signatures. As universal 'ground-truths' for data storage applications,
DataCapsules share some advantages of block-chains, including publicly
verifiable integrity. Above the DataCapsule layer, application writers benefit
from uniform security while continuing to utilize common storage access
patterns, such as filesystems, databases, and key-value stores. The GDP
partitions the network into Trust Domains (TDs) to allow clients to reason about
the trustworthiness of hardware. This architecture includes overlay switches
connected via a tunneling protocol and a scalable location resolution
infrastructure. Each TD is responsible for a subset of the DataCapsules and
provides data location facilities that serve 'location delegation' certificates
(mapping names to network locations) for these DataCapsules. For scalability,
this project investigates several name resolution mechanisms, including one
based on distributed hash table (DHT) principles. This project also utilizes
secure enclave technologies (e.g. Intel SGX) to provide secure computation at
the edge of the network. By promoting best practice labeling and secure
management of information, the DataCapsule infrastructure promises to lead to an
overall reduction in data breaches and safer public and private cyberspace
infrastructure. Further, it will allow application writers to trust the security
of information at the edge of the network, thus leading to new and better
application of data-driven techniques at the network edge while simultaneously
improving privacy; this, in turn, will lead to better applications, such as
robotic and smart manufacturing. Finally, in addition to educational activities,
the project, in collaboration with the University of California Berkeley's
Lawrence Hall of Science, will produce open-access videos to raise awareness of
information vulnerability and provenance with youth and the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.