* 1838733
* ECDI: Computation, Communication, and Storage Infrastructure For The Roaming Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Remzi Arpaci-Dusseau, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2022
* USD 2,000,000.00

The Wisconsin Roaming Edge (WiRE) project aims to support the development of
novel and important mobile applications -- particularly those in the domain of
transportation. The key to the project is the creation of a new computing
platform, termed the "roaming edge", which consists of substantial computational
resources (including processors, memory, storage devices, and sensors) within
mobile transportation platforms (such as busses and automobiles). The WiRE
project will make these resources available to multiple applications in a secure
and robust fashion, and, by providing low-latency and high-bandwidth access to
data and computation, enable the creation of new classes of mobile applications.
This research is about providing strong security and privacy while delivering
high levels of performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WiRE project leverages
recent advances in serverless computing, and four major research challenges --
the construction of a hardware-based secure execution environment, fine-grained
and user-tunable privacy controls, intelligent data-driven scheduling of
computation, and realistic scenario simulation for fast application prototyping.
These form the core intellectual thrusts of the work. All software will be made
available via open-source licenses, thus enabling the broader community (both
academic and industrial) to benefit from and contribute to the effort. The WiRE
project endeavors to transform how future generations of mobile applications are
developed and deployed, particularly in the emerging field of intelligent
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.