* 1838273
* RoL: FELS: EAGER: Collaborative Research: Genomics of exceptions to scaling of longevity to body size
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Liliana Davalos Alvarez, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2021
* USD 215,358.00

In mammals, as body size increases so does maximum lifespan, but bats represent
an exception to this rule. This project will use a detailed genomic analysis to
examine how bats live significantly longer than expected. Bat species studied to
date can live up to six times longer than expected based on their body mass.
Achieving unusually long life requires enhanced cell and tissue upkeep,
maintaining immune function, and avoiding mutations that cause cancer and other
age-related diseases. Hence, their exceptionally long lives require that bats
evolve mechanisms to enable these features. To discover the genetic basis of
healthy old age, this project focuses on pairs of closely related bat species
that sharply differ in their longevity. Detailed genome comparisons between
closely related species with different life spans will test different theories
of aging. Although genome sequences are available for many mammals, including
some bats, in most cases these are too incomplete to allow detailed comparisons.
For this reason, the project also seeks to combine modern DNA sequencing
techniques to produce genome sequences at greater resolution and lower cost than
hitherto possible. The resulting methods can be applied across many other
mammals, and vertebrates more generally. The project will also support the
production of new teaching materials on evolutionary biology for secondary
school students and research experiences for teachers, as well as the
development of new research and analytical approaches for use by the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scaling of longevity by body size relates
the biology of populations to the molecular mechanisms of cells and tissues
making up individuals, but the nature of the connections is debated. Some
theories suggest that aging is the result of genetic trade-offs imposed by the
diminishing chances of reproduction of older individuals (Evolutionary Theory),
while others propose that aging results from molecular and cellular damage as
organisms move through life (Damage Theory). This project will test these broad
theories through comparative analyses of high-quality genome sequences. Besides
generating at least five high quality mammalian genomes to complement existing
or ongoing ones, the project will relate longevity phenotypes to genotypes
across the genome sequence including genes, pseudogenes, transcription factors,
and variation in the number of copies of certain genes. Coupled with analyses of
genomic methylation and RNA transcripts, the project will identify candidate
regions underlying divergent longevities, enabling future functional analyses at
the scale of tissues, cells, and molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.