* 1838364
* CAREER: Decentralized Constraint-Based Optimization for Multi-Agent Planning and Coordination
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,02/28/2023
* William Yeoh, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 02/28/2023
* USD 391,035.00

There is a growing need for optimization methods to support decentralized
decision-making in complex multi-agent systems including target tracking in
sensor networks, mission planning of unmanned autonomous vehicles, coordination
of rescue robots in disaster scenarios, and scheduling of intelligent devices in
smart homes within smart grids. This class of problems is particularly
challenging to solve due to a combination of the following requirements: There
is a high degree of uncertainty that must be taken into account during planning;
the planning process must be done in a decentralized fashion; and the resulting
plan must be executed in a decentralized way as well. The objective of this
project is to respond to the crucial challenge of developing an integrated
approach that captures all these requirements within a single framework in order
to improve the scope and applicability of multi-agent techniques in real-world
applications. The long-term broader impacts of this project include the
potential for the research findings to improve decentralized decision-making in
real-world problems. In the short term, high-school students will benefit from
the education modules developed by the PI, which will be disseminated through
collaborations with local outreach programs as well as local teachers and summer
camp organizers. The students will develop better computational thinking skills
and be exposed to computational concepts applied to relevant applications of
interest. The significance of these efforts is made more crucial by the fact
that a majority of the student body at local high-schools as well as at NMSU is
Hispanic. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make the necessary
foundational contributions to the field of multi-agent systems to improve the
scope and applicability of such systems, especially those that utilize automated
planning and constraint optimization techniques, in the real world. More
specifically, this project will result in (i) novel ways to more accurately
model a large class of multi-agent planning problems using decentralized
constraint-based models; (ii) new scalable algorithms with theoretical
guarantees suitable for solving large-scale decentralized planning problems; and
(iii) effective ways of improving computational thinking in high-school students
via the use of constraint-based representations.