* 1838443
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Room temperature Quantum Logic operations Enabled by Quantum Emitter Arrays in 2D artificial Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Yu Yao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 295,046.00

Non-technical abstract: Two-dimensional (2D) crystals are a new class of
materials that measure only a few nanometers in thickness. Recent studies have
shown that these materials offer unique advantages over other known materials,
and that they hold the potential to make a large impact in new-generation
electronics, energy conversion, and storage applications. When these 2D crystals
are stacked onto each other they form a material known as a 2D Moire
superlattice, which possesses an unusual physical properties that may enable
quantum computation. Such materials could revolutionize current information
technologies. This research aims to reach a fundamental understanding of the
optical behavior of 2D Moire superlattices using advanced optical measurement
techniques, as well as develop state-of-the-art fabrication techniques to create
nanoscale devices for manipulation of quantum information. The research
activities have significant impact on training of next-generation researchers.
Doctoral and master students, as well as undergraduates conduct all the
necessary experiments, participating in hands-on research activities. The
research team is preparing YouTube videos: 'Moire patterns in the nature,
science, and engineering' and '2D Moire superlattices and 2D crystals', to reach
out to the general public and science/technology enthusiasts. Exciting results
are also shared through conference presentations, journal publications, and
scientific review articles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: A quantum
emitter strongly coupled to a cavity that operates down to the single-photon
level is essential for quantum logic. Yet, there have been big challenges to
achieve this at room temperature due to the limited coupling strength between
conventional quantum emitters and optical cavities . This research explores the
quantum optics of Moire quantum emitters (Moire-QEs) as single-photon emitters
and their integration with Fano-dielectric metacavities, allowing manipulation
of coherent states in quantum logic operations. The research projects include;
i) the synthesis of optical grade, highly crystalline, and atomically clean
Moire superlattices sustaining long-lived Moire-QEs through CVD and MBE methods,
ii) investigation of quantum optics of Moire-QEs to identify their potential in
quantum logic operation; iii) designing low-loss, high-Q, and large Rabi energy
splitting metacavities, fabricating them, and integrating them with Moire-QEs to
enable quantum logic operation, and lastly iv) investigation of nonlinear
effects and demonstration of cross-phase modulation. The research is anticipated
to lay a solid foundation towards creating large periodicity Moire-QEs and to
understand their behavior related to single photon nonlinearities. In addition,
the project aims to identify clear pathways towards potentially scalable quantum
system design, to study room temperature quantum optical nonlinear effects, and
quantum state manipulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.