* 1838522
* EAGER: Coulomb explosion in the perturbative regime - a neglected paradigm
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Wei Kong, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 250,159.00

Atoms are composed of positively charged nuclei surrounded by clouds of
negatively charged electrons. Molecules form when atoms "share" electrons. The
shared electrons are happier being between two positively charged nuclei, and
the repulsive forces between the nuclei (both are positively charged) are
reduced because of the presence of the shared electrons between them. When a
molecule is bombarded with an intense light beam (for example from a laser),
electrons in the molecule can be stripped away. In some cases, the loss of
electrons means that the repulsion between the positively charged nuclei
increases, and the molecule flies apart. This phenomenon is called a "Coulomb
Explosion," after the physical law that describes the forces of repulsion and
attraction in charged particles. Many previous studies of Coulomb Explosion
processes have involved high intensity femtosecond pulse lasers (a femtosecond
is one quadrillionth of second. In laser systems, the shorter the pulse, the
higher the light intensity that can be achieved). In this project supported by
the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Wei Kong and her research group at Oregon State University
are investigating Coulomb explosions that are produced with surprisingly low
intensities of laser light. They are using advanced laser techniques to explore
this new phenomenon in detail, by measuring the energy and directionality of the
atomic fragments from molecules and atomic clusters formed under different
conditions, including the size, the chemical composition, and the effective
temperature of the cluster. The Kong group is also testing a new theoretical
explanation for the occurrence of Coulomb explosions induced by low intensity
light. This results from this research project have the potential to change how
we think about molecular structure and the interaction of molecules with light.
In the long term, it may be possible to induce some chemical reactions with
lower energy inputs than currently assumed (thus, "big bang" results may be
touched off by a "whimper" of input light). A post-doctoral fellow engaged in
this project is receiving training in advanced laser techniques and theoretical
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves measurements of the
spatial and energy distributions of atomic fragments from Coulomb explosions of
clusters prepared under a variety of conditions. Based on the tentative model
proposed by the Kong group, Rydberg manifolds of the clusters are necessary for
the initiation and heating stages of Coulomb explosions, and the generation of
multiply charged atomic ions is a result of a singly (or low) charged atomic
ions boiling off a highly charged cluster ion. To test the first half of the
hypothesis, the chemical composition of the cluster is changed from stable
organic molecules to alkali metal atoms. This change in composition
significantly shifts the energy levels and density of states of the cluster. To
test the second half of the hypothesis, the kinetic energy and spatial
distribution of the resulting atomic ions need to be measured. Energy
conservation dictates the ultimate velocity gained by the atomic ions, and
spatial orientation of the fragments signifies the timing of the production of
the atomic ions. Velocity map imaging techniques are being used to obtain these
data. Coulomb explosion processes are currently exploited in chemical imaging
and surface nanostructure applications. This research may lead to advances in
these fields, and potentially in the realm of photochemical reaction
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.