* 1838618
* REU SITE: Research experiences in marine and estuarine science in the northern Gulf of Mexico
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ruth Carmichael, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2022
* USD 339,901.00

The Dauphin Island Sea Laboratory (DISL) located on Dauphin Island, AL in the
northern Gulf of Mexico, will host a Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) program. The program will bring eight undergraduates each summer to DISL
to conduct independent research projects with the guidance of research mentors.
The program will provide a strong integration of field and lab-based studies
across disciplines and proximity to a range of ecosystems. In addition to
independent research in marine science, students will participate in a series of
seminars, field trips, and enrichment activities designed to develop the skills
critical to a career in science. Students will present a final poster at a
formal symposium, with the goal of contributing to a peer-reviewed paper and
presenting their work at a scientific meeting following the summer internship.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the DISL REU program is understanding the
marine and estuarine ecosystems and living resources of the Gulf of Mexico,
including research topics such as benthic ecology, fisheries and marine mammal
ecology, toxicology, and biological, chemical, and physical oceanography. The
program will conduct a national search for applicants and seeks to engage
students who are from schools with limited research opportunities, particularly
those in the Gulf Coast region. Most of the funding provided supports student
stipends, housing and travel to attend the program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Rutgers REU Site will provide a total of twenty-four undergraduates with
internships over the three-year period. This project supports the national goals
of developing the next generation of scientists and the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.