* 1838988
* EAGER:  Combining elemental and biochemical measures of prey to improve predictions of trophic transfers of nutrients
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Shawn Wilder, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 08/31/2021
* USD 199,921.00

Food webs describe the flow of energy and nutrients through communities and
ecosystems. Elements (e.g., carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus) are the most common
currency used by ecologists for measuring food web connections and comparing
them across different ecosystems. Yet, other measures of diet such as
macronutrients (i.e., carbohydrate, lipid, and protein) can also be useful
because they provide more information on the quality of biochemical compounds.
The overall goal of this work is to develop a framework for studying food webs
that combines elements and macronutrients and then to test if this better
predicts the amounts and types of nutrients transferred among organisms in food
webs than elements alone. This research will focus on insects and other
arthropods as they are some of the most diverse and abundant members of
terrestrial ecosystems and a major food source for invertebrate and vertebrate
predators. Better understanding how food webs function is an important goal for
management of agricultural and natural ecosystem. During the course of this
work, the project will also advance secondary STEM education by providing high
school students and pre-service teachers with authentic research experiences and
by training teachers in ways to incorporate research into classroom lesson
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test two objectives important for
better uniting elemental and macronutrient approaches to studying food webs.
First, the project will test the long-held assumption that elements and
macronutrients are correlated with each other in diverse arthropods, which
preliminary data suggest may not be well-supported. Then, the project will test
if a hybrid currency, macronutrient-partitioned elements, is a better predictor
of the transfer of nutrients from prey to predator and the transfer of nutrients
from arthropod carcasses to soil decomposers than elements alone. This work is
intellectually risky because it represents a significant departure from two
fields (i.e., ecological stoichiometry and nutritional geometry) that have
traditionally measured nutrients differently (i.e., elements versus
macronutrients). However, the potential rewards of this work are great as it may
unite these parallel and complementary paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.