* 1838902
* Workshop on Future Trends and Opportunities for Power Electronics in an Electrified Transportation Industry, Held at Univ. of Maryland, College Park MD, August 17-18, 2018. MD
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Babak Fahimi, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,000.00

Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;An electrified transportation industry will transform
mobility, energy independence, power grid operation, and connectivity in a
profound and substantially positive way. The cultural, economic, environmental,
and industrial outcomes of this disruptive trend will have a global impact. This
transformation will open new opportunities for fusing industries such as
communication, energy, electric power, and robotics to name a few. Scientific
and technological leadership in this growing trend plays a pivotal role in long
term economic prosperity, energy independence, and creation of new jobs in the
United States and around the world. Power electronics, as an enabling
technology, plays a key role in ultimate success of this transformation. The
workshop on future trends and opportunities for power electronics in an
electrified transportation industry aims to identify the most challenging and
needed technological advances in the area of power converter, electric motors,
wireless charging, and autonomous vehicle design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop brings leaders from the academia, industry, and government together
within a two days program to discuss and exchange ideas related to the role of
power electronics in electrification of the transportation industry. A series of
keynote speeches by experts followed by task specific group discussions will
take place on August 17-18, 2018. The main technical focus of the workshop will
be on electric drive requirements, charging and energy storage management, and
autonomous operation and connectivity of electric vehicles. The final outcome of
this gathering will be a set of recommendations to outline the most needed short
term and long term technology advances in the area of power electronics and
energy conversion to cope with the anticipated rate of growth in electrification
of the automotive, aerospace, and marine industries. The requested funds will be
used to cover the travel expenses of the invitees to the workshop and meals
during the event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.