* 1838339
* Measuring and Improving Pedagogical Content Knowledge of Student Assistants in Introductory Physics Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Beth Thacker, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2023
* USD 296,775.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR), this project aims to serve the
national interest by developing a validated assessment to improve the
effectiveness of Student Assistants in introductory physics courses. Reforms in
college-level introductory physics courses have promoted a shift from lecturing
and factual recitation to interactive learning and conceptual understanding,
which requires timely in-class guidance from an expanded teaching team. Many
institutions use graduate or undergraduate Student Assistants (SAs) to assist
the primary instructor. It is assumed that SAs contribute to improving student
thinking and conceptual understanding, but there is limited evidence to support
this assumption. In addition, if improvements do result, information about how
the SA contributes to the improvement is also limited. One possibility is that
asking good questions is important, since questioning is an effective
instructional strategy used by instructors in an inquiry-based environment. This
project will test the hypothesis that improving SAs' knowledge about questioning
will improve their abilities to prompt student thinking and scaffold group
interaction in inquiry-based classrooms. In this project, the researchers will
develop both open-ended and multiple-choice versions of an instrument to assess
SAs' knowledge of questioning. This important research is designed to contribute
to a comprehensive understanding of the role that SAs' knowledge of questioning
plays in college students' introductory physics learning. The products from this
research will be made available to physics instructors across the country, and
the instrument may be modified for use in other STEM disciplines. By monitoring
the quality of SAs through the instrument, SAs can be better prepared to act as
instructional leads in inquiry-based classrooms. As a result, the project has
the potential to enhance college-level physics and other STEM education
throughout the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers hypothesize
that SAs' Pedagogical Content Knowledge of Questioning (PCK-Q) is at the heart
of SA effectiveness. This project will measure this effectiveness in three
phases. In the first phase, the researchers will capture videos of SAs
interacting with students during introductory physics classes. From the studying
these videos, the researchers will create open-ended questions as the first
version of the PCK-Q test. In the second phase, the researchers will use the
responses from the first version of the PCK-Q test to develop and validate a
multiple-choice version of the test. The process of developing and validating
both versions of the PCK-Q test will yield qualitative data that contribute to
the assessment and adjustment of SA training strategies. In the third phase of
this project, the researchers will combine the data from the PCK-Q assessments
and conceptual inventories of the students in their classes to build hierarchal
linear models relating SAs' PCK-Q scores to improvements in their students'
conceptual understanding. There will be two hierarchal linear models, one for
students' conceptual understanding of physic concepts and one for student's
conceptual thinking skills. The hierarchies of each level are at the student
level (Level 1) and then at the class level (Level 2). This research project
will benefit the field of undergraduate physics instruction by adding new
insights into how SAs may best promote student learning in introductory physics
classrooms. Potential long-term benefits include increased efficiency and lower
costs of physics education, and adaptions for use in other STEM fields. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. This is an Engaged Student
Learning proposal on the Exploration and Design Track. Through the Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.