* 1838548
* Core Support for the Federal Demonstration Partnership
* O/D,OIA
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* John Boright, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Dragana Brzakovic
* 02/28/2022
* USD 510,000.00

The Federal Demonstration Partnership (FDP) is a cooperative initiative
involving 10 federal agencies and 154 recipient institutions managing federally
sponsored research funds. The goal of the FDP is to increase research
productivity by streamlining the administrative process for research while
maintaining effective stewardship of and full accountability for federal funds.
More specifically, FDP strives to maximize research performance per federal
dollar by minimizing the monetary and time burdens associated with the
administrative aspects of federally-sponsored research. Since its inception, the
FDP has successfully worked to reduce administrative burden while accommodating
continuous changes to the policies and regulations most significant to research
administration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the unique forum provided by the
FDP, federal agency officials work collaboratively with administrative, faculty,
and technical representatives from a broad range of academic research
institutions to identify and assess unnecessary burden resulting from policies
and processes that can be addressed only through cooperation. Targeted projects,
pilots, and demonstrations are an important and defining component of the FDP.
Once a new approach is successfully beta tested by a few willing institutions
and agencies within the FDP, it is generally accepted by the FDP's members and
often by most research funding agencies and recipients. A study and 2016 report
by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine on "Optimizing
the Nation's Investment in Academic Research" cites and references the work of
the FDP throughout. The work that the FDP has accomplished in the past has
achieved national recognition and the current proposal outlines further plans
for maximizing federal investments in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.