* 1838474
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Dating Widespread Social Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Ruth Van Dyke, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2019
* USD 11,995.00

From the 9th to 12th centuries CE, people at Chaco Canyon New Mexico and
throughout a vast surrounding region built communities with monumental
architecture suggesting the development of an ancient Puebloan elite.
Archaeologists have long sought to understand the nature of sociopolitical
relations at Chaco Canyon, and between Chaco and its outlier communities. The
evidence of sociopolitical hierarchy at Chaco itself is ambiguous, with few of
the stamps of individual power seen at other power centers around the world, and
archaeologists know even less about Chaco's 100+ outlier communities, of which
only a handful have seen significant excavation. Michelle Turner of Binghamton
University, under the guidance of Dr. Ruth Van Dyke, will examine the
relationship between Chaco Canyon and Aztec Ruins, one of the largest Chacoan
outlier communities, by establishing a chronology for the construction of the
Aztec North great house. This research will be a basis for Turner's PhD
dissertation, so this grant supports the work of a student. The researchers'
project was developed in cooperation with archaeologists at Aztec Ruins National
Monument, following consultation with tribal representatives, and it will
provide valuable new information for the park's staff to share with visitors.
The researchers will share their findings with tribal representatives and other
members of descendant communities, and the results will also be disseminated at
public talks in the region as well as in academic journals and at professional
conferences.

Turner and Van Dyke conducted limited archaeological testing in 2016 at the
previously unexcavated Aztec North great house, one of three great houses at
Aztec Ruins National Monument. Aztec North's origins are hotly debated. While
its neighbor great house Aztec West was clearly constructed with the involvement
of Chacoan builders starting around 1110 CE, Aztec North's architecture includes
an unusual combination of Chacoan and non-Chacoan construction features. For
example, while the walls of the structure have a sandstone veneer that looks
very much like Chacoan masonry, that veneer conceals an adobe fill core that
looks more local. Was this structure built by newly arrived Chacoan builders who
had not yet developed the work force to build a full masonry structure, or was
it built by local people imitating Chacoan ways? Or was it perhaps a much later
experiment in adobe construction? Turner will test these possibilities by
running radiocarbon dating on organic materials from Aztec North to pinpoint the
site's occupation dates. If Aztec North was built in the years just after
construction of Aztec West, then it is probable that Chacoan builders were
already present, while earlier dates would indicate it was most likely built by
local people emulating Chaco. Dates after the mid-1100s would suggest a post-
Chacoan origin. The radiocarbon dates, interpreted in combination with the
researchers' analysis of the architecture, ceramics and other artifacts from the
excavation, will provide valuable data for archaeologists seeking to understand
the history of both Aztec Ruins and the wider Chacoan region.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.