* 1838512
* RAPID: Rejuvenation of the University of New Hampshire (UNH)'s Neutron Monitor Network
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* James Ryan, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 06/30/2020
* USD 35,000.00

This one-year RAPID project is aimed at supporting the continued operations and
the full rejuvenation of the University of New Hampshire (UNH) network comprised
of three neutron monitor (NM) sites: the summit of Mount Washington, Durham, New
Hampshire and Leadville, Colorado. The three stations are important because they
enable long-term cosmic-ray modulation studies with a data base dating back six
Solar Cycles. The NMs are the legacy workhorse instruments for heliospheric
physics. Because of their simplicity, ruggedness, and tolerance for mis-
adjustment, they have registered numerous transient phenomena, i.e., ground
level enhancements (GLE) and Forbush decreases (FD) for more than a half
century. They have also been used to monitor the global galactic cosmic-ray
intensity that has served as a measure of solar-induced heliospheric activity
and has also been used to quantify the dynamics of the transport of cosmic rays
within the heliosphere. Conducting these measurements over several Solar Cycles,
for example, revealed the 22-year charge-sign dependent heliospheric drift. When
treating the global network of NMs as a single magnetic spectrometer, the
cosmic-ray spectrum of these phenomena can be measured from the atmospheric
cutoff rigidity at high latitudes to almost 20 GV, the geomagnetic cut-off of
the most equatorial station. UNH owns and operates three stations in this
network. A fourth (Climax) is moribund, and a fifth (Maui), is irreparably
decommissioned. The intent of this project is to return the three operating UNH
neutron monitors to a complete operational status and support their operation
for one year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year RAPID project allows time-
critical hardware fixes (controllers and barometers), data processing and
recording, overdue maintenance and contractual arrangements with host
organizations. Of particular urgency is the full return of the Leadville station
to supplant the data stream formerly produced by the Climax monitor. These NM
data, along with those of the other instruments in the global network, are
critical to interpretation of spacecraft data and the collective measurements of
GLEs. Partially filled requests from other investigators for data from one or
more of these instruments illustrates their importance to the system. The
project provides the means to bring all three stations up to standards by the
end of 2018. The three stations are important because they enable long-term
cosmic-ray modulation studies with a data base dating back six solar cycles.
They are also important for GLE studies, providing "ground truth" for
measurements such as PAMELA and AMS. The PAMELA studies by the project team
indicate that to fully appreciate and interpret space-based measurements, NM
measurements are necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project helps support the
non-profit Mount Washington Observatory, which is a meteorological and science
resource for the entire New England community. For the international community,
it enables the spectrum analysis of GLEs with NMs during impulsive anisotropic
phases of an event. This is possible with the South Pole instruments, but the
yield function of Polar PolarBARE is very different. A northern hemisphere
functionality provided by Mount Washington and Durham complements and augments
the South Pole system. It provides an educational experience for an
undergraduate student, who is now re-formatting the NM data from all three
instruments and exporting those data to the Real-time Neutron Monitor Database
(NMDB). The research agenda of this RAPID project supports the Strategic Goals
of the AGS Division in discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.