* 1838341
* Collaborative Research:  RoL:  FELS:  EAGER:  Determining the Interplay of Long- and Short-Range Interactions in Emergent Biological Collective Behavior
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Allyson Sgro, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2021
* USD 149,926.00

Living organisms are capable of remarkable large-scale organization and
coordination, as seen in fish schools, vegetation patterns, or microbial mats.
How such organization occurs is an open question. It is hypothesized that
organisms use a mix of shorter-distance and longer-distance interactions, such
as physical contact and chemical communication, to organize and coordinate
behavior. However, in most systems it is hard to identify and quantify these
interactions. This project will reveal how feedback can modulate the ability to
synchronize, coordinate, and form collectives, how groups tune key properties
such as size and composition, and how groups control larger-scale pattern
formation across multiple collectives. In the social amoeba, the types of
interactions that coordinate behavior at both short and long distances are
known. Studies of these amoeba will allow the development of methods to
visualize these interactions and quantify them for the first time, during group
formation. How these interactions work together to coordinate individuals across
a single group and coordinate between multiple groups will be examined. The
researchers will incorporate this empirical knowledge into a theoretical model
to make general predictions. This project will train undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs in research by involving them in the experimental and
modeling projects. It will also train undergraduates in biological modeling via
a course that will integrate concepts from this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-organization is pervasive throughout the
biological world and understanding how it naturally occurs and the emergent
patterns it produces constitutes the first step towards our ability to control
such processes. Theoretical work has proposed that short- and/or long-range
interactions and feedback between these interactions could drive self-
organization, with different mixes of such interactions leading to different
system-level consequences. Despite prolific theoretical work, experimental
evidence for these proposed mechanisms has largely been lacking, primarily
because there are few systems where we have the level of quantitative control
and readout required. The researchers will address questions of self-
organization and the resulting collective phenotypes in the cellular slime mold,
Dictyostelium discoideum. Optimizing and exploiting new experimental techniques
will permit quantification of the dynamics of short and long-range interactions.
Combining the experimental techniques with a theoretical framework will help
establish how the interplay between them leads to collective behaviors. This
project will reveal how feedback can modulate the ability to synchronize,
coordinate, and form collectives. The project may also determine how organisms
tune key group properties such as size and composition, and control larger-scale
pattern formation across multiple collectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.