* 1838532
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Towards Room Temperature Quantum Logic with Topological Exciton Condensates
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Inna Vishik, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,621.00

Nontechnical Description: Quantum computers promise the next great technology
leap. At the heart of a quantum computer are material implementations of quantum
bits - qubits - which in the present form are highly sensitive to the
environment and are typically only achieved at very low temperatures. This
project aims to discover a new type of material that may enable room-temperature
quantum computing. The new method is based on electrons and their associated
vacancies, also known as holes, in a solid material. When an electron lingers
close to a hole, the electrical attraction between the pair leads to the
formation of a quantum particle known as an exciton. This project explores the
utilization of excitons as qubits for enabling quantum logic devices. Recent
studies suggest that excitons may be formed above room temperature in a new type
of material known as a topological insulator. The principal investigators use a
variety of experimental techniques to understand the nature of excitons in
topological insulators, and improve the critical temperature for achieving them,
so that they may be sustained at room temperature. This project educates and
trains undergraduate and graduate students in the important and rapidly
advancing research area of quantum computation, and offers outreach activities
targeting K-12 students from underrepresented minority
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Topological exciton
condensation is a fundamentally new concept which may open an unexplored and
exciting research area. Our recent experimental studies of three-dimensional
topological insulators have revealed unusual non-local photocurrent at liquid
nitrogen temperature, indicating a superfluid-like topological exciton
condensate. This project builds on these exciting preliminary results and aims
to obtain fundamental understanding of topological exciton condensates.
Experiments to unambiguously distinguish the free Fermion and exciton mechanisms
by conducting electric field dependent photocurrent mapping are performed.
Spatially resolved angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (micro-ARPES)
supports this effort by characterizing the occupied single-particle spectrum of
materials platforms where signatures of an excitonic condensate are observed.
Ultrafast spectroscopy is carried out to measure exciton lifetime and velocity.
The exciton induced spin polarization is explored using Kerr rotation. An even
higher onset temperature for exciton condensation is achieved in thinner and
more intrinsic samples and other low dimensional topological materials beyond
Bi2Se3. The topological exciton condensate, a high-temperature macroscopic
quantum state with long coherence lengths and unique spin texture, has a truly
promising potential to be implemented in room-temperature quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.