* 1838412
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Exceptional-point Topological Polaritonics for Room-temperature Quantum Logic
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Alan Johnson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Non-technical description: This EAGER project seeks to enable room-temperature
quantum logic operation in an emerging platform known as two-dimensional quantum
materials. While quantum technologies present exciting opportunities such as
exponential speed-ups of large computations, their realizations often require
cryogenic conditions, such as -269 degrees Celsius, which is challenging to
obtain in daily lives. Accordingly, the research team proposes to investigate,
theoretically and experimentally, a set of fundamental physical mechanisms and
phenomena that can significantly reduce the threshold of quantum logic gates and
bring them to room-temperature operation. This research activity is integrated
with efforts to train undergraduate and graduate students via interdisciplinary,
collaborative research at the forefront of optical and quantum physics, material
science, and nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The
interaction between light and matter is at the heart of both quantum logic gates
and classical optoelectronic devices. So far, most research is built upon the
traditional theoretical framework of cavity quantum electrodynamics, which
relies on one assumption: the Green's function of a system can be fully expanded
by its eigenmodes. In this project, the research team propose to investigate new
physics and devices where this fundamental assumption fails, at a unique type of
non-Hermitian topological degeneracies known as exceptional points. In
particular, the project focuses on the application of exceptional points to
reduce quantum logic thresholds in the platform of two-dimensional materials.
Successful completion of the project may benefit society by potentially granting
access to quantum technologies in people's daily lives. In addition, the focus
on non-Hermiticity and topological physics enables the development of new
families of classical optoelectronic devices essential to our technological
infrastructure in a multitude of areas, including imaging and sensing,
healthcare, and energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.