* 1838314
* RoL:  FELS:  EAGER Rules of lifespan determination and buffering from lifelong spatiotemporal activity of key aging pathways.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Kevin Flores, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

This project will develop tools and data necessary to accurately predict
lifespan from the activity of genes that respond to environmental conditions
such as food intake or stress exposure. It is not fully understood how genes and
the environment determine an individual's specific longevity outcome. For
example, it is known that calorie reduction or reduction in oxidative stress can
lead to increased longevity, but precisely predicting longevity from this
information alone is not possible. Given the difficulties of studying aging in
humans, the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, will be used as a model to link
the activity of specific genes known to affect aging. A mathematical model of
the relationship between environment, genes, and longevity will be generated to
reveal which genes and environments are most important in determining aging and
longevity and to enable the prediction of lifespan. This information will be
used in future work that focuses on whether these predictions can be extended to
other organisms, and ultimately to humans. Through this work, two graduate
students and one postdoctoral researcher will receive interdisciplinary
training. In addition, this project will support a Latinx-directed STEM
initiative for high-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's main
goal is to develop an experimental and analytical pipeline that will enable the
establishment of rules of lifespan determination in the model organism
Caenorhabditis elegans. Mathematical and statistical models that can predict
lifespan of an individual based on lifelong activity of key aging pathways will
be developed. The research tests whether variability in activity of key genes
(due to biological noise or environmental or genetic perturbations) is
propagated to variability in lifespan. To address this question, a microfluidic
platform that enables monitoring of multiple individuals throughout their
lifespan, while quantifying the activity of key aging pathways through
endogenous fluorescent reporters, will be developed. The proposed platform will
allow data pairing, where gene activity at the single individual level can be
paired with its lifespan. Experimental tools that enable simultaneous
quantitative analysis of in vivo gene activity and combinatorial environmental
perturbations will be developed. These tools hinge on microfluidics, computer
vision, automation, and new reporter strains engineered by CRISPR to track gene
activity under endogenous regulatory control. The acquired data sets will be
used to derive data-driven mathematical models that describe the stochastic
dynamics of gene activity and its downstream phenotypic outcome: lifespan. Novel
statistical techniques will be combined with mathematical models to infer
phenotypic heterogeneity and robustness within populations. Interdisciplinary
training will be provided to two graduate students and one postdoctoral
researcher, and the award will support an educational program directed at
broaden participation of Latinx high-school students in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.