* 1838984
* EAGER: Lattice-matched direct-bandgap III-V photodetector materials to silicon
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Seth Bank, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 08/31/2019
* USD 156,000.00

Part 1:&lt;br/&gt;The electronic integrated circuit, built primarily of crystals
of silicon, has transformed the way humans compute and exchange information.
This progress been enabled by the development of ever more powerful
manufacturing techniques for electronic integrated circuits. This manufacturing
infrastructure has also enabled tremendous advances in other areas, such as
solar cells and digital cameras, where silicon is used to turn incident light
into electrical energy/current. However, the range of colors of light to which
silicon is sensitive, as well as the speed with which it can detect light, are
fundamentally limited. Here, we seek to study a new family of materials that
offers the potential for sensing colors of light in the infrared to which
silicon is not sensitive, as well as greatly increased speed of detection, with
applications including autonomous vehicles, communication systems, and
biomedical instrumentation. The key advantage is that these new materials share
a compatible crystal structure with silicon, potentially allowing them to be
grown as crystals directly on silicon and take advantage of the sophisticated
silicon manufacturing infrastructure. The goal of this project is to answer key
questions related to the potential to enhance light detection on silicon. This
project will provide cutting-edge research opportunities for two Ph.D. students,
increase research opportunities for undergraduates from historically
underrepresented groups, and engage pre-K to 12 students with the exciting world
of nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches
towards monolithic integration of direct bandgap materials on silicon suffer
from a variety of challenges and there is no clear path to the lattice-matched
materials needed to address important emerging applications in the near- and
mid-infrared. For photodetectors specifically, lattice-matching is critical to
avoid the excessive dark currents that plague metamorphic approaches. While
silicon itself can be an extremely efficient photodetector, it is limited in
spectral coverage to less than ~1.1 micron and the thick absorbing regions
required for high quantum efficiency tend to limit achievable bandwidths to less
than ~2 GHz. This project will focus on the potential for BGaAs and BGaInAs
photodetectors, which could span ~1-5 micron cutoff wavelengths on silicon and
offer dramatic bandwidth advantages due to their direct bandgap. It is
underpinned by (1) the PI??s recent success incorporating record high boron
contents up to ~22% into GaAs, nearly sufficient to lattice-match with silicon,
(2) preliminary metal-semiconductor-metal BGaAs photodetectors, (3) successful
initial growths of direct bandgap BGaAs on GaP, and (4) the commercial
availability of GaP-on-Si substrates. This project will answer key questions
that govern the potential viability of these emerging materials for
photodetectors related to p- and n-doping, defect mitigation, and fundamental
optical properties. Additionally, lattice-matching of BGaAs onto GaP-on-Si
templates will be demonstrated for the first time, along with alloying with
indium to produce tunable-bandgap BGaInAs alloys lattice-matched to silicon.
While the focus here will be on addressing the requirements for direct bandgap
lattice-matched photodetectors, it is important to note that much of these
research findings could be applicable to emitters as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.