* 1838297
* RoL:FELS:EAGER: The genetic architecture of biomechanical integration in fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Timothy Higham, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 294,022.00

Animals must coordinate the function of multiple body parts and/or systems in
order to accomplish a task. For example, the coordination of visual and
locomotor systems is critical for animals that actively hunt mobile prey. For
fishes, both the locomotor and feedings systems must be coordinated in order to
accurately capture prey in the water. How this coordination impacts survival, or
how it differs depending on ecological conditions, is unknown. Furthermore, the
genetic basis of this functional integration is a mystery. In fact, almost
nothing is known about the genes that control behavioral traits in non-human
animals. The three-spine stickleback system is used for uncovering these
relationships because they have repeatedly invaded isolated freshwater habitats
from a common marine ancestor. This has resulted in the rapid parallel evolution
of populations over a relatively short period of time (since the last glacial
period). This natural experiment provides the framework from which to discover
the specific genes that underlie complex behavioral integration during tasks
that are critical for survival. This project will expand the boundaries of
evolutionary theory and provide a basis from which to conduct future studies on
complex behaviors. This research can translate to any animal system, including
humans. The project will provide research training and international field
experiences to student and postdoctoral investigators, including those from
groups that are traditionally underrepresented in the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the evolution of natural
populations that diverge to exploit different ecological resources is an
important objective in evolutionary biology. Most studies that examine the link
between genetics and phenotype focus on morphological differences among species
and populations. However, evolutionary changes in behavior are often considered
integral in initiating adaptive shifts, whereby populations or species may
exhibit a variety of habitat selection strategies to use resources and may
differ in the behavioral traits used to exploit those resources. Behavioral
traits critical for survival, such as prey capture or predator evasion, emerge
from the integration of parts and systems within an organism, causing
quantitative phenotypic traits to often co-vary with one another. Little is
known about the genetic architecture of behavioral traits in vertebrates, and
even less is known about the architecture of behavioral integration. Leveraging
the extensive information regarding the ecology and evolution of the threespine
stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus), the genetic architecture of dynamic
functional integration between locomotion and feeding during prey capture will
be determined. This will be done using the parallel evolution of freshwater
populations that have diverged from a marine ancestor. The genetic architecture
underlying these behavioral traits will be examined by sequencing a number of
crosses between populations (and obtaining QTLs), and then linking this to
biomechanical phenotypes (using high-speed 3D video). The importance of
integration will be assessed using a strike accuracy assay and other measures of
capture success. This integrative approach may lead to new insight into the
evolution of complex phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.