* 1838667
* RCN: Coral Bleaching Research Coordination Network
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Andrea Grottoli, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2023
* USD 539,828.00

Researchers at the National Science Foundation U.S. Investigator Workshop on
Coral Bleaching in 2016 determined that advancing coral bleaching research
required new efficiencies in research and sample archiving methods across a
large multi-disciplinary network in order to facilitate comparisons among
studies and reduce the time to discovery. It was determined that a Coral
Bleaching Research Coordination Network (Coral Bleaching RCN) was the most
effective way of addressing this problem. The goals of this Coral Bleaching RCN
are to 1) develop experimental design, sample archiving, and data synthesis
protocols, through three workshops and 2) facilitate the formation of
interdisciplinary collaborative teams. Workshop findings will be disseminated
through live cyber-seminars, publications, conference presentations, and
archived on the Coral Bleaching RCN website. To foster interdisciplinary
training of early career scientists, an Early Career Training program will make
available, on a competitive basis, funds for individuals to spend time in
another lab to learn new skills, methods, or analytical approaches, thus
furthering interdisciplinary training. Two graduate students and sixteen early
career scientists will be supported by this grant. Efforts will be made to
select a diverse group of individuals for the workshops and early career
program, with representation across gender, race, and country of origin, as well
as research expertise. Diversity among career stages will also be considered for
workshop participants. The Steering Committee members include two women and one
individual from a historically underrepresented group with research expertise
ranging from geochemistry to ecology to genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals
of this Coral Bleaching RCN are to 1) develop experimental design, sample
archiving, and data synthesis protocols, through three workshops and 2)
facilitate the formation of interdisciplinary collaborative teams. These goals
will be addressed through four activity nodes: workshops, cyberseminars, student
and Early Career Training, and RCN activity dissemination. The workshops will be
the centerpiece of the Coral Bleaching RCN and focus on three topics: 1)
experimental design protocol recommendations, 2) sample archiving protocol
recommendations, and 3) data assimilation protocol recommendations. The first
two days of each workshop will focus on developing the protocol recommendations.
The last day of each workshop will focus on building and/or expanding
interdisciplinary collaborative research teams. Each workshop will consist of 27
participants (5 Steering Committee members, 2 graduate students, 10 invited
participants, and 10 selected participants through a competitive application
process). This strategy will allow for a large number of individuals to
participate in one or more workshop(s). Pre- and post-workshop activities will
ensure active participation of all parties and allow for ongoing improvement to
the workshop workflow. The outcomes of the workshops will help to guide coral
bleaching research by enhancing research efficiency, the rate of discovery, the
capacity for multi-study comparisons, and stimulating new and unique
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.