* 1838207
* BIGDATA: IA: A multi-level approach for global optimization of the surveillance and control of infectious disease in the swine industry
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Xin Liu, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,616,000.00

The United States livestock industry has an enormous socio-economic impact
contributing to annual sales of $180 billion and 550,000 direct jobs. Its
sustainability and success rely on the maintenance of good livestock health,
high productivity, and efficiency. This requires effective analytical methods,
prediction models, and decision tools. While a vast amount of data has been
collected in all production processes, the integration and usage of such data to
better inform decisions in livestock health has remained circumstantial. It is
usually restricted to simple descriptive statistics or molecular analyses for
specific aspects of animal breeding and pathogen diagnostics. The goal of this
project is to develop a new, multi-scale, approach to bridge the gap between the
data availability and its effective usage. The project will focus on the swine
industry and its most economically devastating disease, the Porcine Reproductive
and Respiratory Syndrome (PRRS). This will not only have a direct beneficial
impact in the swine industry but will contribute to the better manage other
livestock health problems, saving producers and US livestock industry millions
of dollars yearly. This is the first principled decision framework for the
livestock industry that integrates multi-level data to predict disease dynamics,
detect changes in farm status, and optimize the use of testing, treatment and
vaccination strategies. As a consequence, it is expected to improve animal
health and welfare and secure the sustainability of US agriculture and food
systems by providing a data-driven decision framework and tools that push the
frontier of precision epidemiology. The outcome of this project will be widely
disseminated through our education and extension program (BIGDATA-4- HEALTH) and
the integration of methods in the Disease BioPortal platform. PIs have well
integrated the research and education programs and will continue to do so. The
project will generate new curriculum for multiple classes in computer science,
animal science and veterinary science and will involve undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project proposes a principled data-
driven decision framework for systematic PRRS prevention and control, based on
the multi-level data sources collected during swine production, using novel data
mining and machine learning techniques. The objectives are: 1) Early detection
through efficient testing using a proactive and cost sensitive testing
framework. 2) Systematic PRRS prevention and control by effective integration of
testing, vaccination, and biosecurity implementation at a production system
level. 3) Real- world experimentation and algorithm evaluation using both large-
scale numerical evaluation with real traces and small-scale experimentations and
real-time validation in five demonstration swine operations. 4) Education and
extension program (BIGDATA-4-HEALTH) with training materials and technology
transfer activities and the expansion of our user-friendly Disease BioPortal
platform to facilitate the use of the developed methods to all industry
stakeholders, researchers, and the general public. The intellectual merits of
this proposal are multi-folds: the research team will develop novel mechanisms
that advance the state-of-the-art in data-driven decision making algorithms. To
reduce exploration cost, efficient situation-aware exploration techniques that
addresses the fundamental exploration-exploitation tradeoff in multi-armed
bandits and reinforcement learning will be developed, To handle missing data,
novel compressive sensing algorithms designed to better manage accuracy
disparity will be investigated. Finally, to balance the cost-accuracy tradeoff,
efficient means to integrate simulation and experimentation will be explored,
which only has been limited studied in the literature. Furthermore, the value of
these tools for the early detection of diseases at farm and system level using
historical data and prospective real world experimentation will be also
evaluated and demonstrated. While focusing on swine production, this work
provides the foundations and can be adapted to improve animal health of other
livestock species and to advance in other disciplines facing the same data
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.