* 1838447
* Travel to Attend the 12th AIAA/ASME Joint Thermophysics and Heat Transfer Conference (Atlanta, GA, USA, June 25-29, 2018)
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Nicholas A. Roberts, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 05/31/2019
* USD 6,000.00

The Thermal Rectification panel will be held at the 12th AIAA/ASME Joint
Thermophysics and Heat Transfer Conference, which is a collaboration between
AIAA (American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics) and the Heat Transfer
Division of ASME (American Society of Mechanical Engineers). Thermal
rectification can have a significant impact in many devices that can benefit
from this phenomenon, such as current electronics, by improving passive thermal
management and allowing for higher performance. Additional
technologies&lt;br/&gt;could be developed in the form of thermal devices like
thermal switches, diodes, and&lt;br/&gt;regulators, that could be combined to
make thermal analogies to electronic circuits for energy,&lt;br/&gt;memory, and
communications. These envisioned devices will require a full understanding of
thermal rectification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal rectification is a
phenomenon in which thermal transport is dependent on direction along a single
axis, analogous to the p and n junction electrical rectifier (or diode) that
allows current to flow in one direction, but not in the other under reasonably
low forward and reverse bias. Unlike the electrical rectifier, there have been
many mechanisms theorized and demonstrated (at least conceptually) that produce
a thermally rectifying effect. Observations based on different mechanisms have
been documented as early as in the 1930s and saw a significant increase in
interested in the recent years. These mechanisms have one characteristic in
common in that they require an asymmetry in the system along the rectifying
axis. These asymmetries have been of the form of interfaces between dissimilar
materials, gravity, surface emissivity properties, temperature dependence of
thermal conductivities, and more, although the realistic effect and its
magnitude is still a subject of controversy in several of
these.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.