* 1838985
* Student Travel to the Cornell, Maryland, Max Planck Pre-Doctoral Research School
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Samrat Bhattacharjee, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 06/30/2020
* USD 49,996.00

Various universities, funding agencies including National Science Foundation,
and companies have made extensive efforts to create opportunities for research
experiences for undergraduates (REUs). However, at many top undergraduate
institutions worldwide, far too few talented students ever attempt systems
research, let alone pursue a research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result
many of our best students fail to realize their full potential for a research
career in computing. Sadly, as many studies have shown, the fraction of students
who choose a research career in Computer Science is even lower among women,
underrepresented minorities, first-generation students, and those from low-
income backgrounds. Focusing on Computer Science and specifically in systems, we
believe this unfortunate attrition out of a career in research arises largely
from a basic misunderstanding and lack of exposure to what Computer Science (CS)
research is. Motivated by this observation, and in an effort to address this
problem, we propose a new series of annual summer research schools aimed at
giving students a brief but intensive exposure to systems research. The high-
level idea is to provide an engaging environment in which students can interact
with preeminent researchers from multiple areas of Computer Science, but to do
so in a short enough amount of time (on the order of a week) so as to appeal to
students who may be skeptical of what research has to
offer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks funding for supporting the
travel and accommodations for students from the United States to attend the
summer school (we anticipate 100 participants worldwide). We believe the program
will only be successful if it is able to offer full financial support for travel
and accommodation for all participating students, since this will remove a
significant barrier for attending for many students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.