* 1838996
* RAISE: TAQS: Two-Photon Quantum Photonic Logic Gates Enabled by Photonic Bound States
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Duncan Steel, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,006,000.00

Quantum information science exploits quantum mechanical phenomena such as
superposition and entanglement to improve classical communication, computation,
information processing, and precision measurement. Quantum technology is
expected to play a decisive role in enhancing national security and bolstering
further scientific discovery. In quantum information processing, single-quantum
bit (qubit) operations are not sufficient to unlock all the computational power
that is endowed by a collection of qubits. Hence it is necessary and in fact
sufficient to add a two-qubit gate such as a controlled-phase gate to a finite
set of single-qubit gates to achieve what no longer can be efficiently simulated
on a classical computer. In optical quantum computation, photonic qubits are
used as information carriers due to their low-noise, long coherence times,
light-speed transmission and ease of manipulation at the single-qubit level
using standard optical components. To date, only probabilistic two-qubit
photonic logic gates based on linear optics and photon detectors have been
demonstrated. The implementation, however, is associated with substantial
resource overhead and demands stringent technological requirements which are
still challenging today. This project addresses the fundamental challenges by
developing a deterministic controlled-phase gate to realize the full potential
of quantum computation. The educational and outreach activities will train the
next-generation quantum scientists and engineers to accelerate the pace of
quantum information science and applications. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to develop a new
technological approach to a controlled-phase gate for two photonic qubits using
an entirely novel approach based on the generation of photonic dimer states, a
chiral nano-photonic waveguide, and a single dipole emitter. The tight optical
confinement in the transverse direction in the nanophotonic waveguide allows one
to place the dipole emitter at the chiral point and achieve strong coupling
between the photon and the emitter such that the scattered photons couple
efficiently to the forward but not the backward-propagating mode. The correlated
photons form the photonic dimers, which are the bound states of photons and give
rise to a non-trivial transmission pi phase shift. The validation of the
controlled-phase gate will be achieved using a novel experimental design based
on an integrated waveguide approach coupled with number-resolved photon
detectors. The demonstration of the photonic dimer state and the corresponding
180-degree phase shift associated with the state with both photons interacting
with the dipole emitter will be a major step forward in demonstrating the
potential of photonic quantum computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.