* 1838611
* The trajectory of research at the intersection of biology and engineering
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Matthew DeLisa, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 11/30/2018
* USD 49,541.00

Given the increasing interdisciplinary nature of research, exchanges between
leading investigators working at the interface of biology and engineering are
becoming increasingly important. In order to facilitate these exchanges, this
workshop assembles a group of approximately 250-300 predominantly US scientists
and engineers, at all career stages, on the campus of Cornell University in
Ithaca, NY June 22, 2018. Invited speakers from academia and industry and a
limited number of international participants, will discuss the current and
future prospects of several important and emerging fields that encompass
biochemical engineering, nano-biotechnology, protein engineering and design,
synthetic biology, systems biology, regenerative medicine, and personalized
medicine. Invited speakers, as well as other academic and industrial leaders in
attendance, will make themselves available over the course of the meeting for
intellectual exchange and networking with all attendees, especially postdocs,
graduate students, and undergraduate students. The results of the workshop would
be posted on a website for broad dissemination.

This award supports a workshop that brings together a group of approximately
250-300 predominantly US scientists to discuss the trajectory of research at the
interface of biology and engineering. The workshop convenes on the campus of
Cornell University in Ithaca, NY. The workshop goals are as follows: (a) to
mutually inform participants on current and future activities related to
biochemical engineering at the interface of biology and engineering, (b) to
discuss translational potential and challenges and concerns associated with the
technologies related to the scientific areas of discussion, (c) to explore the
educational needs and best practices for education and training and (d) to
assess common ground and opportunities for collaboration.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.