* 1838830
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: A Framework for Optimizing Hearing Aids In Situ Based on Patient Feedback, Auditory Context, and Audiologist Input
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Octav Chipara, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2022
* USD 701,956.00

Twenty percent of Americans will be 65 years or older by 2030 out of which 35 -
50% will report having age-related hearing impairment that is treated primarily
with hearing aids (HA). Regular use of HAs has been shown to improve
communication and avoid the negative effects of hearing loss that include an
increased risk of social isolation, depression, and inability to work, travel,
or be physically active. Past research has shown that many people do not wear
their HAs regularly, as they are unsatisfied with the performance in the real
world. A fundamental limitation of existing methods for tuning HA is that they
are not tailored to individual needs, which often leads to unsatisfactory
performance. As part of this project, a team of computer scientists, engineers,
and audiologists will develop new methods for tuning HAs that are based on the
individual needs of a patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is based on the
approach that better HA configurations may be identified based on feedback from
the patient that is collected in the moment and in situ. The project includes
development of two systems for optimizing the configuration of HAs. The first
system will improve the efficacy of the traditional tuning process by improving
how feedback is obtained from patients, combined with auditory context
information, and translated into HA configuration adjustments. The second system
will automatically adapt the configuration of a HA based on patient feedback and
auditory context information without requiring an audiologist to perform
adjustments. The intellectual merit of this proposal includes the advances in
machine learning necessary to model the performance of complex systems that have
numerous parameters such as HAs and tuning their parameters based on feedback
obtained from patients. Additionally, the project will advance the state-of-the-
art in embedded systems by developing techniques to run HA optimization
algorithms as part of a multi-tier system composed of HAs, mobile phones, and
cloud services. It is anticipated that the proposed research will empower
patients to become more involved in their hearing care, improve HA satisfaction,
and enrich their social interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.