* 1838071
* BIGDATA:F: Statistical and Computational Optimal Transport for Geometric Data Analysis
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Philippe Rigollet, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Current approaches to big data and accompanying computational methods have left
behind critical applications where the data is not a collection of individual
points, but rather whole geometric objects. Such applications include medical
imaging, LiDAR for self-driving cars, and single-cell RNA sequencing, to name a
few. Transferring the overwhelming success of simpler data processing and
statistical techniques to this regime requires not only large datasets, but also
suitable models and algorithms for analysis of this more general type of data.
The theory of optimal transport has proven valuable to address these limitations
thanks to recent advances on the computational front. Yet, understanding optimal
transport as a statistical tool is still in its infancy. This project aims at
developing a "geometric data analysis" toolbox based on optimal transport to
tackle these new datasets. This proposal will help create a common language to
interact and collaborate across disciplines. Much of this research will be
integrated in this curriculum and made available through MIT OpenCourseWare.
This proposal will also enable rich interdisciplinary training of PhD and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed methods are built
around the rich mathematical theory of optimal transport (OT). This theory
provides a framework for the development of new methods for geometric data
analysis in addition to their rigorous statistical and computational analysis.
The nascent theory of computational optimal transport is still largely
dissociated from statistics, and many methods do not account properly for
sampling and measurement noise. To avoid the pitfalls of overfitting, this
proposal singularly and systematically takes a statistical approach to geometric
data analysis. With an understanding of the theoretical advantages and drawbacks
of OT for statistical modeling, it will lead to scalable OT algorithms with
strong statistical guarantees. A tangible outcome of this proposal is a cohesive
toolbox extending not only averaging but also regression, classification,
clustering, and other notions from classical statistics in a fashion that
captures global geometric features of data. It will have a direct impact on
various applications in analysis of not only medical images but also point
clouds gathered by LiDAR for self-driving cars, sequences of gene expressions
produced by single-cell RNA sequencing, and other diverse yet large-scale
sources of data. These datasets contain millions of entities but resist
application of standard statistical procedures; current state-of-the-art
techniques for their analysis are ad-hoc, not generalizable, and fail to reach
the quality achieved by "big data" tools in other domains. Educational impact
will be made by incorporating this work in new degree programs in statistics at
MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.