* 1838217
* I-Corps:  Three Dimensional Bio-Printing of Human Tissues
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Rhonda Shrader, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to increase
the availability of cost-effective automated 3D bioprinting platforms capable of
reconstructing biological tissue in situ. Existing bioprinting technology is
limited and only available to institutions with vast amounts of resources,
therefore limiting the potential it can bring to both academic and non-academic
sectors. In industry, industry, many late stage trials can fail due to
inaccurate drug testing and errors in the translational gap when using animal
models. As an alternative, testing on 3D printed human tissue models could
reduce costs as a valuable intermediate step before proceeding to animal model
testing. Second, 3D bioprinting applications in pharmaceutical companies will
increase throughput in drug screening. Third, researchers in academia can
further advances in 3D biomaterial engineering. Fourth, with the education
sector moving towards a Next Generation Science Standards curriculum,
bioprinters have immense potential as an innovative tool for hands-on learning
in the classroom. Educators can utilize 3D bioprinting as a powerful teaching
tool to train and empower the next generation of scientists in pursuing their
research. Ultimately, this project aims to create a positive impact and improve
technological access worldwide for researchers and students alike.

This I-Corps project is based on a core technology that allows researchers to
print various tissue constructs. This bioprinter is able to reconstruct a viable
skin construct using human fibroblasts and keratinocytes. The project?s minimum
viable product (MVP) is a bioprinter with a multi-modular system using three
different technologies. The technologies used in this product enable on-demand
biomaterial customization during the construction of a 3D high-fidelity scaffold
and precision placement of cells down to the micron level. Together, the
combination of these modules creates a versatile product that has broad
applications. This development will improve accessibility of the bioprinting
technology and will further advancements in tissue engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.