* 1838333
* 2018-2019 NSF Student Poster Competition at the ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition (ASME-IMECE); Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; November 9-15, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Po-Hao Huang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2021
* USD 49,840.00

The purpose of this award is to provide partial travel support for 50 graduate
and undergraduate students to attend the premier American Society of Mechanical
Engineers event, the International Mechanical Engineering Congress and
Exposition to be held on November 9-15, 2018 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. The
students will participate in a poster symposium to present their research
projects to the broader mechanical engineering community. The students will be
from a pool of candidates that are being funded through the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG) or Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) programs at
the National Science Foundation. The students will be selected based on an
application that will include a brief resume, a one-page statement of why they
want to attend the conference, and a statement of support from their faculty
advisor. Consideration in the selection process will be given to include members
of underrepresented groups and diversity of institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This participation support is expected to benefit
students' professional, scientific and technical development as they present
their NSF funded research projects to the broader mechanical engineering
community. Attendance at the conference will provide the students an opportunity
to learn about the engineering profession and state-of-the-art research via
access to approximately 2000 technical and professional development talks by
domestic and international speakers. Students will enhance their communication
skills through discussions of their work with the top researchers in their
fields during the society-wide poster symposium. They will also have the
opportunity to attend technical presentations spanning more than 240 topics,
join the keynote and plenary sessions featuring technological pioneers, and
network with potential mentors, colleagues, and employers. This interactive
experience is expected to broaden their education, increase enthusiasm for their
research topic, acquaint them with expectations for scientific careers, and
expose them to new avenues for innovative research. This award will benefit the
nation through the education of a skilled and diverse engineering workforce
better prepared to provide transformative solutions to overcome the challenges
of their chosen fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.