* 1838492
* RAPID: The ecological role of Pyrosoma atlanticum in the Northern California Current
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Kim Bernard, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 06/30/2020
* USD 190,378.00

In the last three years, fishermen off the coast of Oregon have been baffled and
alarmed by the sudden appearance of thousands of rod-shaped, jelly-like animals,
called pysrosomes, fouling their gear and dominating their catches. Beach-goers,
too, have been fascinated by these creatures that can blanket the sand when
washed up in the surf. This warm water species was rarely encountered north of
southern California until the last three years, when they have become
increasingly abundant in the Northern California Current (NCC) off the coast of
Oregon and even up into the Gulf of Alaska. A recent fisheries survey caught
18,000 pyrosomes in a 5-minute trawl. The effect on local marine food webs is
not clear, but pyrosomes could compete with other important species for food,
potentially changing the marine food web of the NCC. Few studies have been
conducted so understanding of the implications of increased pyrosome occurrence
is limited. There is thus an urgent need to learn more about the species. This
project provides insight into the possible ecological effects of pyrosomes in
the NCC. The study will also benefit researchers working in other regions, like
the Gulf of Alaska. Broader impacts will be strengthened by outreach. An
undergraduate student will work on the project over the summer, gaining valuable
research experience. The research team will create a display about pyrosomes in
collaboration with the Visitor Center at the Hatfield Marine Science Center
(Newport, OR). The lead investigator on the project will also work with the
media outreach team at Oregon State University to produce a high-quality popular
science article about the research to be distributed via various media streams,
including online, in print, and via social media.

Pyrosoma atlanticum (commonly known as the pyrosome) is a warm water species of
pelagic colonial tunicate that until recently had not occurred north of southern
California. However, in the last three years, pyrosomes have become increasingly
abundant in the Northern California Current (NCC) off the coast of Oregon, and
as far north as the Gulf of Alaska, with implications for ecosystem productivity
and fisheries. Preliminary data collected by the investigators show that
pyrosome colonies off the Oregon Coast have extremely high grazing rates,
suggesting that pyrosome blooms are capable of grazing significant amounts of
phytoplankton standing stock. Indeed, in other parts of the world oceans,
pyrosome blooms are capable of removing more than half of the phytoplankton
standing stock in the top 10 m of the ocean. Pyrosome blooms in the NCC could
outcompete other zooplankton grazers, such as copepods and euphausiids, thereby
negatively affecting the higher trophic levels that rely on those crustaceans as
prey. The effects on the food chain are likely to be significant. Pyrosomes have
already been recorded in the stomach contents of a number of fish species,
including Pacific halibut, rockfishes, sablefish, and Pacific salmon, yet their
caloric content is half that of these fish species' preferred prey, krill. With
increasing frequency of pyrosome blooms, there is an urgent need to assess their
potential ecological implications in the NCC. Scientific understanding of the
ecological role of pyrosomes in the global oceans is severely limited and the
effects of the unprecedented continuous large blooms of pyrosomes in the NCC are
unknown. This project is an intensive study on the role of pyrosomes in the
pelagic food web and biogeochemical cycles of the NCC to answer the following
research questions: (1) What proportion of the phytoplankton standing stock do
pyrosome blooms remove daily? (2) What size fraction of the phytoplankton do
pyrosomes preferentially graze upon in the NCC? (3) What is the contribution of
pyrosomes to the flux of organic matter to the sea floor in the NCC?

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.