* 1838082
* Workshop: Cyberinfrastructure for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Peter Shawhan, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2019
* USD 40,670.00

The first observation of a binary neutron star merger by LIGO/Virgo, Fermi and
many ground- based observatories around the world announced the arrival of the
long-anticipated field of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics (MMA). Observation and
analysis of just this single event took weeks, and consumed a significant
fraction of the human and computational resources of the global gravitational
and astronomical communities. The IceCube Neutrino Observatory at South Pole has
recently identified a very high-energy (&gt;PeV) neutrino and the Fermi and
MAGIC observatories have identified high-energy gamma rays coincident in time
and location with that neutrino. The Large Synoptic Survey Telescope (LSST)
primary survey will start in late 2022, needing extra capacity to ensure the
daily massive datasets are processed and coordinated with gravitational,
particle, and other astronomical and astrophysical observations, and all in
near- real-time and with very low latency. MMA needs now to address the
challenges of this increase in the amount and complexity of data that will soon
be upon us, as we start around-the-clock monitoring of frequent multi-messenger
events. As such, this workshop on Cyberinfrastructure (CI) for Multi-Messenger
Astrophysics will provide a forum for experts in Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
and Cyberinfrastracture to develop concepts for new community-scale data
cyberinfrastructure for timely handling, processing, analysis, and modeling of
multi-messenger astrophysical data. The workshop will be held at the Physical
Science Complex at the University of Maryland on May 23-24,
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the objectives of three of 10
Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments: "Windows on the Universe: The Era of
Multi-Messenger Astrophysics", "Harnessing the Data Revolution" and "Growing
Convergent Research at NSF". The 10 big ideas will push forward the frontiers of
U.S. research, provide innovative approaches to solve some of the most pressing
problems the world faces, as well as lead to discoveries not yet known. This
project also advances objectives of the National Strategic Computing Initiative
(NSCI), an effort aimed at developing new technological capabilities in the
post-Moore's Law era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop award is supported by
the Computational Physics program in the Division of Physics and the
Cyberinfrastructure for Emerging Science and Engineering Research (CESER)
program in the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.