* 1838500
* High Risk Research: Long Term Human Adaptation in a Tropical Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Karen Lupo, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2019
* USD 34,181.00

Researchers have long recognized that population migration is a pivotal process
of cultural and technological and ecological change that often has wide-ranging
and sometimes cataclysmic consequences for societies. To better understand how
human migration influences cultural change and its consequences, researchers
have increasingly turned to the archaeological record where known prehistoric
migrations were important in forming contemporary societies. The main goal of
this project is to gain a better understanding of the catalysts, timing, nature,
and consequences of one of the largest human migration events in prehistory -
the expansion of Bantu-speaking farmers across Sub-Saharan Africa some 5,000 to
2,000 years ago. To investigate this poorly understood event, this research will
focus on excavating Nangara-Komba Rock Shelter in the Central African Republic
which spans the critical time period before and after the Bantu expansion.
Information generated from this project will speak to broader issues about why
populations migrate and the impact incoming populations with new technologies
have on indigenous peoples and environments. This collaborative research project
brings together researchers from the Central African Republic, a country
underrepresented in the sciences, and the United States. The inclusion of
American and Central African students in the research supports scholarly and
cultural exchange. The project will build intellectual capacity for Central
African graduate students who will receive training in archaeological methods
that is unavailable in their country. Public outreach activities such as radio
interviews, public lectures, blogs and digital media in Central Africa and the
US will disseminate the findings and implications of this project to different
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expansion of Bantu-speaking farmers across
Sub-Saharan Africa is widely recognized as having a significant and lasting
impact on language, culture, demography and technology, as well as the
trajectories of contemporary African peoples. Despite its importance, very
little is known about the environmental catalysts, exact timing, nature and
consequences of this event. Nangara-Komba Rock Shelter is one of the oldest rock
shelters in this part of Central Africa with prehistoric occupations spanning
from 5,600 years ago into the nineteenth century. Importantly, the site lies in
the Sangha River Interval believed by many as an important natural corridor for
Bantu migrations into Central African forests. Excavations in the shelter will
yield organic materials that can be used to construct an exact chronology of the
site and date when ceramic and iron artifacts associated with Bantu-speaking
populations appear. Analysis of artifacts and organic materials will provide
crucial information on the lifeways of pre-Bantu indigenous hunter-gatherers and
early Bantu-speakers. Comparative analyses of these materials over time will
provide information on changes in prehistoric lifeways associated with the
expansion of Bantu peoples. Geochemical analyses of sediment from the site and
adjacent areas will be used to reconstruct vegetation and climate changes
spanning the period before and after the migration. Cumulatively, information
from this project will significantly enhance current understanding of migration
and Central African prehistory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.