* 1838972
* Training courses on the matrix approach to modeling land carbon and nitrogen cycles; 2018-2021: Flagstaff, AZ
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Yiqi Luo, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 06/30/2022
* USD 93,087.00

This project will train early career scientists and develop the U.S. workforce.
The training will occur through a series of short courses on the topic of land
carbon and nitrogen cycles. Carbon and nitrogen are both important for human
well-being and ecosystem function. Land ecosystems absorb approximately 30% of
current carbon dioxide emissions by humans. We need further details about how
this happens. To improve models that can provide these details, scientists have
recently developed a new technique called the matrix approach. The matrix
approach has been recognized as a way to unify all the land carbon cycle models.
There are additional benefits from this approach that involve understanding
uncertainty, reducing computation time, and merging data into the models. The
approach has the potential to improve land carbon and nitrogen models to better
predict future changes in ecosystem services. The courses will train a new
generation of ecosystem modelers to achieve simplicity in coding, cleaner and
more efficient models, faster results, and a better bridge between model
complexity and understandable results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
run an annual short training course for the next three years. The topic of the
course is modeling land carbon and nitrogen cycles. The specific approach is
called the matrix approach. The course will focus on five skills to be trained:
(1) drawing the carbon flow diagram of a model; (2) writing carbon balance
equations of a model; (3) developing a matrix model out of carbon balance
equations; (4) adding diagnostic variables; and (5) adding semi-analytic spin-up
algorithms. The hands-on training will be combined with lectures on a variety of
topics. The topics will be: theories of land carbon cycle dynamics, data
assimilation, matrix operation, differential equation solvers, and model
structure databases. The training course will divide the trainees into several
working groups, each with one instructor to ensure individual help. The course
will be improved to become more effective and efficient over time as feedback
from trainees is incorporated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.