* 1838425
* EAGER:  Using eco-evolutionary interactions to understand forest responses to environmental change
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Emily Moran, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 08/31/2020
* USD 199,996.00

Trees take a long time to grow and begin producing seeds, which means they have
long generation times. Therefore, it has been thought that the main way they
could survive rapidly changing climates is by spreading into areas that are more
suitable before they die out in areas that are becoming less suitable. However,
tree species may also harbor a substantial amount of genetic diversity among
individual trees within a populations, which may allow them to adapt to changing
conditions on short time frames (50-100 years). This research will test this
idea using computer models developed using information from real forest sites.
If trees species can adapt quickly, this could influence how forests are managed
and how we predict forests will change in the future. This project will also
support the research of an early career scientist, provide research training to
students, including those from under-served populations, in the use of computer
simulations for biology, and provide outreach to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a multi-species individual-based
modeling approach to examine how heritable variation in demographic responses to
climate may influence how forests respond when climates shift. These responses
include changes in tree species ranges and local forest composition. The
researchers will modify the forest simulator SORTIE-ND to allow parameters
determining how temperature and precipitation affect tree demography to differ
between individuals and be passed to offspring with various degrees of
heritability. Traditional simulations that assume all individuals of a species
are the same will be compared to simulations that allow adaptation to changing
temperature and rainfall over 90 years. If heritable environmental responses can
substantially affect forest responses to rapid environmental change, this would
greatly affect our understanding of the role eco-evolutionary processes will
play in future forest dynamics. It would suggests that models need to take these
responses into account, and that measuring the magnitude of potential responses
to selection is a key empirical need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.