* 1838299
* RoL:  FELS:  EAGER:  Disease resistance as a product of synergy between host immunity and the microbiome
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Steven Lindow, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,530.00

It is now well-established that the microbiome (the community of microbial
species associated with a host organism) can increase host nutrient acquisition
and protect against disease. Even so, which communities of bacteria will provide
positive outcomes for their hosts cannot be reliably predicted. In large part,
this is because there are seemingly infinite configurations of "healthy"
microbiomes, making analysis of natural patterns difficult. Moreover,
understanding of microbiome function is currently hampered by the complexity of
host-microbe and microbe-microbe interactions underlying these positive
outcomes. Despite this complexity, however, recent research suggests that
general principles underlying microbiome-mediated protection against pathogen
establishment and disease may be identifiable. The combination of new sequencing
technologies and the development of new experimental systems presents a unique
opportunity to begin disentangling the interactions between the microbiome and
disease, and to examine the generality of microbiome-mediated protection across
different host species. A starting point for such an undertaking focuses on a
broad host range pathogen, for which evidence of microbiome-mediated protection
currently exists across multiple hosts. Using two different plant-microbiome-
pathogen systems (one with direct relevance to forestry management and the other
to agriculture) as proof of concept, the current work aims to build a predictive
framework for identifying microbial consortia that synergize with the host
immune system to protect against disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building upon
existing data from Bleeding Canker disease of Horse Chestnut trees and Bacterial
Speck of Tomato plants, both of which are caused by pathovars of the bacterial
pathogen, Pseudomonas syringae, this project will test the idea that there are
general rules underlying microbiome-mediated protection that are applicable
across systems. In each of these two systems, previous evidence has linked the
diversity and composition of the phyllosphere (above ground) microbiome to
pathogen colonization success and/or plant disease outcome. This project will
use culture-independent sequencing data from the natural tree system to generate
predictions about microbiome-mediated disease protection based on microbiome
composition, diversity, and/or function. These predictions will then be tested
using synthetic microbiomes in tomato plants, where the relative contributions
of direct (microbe-microbe) and indirect (plant-mediated) effects in shaping
microbiome-mediated protection can be experimentally quantified. By combining
high-throughput seedling priming assays with a synthetic microbiome approach,
the project seeks to identify disease protective community properties that
synergize with plant defenses. The general principles of microbiome-mediated
protection that this project seeks to uncover have the potential to be broadly
applicable across systems, and inform predictions about protective microbial
communities in human health and agriculture. The ultimate goal of the work is to
be able to leverage these host-microbiome-pathogen interactions to attain robust
and durable disease protection, and the results will aid in management of both
agricultural and natural systems, and the development of probiotic treatment
against plant disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.