* 1838306
* EAGER: ISN: Network Analysis and Opportunities for Disruption of Organ Trafficking
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Naoru Koizumi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 372,683.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award will contribute
to the advancement of national security and welfare through a greater
understanding of the worldwide operations of illicit organ trafficking networks.
The system of organ trafficking is known to be complex; it consists of multiple
players such as kidney sellers (often poor, young and healthy), buyers (affluent
but desperate), transplant service providers (surgeons, hospitals and other
agents), brokers (who often provide similar services to other illicit trades)
and financial institutions that knowingly or unknowingly participate in passing
money from the buyers to other actors. Inter-actor social networks are inherent
in organ trafficking since the system tends to operate and expand through social
connections. This award seeks to establish a fundamental understanding of the
network structure, including incentives and behavioral patterns of the
participants, linkages between the participants, and its dynamic evolution. The
transdisciplinary nature of this project, involving social scientists,
operations researchers, and health and health policy professionals, provides an
opportunity to examine the nature of organ trafficking networks from multiple
perspectives and to discover structural patterns and network disruption
strategies that may not be easily discerned otherwise. The results of this
research will be disseminated widely to assist law enforcement in detecting
trafficking crime and and policy makers in developing effective policies and
regulations to disrupt these networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project develops an analytical framework to examine structural patterns and
evolution of organ trafficking networks. The framework will: i) deploy an agent-
based simulation model to characterize such networks based on limited but
reliable data from the field; ii) provide a network analysis to investigate
structural connections and their vulnerabilities in the networks; and iii)
explore optimization methods to derive effective strategies to disrupt these
networks. The impact of properties that distinguish these networks from other
illicit supply networks, namely the higher profit per transaction, involvement
of highly skilled, often high profile actors (physicians, lab technicians, etc.)
and required access to specialized facilities and equipment will be studied as a
potential points of leverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.