* 1838513
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Electrically tunable, long-distance coherent coupling between room temperature qubits mediated by magnons in low-dimensional magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,09/30/2020
* Vladimir Shalaev, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical description: The counterintuitive laws of quantum mechanics (not
observable in a classical world) offer the possibility to build next generation
of information processing, communication and sensing technologies capable of far
outperforming present-day devices. Quantum phenomena are extremely susceptible
to interactions with the environment and are generally limited to ultralow
temperatures, where interactions are minimal. In stark contrast, atomic-scale
defects in diamond, being sufficiently isolated from the environment, exhibit
quantum properties even at ambient conditions. Consequently, such systems are
ideal building blocks for creating room temperature quantum devices. However, in
order to realize scalable room temperature quantum devices, it is imperative to
increase the range of interaction between individual defects, while also having
the control to turn the interaction on and off. This project addresses these
outstanding challenges by developing a novel hybrid material platform of diamond
defects interfaced with thin magnetic films, where the required long-distance
and controllable quantum interaction between individual defects is mediated
magnetically. The project also aims to enhance the United States' quantum
engineering workforce by providing interdisciplinary training to undergraduate
and graduate students at the interface of quantum physics, engineering and
materials science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Nitrogen vacancy
centers in diamond have emerged as the dominant room temperature quantum bit for
building quantum technologies. However, scaling coherent coupling beyond
Nitrogen Vacancy centers separated by few tens of nanometers has proven
challenging. This research project aims to provide a solution to this materials
challenge by demonstrating electrically tunable coherent coupling between
Nitrogen vacancy qubit spins at room temperature, which are separated by near
micrometer distances. For this purpose, a novel platform is proposed, where the
coherent coupling between Nitrogen vacancy centers is mediated by magnons
confined in electrically controlled low-dimensional magnets. The proposed
platform takes advantage of two recent experimental advances, namely: (a) strong
resonant enhancement of magnon-Nitrogen vacancy spin coupling, and (b) enhanced
electric-field tunability of low-dimensional magnets. The resonant enhancement,
in combination with the long-distance transport of magnons, allows for the
possibility of mediating long range coherent coupling; while the electrical
tunability of these resonances offers exciting possibility to turn the coherent
coupling on and off. In particular, the project takes advantage of these
previously unavailable opportunities to extend the range of coherent coupling
beyond the state-of-the-art demonstrations for room temperature quantum bits, as
well as, demonstrate an on-demand quantum gate functionality. The proposed
research provides opportunities for technological applications, while it also
offers unique educational opportunities for training the next generation of
quantum technologists and scientists. Specifically, successful completion of the
project provides the missing link towards building a scalable platform for
quantum technologies working at ambient conditions. On the other hand, the
intersection of quantum information processing and spintronics also offers new
opportunities for interdisciplinary training of students and postdocs,
development of new courses, and outreach to the public. For this purpose, the
team proposes to leverage existing undergraduate research experience programs at
Purdue, along with posting of online seminars on nanoHub (the largest online
resource of nanotechnology) for dissemination to a broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.