* 1838271
* CSR: Large: VarSys: Managing Variability in High-Performance Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Layne Watson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,189,778.00

Exascale high-performance computing (HPC) systems are required to meet the
demands of many grand challenges for scientific computing and e-commerce in the
21st century. Variability in these systems is growing intractably and leads to
performance loss and energy waste. This project is building the Variability
System (VarSys) software framework, grounded in fundamental engineering
principles, to enable variability management in large-scale advanced computing
systems. The intellectual challenges in this work include determining the extent
to which variability can be managed and the tradeoffs that result from such
management. The work will demonstrate the use of variability management on large
scale systems and cloud infrastructures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The continuation
of the project will endeavor to create methodologies to establish a community
ecosystem to benchmark progress and engage a broader community in this research.
Currently, there are over 25 faculty, staff and students (including 6 women and
2 minority students) participating in the project and more than 200 students
have been exposed to system variability in the operating system courses. The
project will also create additional compelling videos and other media artifacts
to describe the progress and capture the excitement inherent to the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Keywords: high-performance computing; statistical
and mathematical modeling; variability-performance trade-
offs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.