* 1838604
* Collaborative Research: Tunable Control of Mixed Ionic and Electronic Conductivity through Ion Irradiation in Electroceramic Materials for Energy Storage System
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Hui Xiong, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2024
* USD 319,619.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The goal of this foundational study is to
significantly improve the performance of lithium ion batteries. These batteries
are among the most promising energy storage technologies and are much needed for
near-term growth of the renewable energy and electric vehicle markets. This
project examines how electroceramic materials (used in batteries) can be
intentionally altered by adding impurities or producing other defects. For
electrode (i.e., anode and cathode) materials, conductivity is critical for high
energy and high-power lithium ion batteries. Recent research demonstrates
improved performance when electrode materials contain defects, with the
potential to extend battery energy, power density, stability, tolerance in
extreme conditions, and calendar life. This project focuses on and explores the
model oxide system, titania (TiO2) to shed light on the underlying conductivity
phenomena in these electroceramic materials. In addition, this project is
coupled to education, diversity, and training activities that are integrated
across two participating universities (Boise State and Purdue). For example,
this project is implementing a cross-institutional undergraduate researcher
'exchange' program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This study presents
a unique method for tailoring ionic/electronic conductivity using irradiation,
which could open new research pathways in irradiation-enhanced materials
functionality and lead to an unprecedented advancement in tailoring
electrochemical performance in electroceramic materials. The project
investigates the hypothesis that irradiation-induced defects can provide tunable
control over the mixed ionic/electronic conductivity in electroceramic
materials, thus delivering enhanced electrochemical properties for lithium-ion
battery applications. Electrodes containing extrinsic (e.g., doping) and
intrinsic defects (e.g., vacancies, cation disorder) exhibit improved
electrochemical properties. Specifically, extrinsic defects may enhance
electronic conductivity, while intrinsic defects may enhance ionic conductivity.
Intermediate energy ion irradiation creates intrinsic defects, while the
irradiating ion species becomes implanted in the target material as extrinsic
defects. Thus, it is theorized that the appropriate selection of the irradiating
ion species and energy enables tuning of the ionic and electronic conductivity
to produce better electrochemical properties. This project focuses on a model
metal oxide, TiO2 (anatase). Specimens irradiated with niobium ions to produce
both intrinsic and extrinsic defects, are compared to specimens irradiated with
helium ions, which diffuse from the target material and leave behind only
intrinsic defects. The hypothesis is being tested on crystalline thin films,
which enables a mechanistic understanding of intermediate energy irradiation
effects on metal oxides to be formed. Building on these results, research on a
polycrystalline nanoarchitectured TiO2 electrode follows to elucidate the ion
irradiation effect on the electrochemical properties of the electrode. This
research is being incorporated into teaching and outreach modules for
integration across the two participating institutions and is being made
available via NanoHUB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.