* 1838470
* I-Corps:  Neuromorphic Target Tracking and Control for Insect-Scale Aerial Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Silvia Ferrari, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 11/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable a
broader range of end users to utilize the capabilities of autonomous robotics
and to make advanced autonomous systems more broadly accessible and reliable.
Robotics such as micro aerial vehicles (MAVs), self-driving cars, and other
ground-based service robots are playing increasingly important roles in the
lives of many industries as advances in autonomy enable them to be used safely
and reliably in diverse situations. Accurately tracking targets and navigating
while avoiding obstacles are important prerequisites to fully autonomous
operation for robots. Neuromorphic cameras can more accurately detect motion
than traditional cameras while consuming far less power. This project will
explore the commercial applications of algorithms which interpret the data from
neuromorphic cameras to enable autonomous systems to accurately track motion and
navigate in unknown environments. By enabling more accurate sensing with reduced
power consumption, these algorithms will increase the safety and reliability of
autonomous systems. The proposed techniques will enable autonomous systems to
react safely and robustly in real time to unexpected environmental changes
without immediate operator intervention.

This I-Corps project will explore the commercialization of neuromorphic sensing
and control algorithms that enable accurate environmental sensing from moving
robotic platforms. Autonomous navigation requires processing data from
exteroceptive sensors for the purposes of obstacle avoidance and target
tracking. These tasks must be accomplished in real time with minimal latency to
maximize the capabilities and reliability of the autonomous robot. Neuromorphic
cameras sense the environment with sub-millisecond latency and, unlike
traditional cameras, provide information only about changes in the scene. The
algorithms which will be explored by this project efficiently process the data
from neuromorphic sensors to detect the presence of moving targets and
stationary obstacles to enable efficient autonomous control for high-speed
aerial and ground-based robots in uncertain and rapidly changing environments.
These algorithms include neuromorphic control techniques which enable autonomous
control in the presence of both environmental uncertainties such as disturbances
and uncertain variations in the physical parameters of the robot. The proposed
techniques have been validated in high-fidelity simulations using benchmark
datasets and have been shown to be capable of rapid adaptation to unexpected
changes while maintaining control of the autonomous system.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.