* 1838992
* Positioning Youth for Success in Science: Studying the Malleability and Impact of Computational Thinking for Science
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Rena Dorph, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,871,814.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (preK-12). This project will advance research and
development of new transdisciplinary approaches to computational STEM teaching
and learning that will integrate the fields of computational thinking and
science learning. The project will synthesize across frameworks and definitions
of computational thinking to identify those aspects that best position youth for
future science learning. The resulting construct, Computational Thinking for
Science (CT-S) will be examined through the development of valid and reliable
assessments, and the project team will investigate whether, for whom, and under
what circumstances CT-S enables success in proximal science learning
experiences. Findings will contribute to the field by describing the varied ways
that students develop CT-S skill sets and the degree to which CT-S supports
science learning and developing STEM career preferences. This will inform future
curriculum and instructional development that integrates computational thinking
and science learning in productive and supportive ways. This project is
supported by the STEM + Computing Program that advances research and development
of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of
computing within science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
teaching and learning for preK-12 students in both formal and informal settings.
STEM+C supports research on how students learn to think computationally to solve
interdisciplinary problems in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
examination of CT-S will be embedded in a new Next Generation Science Standards-
aligned, technology rich middle school science curriculum aimed at supporting
the development of computational thinking. The research plan includes
articulation of the CT-S construct and associated hypothetical learning
progression, and development of CT-S assessment instruments embedded in three
different science topics. These instruments will be validated via cognitive
interviews with students, qualitative analysis of the pilot responses, and cross
validated with student logs of simulations used in the curriculum. The project
will use these instruments to conduct a multi-cohort one year longitudinal study
with 1300 middle school students, exploring the relationship of CT-S with
learning and career awareness outcomes and identify variations between
subgroups. Data gathered over this longitudinal study will be analyzed through
two analytical models. The first correlational model will examine CT-S as a
predictor of engagement during learning experiences and science content
learning. The second explores variations within and across individuals using HLM
models to examine how CT-S changes during the middle grade years. Outcomes of
this work will be shared to inform professional, practioner, and policy
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.