* 1838569
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Tropical Forest Mobility and Subsistence
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Tim Dennehy, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 12,981.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael E. Smith of Arizona State University, Mr.
Timothy Dennehy, will conduct research to address a central anthropological
question: how do human societies change as they transition from foraging to
agriculture? The origin of agriculture is one of the most heavily researched
topics in the study of human prehistory, and much is known about the first
people to independently adopt farming in each area of the world. Yet
comparatively little is known about the pre-agricultural groups that occupied
these same landscapes before farming arose. This hampers understanding of both
domestication processes as well as the changes to human society that accompanied
them. By analyzing multiple lines of evidence derived from the stone artifacts
(lithics) from three sites in the Lowland Maya region of Mesoamerica, this
project will contribute greatly to understanding of how human groups transition
from a mobile hunting and gathering lifestyle to a more sedentary one focused on
food production. This project also works cooperatively with descendant Maya
communities in Belize, thus contributing to the training and education of an
ethnic group underrepresented in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mr.
Dennehy will examine how tropical forest foragers changed their mobility
strategies over time in response to an environment that they themselves were
altering through their manipulation of forest resources. The term "mobility
strategy" here refers to the number of moves made by a group in a given year. On
one end of the spectrum, a Residential Mobility Strategy entails many small
moves in which the entire group sets up a new camp every few days. On the other
end, a Logistical Mobility Strategy entails fewer residential moves but a
greater number of small task-oriented (i.e. logistical) moves, wherein
specialized groups of foragers undertake long-range trips to bring vital
resources back to a central camp. Modern-day tropical forest groups that rely
solely on wild resources tend to practice the former strategy; other modern-day
groups who more extensively manipulate their environments and cultivate
resources tend practice the latter. These two mobility strategies affect the
amount of raw material available for stone tool production; in turn, raw
material availability impacts several lithic traits, making this project's
lithic analysis one of the only ways to indirectly assess mobility strategies.
The rockshelters that are the focus of this study contain deposits that date
from 8000-900 B.C., and cover the late Paleoindian/Early Archaic transition
through the Late Archaic/Middle Preclassic transition, a record whose time-depth
and completeness is unparalleled in the Maya world. This record is anchored at
one end by the early hunter-gatherer societies who preceded domestication, and
on the other by fully agricultural Maya groups; thus, it will provide evidence
of the full spectrum of subsistence strategies utilized during the transition
from foraging to agriculture. By examining mobility and subsistence throughout
this long time period and at three different locations, this study offers a
unique spatio-temporal perspective on changing Mesoamerican foraging
societies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.