* 1838434
* AF: EAGER: The Power of Isolation in Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Dieter van Melkebeek, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 125,000.00

Computer science and engineering have made great strides in building high-
performing software and hardware systems. Further progress on the hardware front
requires multiple processors to work in parallel on the same task. To make
adequate use of the parallel hardware, the software needs to be parallelized as
well - it needs to specify how to break up the task among the various
processors. The fact that a given problem may have several solutions often
complicates software parallelization. This is because the processors do not have
much time to coordinate among themselves. Without coordination, they may be
working towards different, incompatible solutions. Isolation is a strategy to
ensure all processors work towards the same solution. It also has a wide range
of other algorithmic uses. This project focuses on the power of isolation, which
is the process of singling out a solution to a computational problem that may
have many solutions. Though fundamental in nature and aimed at developing the
underlying theory, the project may lead to practical improvements, e.g., for
computational problems that involve detecting similarities between certain types
of structures. Graduate training and education are core to the project.

The project consists of several thrusts that center around the notion of
isolation: (1) Derandomizing known isolation procedures for problems that
capture various models of computation. Known procedures are based on the
Isolation Lemma, which assigns small random weights to the components of a
solution so as to make the solution of minimum total weight unique. The project
aims to reduce the number of random bits needed and ultimately remove the need
for randomness completely while maintaining efficiency.

(2) Developing deterministic or randomized isolation procedures for well-studied
intermediate problems, namely, isomorphism problems on graphs and more
expressive structures. This relates to a number of known open questions
regarding these problems, including the connection with testing rigidity of
structures and with finding a canonical form for the structures.

(3) Refuting the Unique Games Conjecture, a central conjecture in the area of
hardness of approximation with ties to several other mathematical fields. The
conjecture states that approximating the optimal yield of strategies for so-
called label cover games is as hard for cases that satisfy a certain isolation-
like property as it is in general.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.