* 1838378
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Towards Room Temperature Quantum Logic Using Moire Heterostructure Single Quantum Emitters Coupled to Plasmonic Waveguides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Brian LeRoy, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 354,971.00

Nontechnical description: Quantum mechanical systems have the potential to lead
to transformative advances in communication, sensing and computing technologies.
However, these quantum information technologies require the creation of novel
materials to enable their full potential. Recently two-dimensional materials
have emerged as a promising platform as their properties can be easily tailored
through control of their constituent atoms, electrical interactions, and
interactions between layers of the material. One promising avenue for quantum
information processing is through the use of light sources that produce
individual photons on demand. However, there are several drawbacks that need to
be overcome before these are technologically feasible, including the
fabrication, placement and control of such light sources. This project aims to
create a room-temperature-operating scalable single-photon-source platform,
opening the way to quantum information processing technologies that are
currently not possible because they require cryogenic temperatures to operate.
Beyond the significant impact that this research has on technology, it also
provides interdisciplinary training for two graduate students in the areas of
materials synthesis, nanofabrication, scanning probe microscopy and optics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This interdisciplinary project
seeks to create a scalable room-temperature quantum logic architecture composed
of single quantum emitters intrinsic to 2D materials heterostructures coupled to
plasmonic waveguides. In particular, the lattice mismatch and twist angle
between two transition metal dichalcogenide monolayers leads to a moire pattern
with a periodic arrangement of potential minima. Using a heterostructure of WSe2
and MoSe2 allows a long wavelength moire pattern to be created, thanks to a
close match between lattice constants. In each of the potential minima, a single
exciton can be trapped with a well-defined intrinsic confinement potential,
leading to the creation of a single quantum emitter. The excitons consist of an
electron in one layer and a hole in the other layer. By uniquely controlling the
twist angle between layers, the confinement potential of the exciton can be
changed and the spacing between them also controlled, allowing the deterministic
placement of the single quantum emitters. These emitters are then coupled to the
electromagnetic field of propagating surface plasmon polaritons using plasmonic
nanostructures. This coupling of surface plasmon polaritons and single quantum
emitters is subsequently used for a room-temperature single photon transistor
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.