* 1838994
* EAGER: Crowdsourcing Metadata Enhancements to Improve the Discoverability and Reusability of Scientific Data: Experimental Evaluations
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Margaret Levenstein, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2022
* USD 298,234.00

This exploratory pilot project will undertake two experiments to determine what
motivates people to contribute metadata enhancements to data that have been
archived, but that are not sufficiently findable, accessible, interoperable, and
reusable. Current practice in data curation relies on the efforts of data
producers and professional data curators to produce and provide metadata,
including variable level data descriptors, study key words, and bibliographic
citations to data-related publications. These efforts are expensive and, as a
result, are often undersupplied, leaving data that has been archived and shared
with the scientific community of limited value for reuse. The experiments in
this project will directly inform potentially transformative efforts to engage
the broader community in crowdsourcing enhancements to metadata so that tools
and interfaces can be designed that will induce others to participate in this
valuable activity, tapping into their knowledge of and interest in data in
particular domains to increase data FAIRness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the National Science Foundation Public Access Initiative which
is managed by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure on behalf of the
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.