* 1838385
* RAPID: Collaborative: Geodetic and Seismic Observations of Volcanic Unrest at Sierra Negra volcano, Galapagos Islands
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Falk Amelung, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2019
* USD 4,866.00

Seismic and geodetic observations of volcanic unrest and of erupting volcanoes
not only lead to a better understanding of the fundamental processes of magma
storage, magma reservoir failure, magma transport towards the Earth's surface,
but also provide opportunities to identify precursory signals that could serve
to better forecast eruptions. Sierra Negra volcano in the Galapagos islands, one
of the world's largest and most active basaltic shield volcanoes is in a new
episode of unrest. This project responds to this unrest by collecting critical
observations to understand this and other systems better. The Broader Impacts of
this work include better understanding of hazards associated with volcanoes and
the earthquakes that happen near them. The project is a collaborative effort
between a large geodetic facility, and researchers at the University of Miami
and Pennsylvania State University. In addition, the work will be done in
collaboration with Instituto Geofisico (IG), Quito,
Ecuador.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAPID responds to the inflation activity at
Sierra Negra. The project will work (1) to upgrade the existing geodetic
network, (2) to conduct a photogrammetric survey of the trapdoor fault system
using a drone, (3) to conduct time-lapse gravimetric observations inside the
caldera (an initial survey was done in February 2018), and (4) to expand the
network to better capture inflation activities. Questions that will be addressed
include how intrusions initiate, how does the trapdoor faulting work and relate
to the magma inflation, and what is the volatile content of the magma. This
project provides the geodetic observations complementing the temporary seismic
network of collaborators at Edinburgh, IG and Tulane. The combination of
multiple geophysical data sets will allow modeling the build-up to and the
processes during an eruption in unprecedented detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.