* 1838316
* RoL: FELS: EAGER Rules for cellular adaptation to the mechanical properties of their environment
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2018,11/30/2020
* Charles Baer, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 11/30/2020
* USD 320,370.00

Animal somatic cells such as fibroblasts and endothelial cells display
consistent functional differences when cultured on soft surfaces (substrates)
compared to stiff substrates in the degree of proliferation, cell death,
differentiation, cell spreading and migration. Mechanical properties of the
extracellular environment also affect intracellular features including
cytoskeletal organization, chromatin compaction, and gene expression. This
project will use experimental techniques to uncover evolutionary rules
underlying the adaptation of eukaryotic somatic cells (cells forming the body of
the organism) to the mechanical rigidity of their microenvironment, what we call
mechano-evolution. If successful, this research will highlight the importance of
mechanical cues in cellular evolution, which can give rise to new directions in
the fields of cell mechanics and evolutionary cell biology. Also, this project
will promote an appreciation for experimental evolution on biomaterials as a
tool to engineer somatic cells. The project will provide training opportunities
to undergraduates, high school students and a female graduate student in
chemical engineering.

The project hopes to discover two fundamental rules. Rule 1: Phenotypic
plasticity. Replicate populations of mouse fibroblasts previously adapted to a
rigid adhesive substrate will be allowed to evolve on substrates of different
rigidities. Replicate populations of cells will be cultured and passed
continuously on substrates of carefully controlled rigidity for two years
(~360-500 generations, N~1000 cells at passage). If and how substrate mechanical
properties consistently select for a suite of cellular traits features at
different levels of biological organization will be investigated. Rule 2:
Mutational input. Replicate populations will be maintained as above, except at
very small population size (N~5 cells at passage); these populations are called
"mutation accumulation" (MA) lines. By comparing evolution at small and large N,
the extent to which adaptation to substrate rigidity, and the evolution of
phenotypic plasticity in general, is constrained by mutational input vs.
constrained by opposing selection on correlated traits will be inferred.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.