* 1838770
* SCH: INT: The Virtual Assistant Health Coach: Learning to Autonomously Improve Health Behaviors
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Barbara DiEugenio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,200,912.00

Health coaching is an effective process for improving health behaviors by
providing education on health-related topics, setting personalized and
realizable health-related goals, monitoring and encouraging progress towards
those goals, and sequencing or refining a progression of health goals over time.
Though useful, its highly personalized and labor-intensive nature makes the cost
of effective health coaching prohibitive for many underserved populations that
could benefit significantly from it. This project will develop a virtual health
coaching system that learns from human health coach demonstrations to interact
with patients via the smart message system (SMS) to set appropriate health goals
that are Specific, Measurable, Attainable, Relevant, and Timely (SMART). The
virtual coach will become progressively more independent, but will not be fully
autonomous for two reasons: first, at this stage of research, one cannot trust
the system to always send appropriate messages when it encounters unique
situations; second, the virtual coach would not substitute, but
supplement/collaborate with a human coach. Successful development of these
capabilities represents an important step towards more scalable health coaching
systems that do not sacrifice the effectiveness realized by a human health
coach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the two key components of a
virtual health coaching system: a dialogue management and sentiment analysis
component that guides and analyzes communication with users; and an imitation
learning component for learning high-level SMART goal-setting and coaching
strategies from the human health coach's interactions with users. Significant
technical advances that address the underlying problems from these sub-areas are
needed to achieve human-level health coaching efficacy and positive health
outcome rates. These include: novel natural language processing methods to
process informal, concise SMS including the emotion and mood they convey;
expression of increasing autonomy via linguistic proxies such as initiative; and
inverse optimal control methods for rationalizing observed behavior. Building on
an initial feasibility study, this project will assess the benefits of a
developed virtual health coach with varying degrees of autonomy for SMART goal
setting and additional health coaching for a diverse range of users through SMS
and fitness tracking devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.