* 1838507
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Driven Non-Equilibrium Room Temperature Quantum States
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical description: Quantum-information science promises to revolutionize
computation and communication, as well as our fundamental understanding of
complex quantum systems. Qubits, the fundamental units of quantum computation,
are the quantum analogs of the binary states of classical computers. A
fundamental requirement of qubits is that the time over which they retain the
encoded information, known as lifetime, is long compared to the operations that
manipulate them. Here, the research team proposes a method to dramatically
increase qubit lifetimes in specialized two-dimensional semiconductor materials.
The main mechanism by which information in a qubit is lost is through
interactions of the system and its environment, much like a pendulum is slowed
down by friction at its suspension point. A common approach to increasing qubit
lifetime is to isolate the system, analogous to lubricating the point of
suspension of the pendulum, but this is highly impractical for many quantum
information applications. The approach proposed here is to periodically decouple
the system from its environment using various external controls. In this way,
qubit lifetime is extended even at room temperature, greatly expanding the range
of materials that can be used for quantum information applications. These
research aims are naturally integrated with an educational plan that seeks to
advance undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral training. The mechanism of
this program is the development of online tutorial courses and outreach work
that promotes science learning to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: A major challenge in
quantum information sciences has been the prevalence of short-lived coherences
between quantum states, which impede practical utilization of quantum phenomena.
This is especially problematic at room temperature where the environment causes
large energy fluctuations that greatly accelerate decoherence. Here, the
research team proposes a method to dramatically increase electronic coherence
times in quantum-confined two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors at room
temperature. The approach is multi-faceted: 1) perform 'single' particle
measurements to minimize heterogeneous broadening, 2) identify transient
excitonic states that are well-below the bandgap of the materials, and 3) create
unique decoherence-free subspaces by optical driving fields that decouple the
excitons from strongly coupled phonons, thereby giving rise to long-lived
coherences among electronic states of matter. The proposed platform based on
highly tunable 2D organic-inorganic perovskite crystals is used to create robust
quantum states far from thermal equilibrium for applications in quantum sensing,
quantum transport, and quantum information processing. 2D perovskites are ideal
materials for this purpose because they exhibit a large manifold of transient
and strongly-coupled exciton states that can be used as qubits in quantum
information processing and sensing. The approach combines ideas from magnetic
resonance, quantum chemistry, coherent spectroscopy, and quantum optics in order
to create long-lived coherences with orders-of-magnitude longer electronic
coherence times than currently possible in condensed-phase molecular systems
under ambient conditions. The work proposed here enables understanding of how
structural and chemical changes to the system, as well as modifications of the
bath through external perturbations, affect decoherence far from thermal
equilibrium. This project incorporates an educational component that advances
undergraduate and graduate training through the creation of online tutorial
courses that disseminate the research findings and the scientific background
necessary to understand them. These courses are made available to a wide
audience of students and teachers at the K-12 levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.