* 1838039
* EAGER: ISN: Disrupting Exploitation and Trafficking Labor Supply Networks in Post-Harvey Rebuild
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Yanling Chang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Irina Dolinskaya
* 06/30/2021
* USD 312,944.00

This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will
contribute to the national security, prosperity and welfare by improving
understanding of the states of laborers exploitation and trafficking that often
occurs in the chaotic rebuild and recovery environment following a natural
disaster. Construction workers are extremely vulnerable to exploitation and
human trafficking, especially in the post-disaster settings. Through
retrospective interviews among Houston-area laborers, this project will
facilitate scientific understanding of the illicit supply networks in the
construction industry in the post-Harvey rebuilding efforts and evaluate
potential countermeasures for their disruption. The project will be a first step
toward disrupting human trafficking in other industry sectors. It will involve
early-career scholars, graduate students, women, minorities, and multiple
institutions, and will more broadly facilitate future involvement of the
operations research community in the disruption of illicit supply networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will address several novel and
unique features encountered in the complex post-disaster labor trafficking
ecosystem, including stochastic systems with partial information to capture the
case where a laborer's state cannot be directly observed. In addition, the
employment status of construction laborers generally changes relatively
frequently. These status or state changes and the associated decisions and
actions by ecosystem participants will require researchers to explore the merit
of multi-period dynamic stochastic games in capturing these dynamics. The
planned multi-agent stochastic decision-making framework will be developed based
on real-world evidence from the retrospective field interviews wherein laborers
will provide a recalled trajectory of employment and behaviors experienced since
Hurricane Harvey or their arrival to the affected region. The partial
observability of victims and adaptive behavior of the traffickers will also be
captured. Stochastic model development will be supported and evaluated with
multiagent simulation models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.