* 1838145
* BIGDATA: F: Collaborative Research: Collective Mining of Vertical Social Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Eduard Dragut, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 427,912.00

A large fraction of internet social media content is found in thousands of
specialized communities that are hosted by news outlets, typically in the form
of reader forums or comments on news articles. The users of the such a site are
said to form a vertical social community (VSC), because they deeply engage with
a single media source. While each VSC is tiny compared to broad communities such
as Facebook, they are important because they expose how different segments of
society feel about various world events. This can be a very useful resource for
downstream intelligence and predictive analytics. However, current web crawlers
cannot effectively access VSCs. Thus their data is invisible to search engines,
and remains hidden from analytics tools. The goals of this project are to enable
effective access to vertical social communities coalesced at news reports
online, and to mine their comments and debates. This project will provide
researchers with tools to collect data from these communities and analyze them.
The educational component of the project includes the involvement of graduate
and undergraduate student training and research and the incorporation of
research projects and results in courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
will develop algorithms to unearth the content generated at thousands of
vertical social communities and make their content transparently accessible to
data management and analytics tools. The researchers will develop novel deep
learning techniques for content detection, and build a novel scalable end-to-end
system for real-time access and collective mining of these communities, capable
of handling large parallel data streams based on shifting ideas. The specific
algorithms will include user population estimation, bootstrap communication
patterns for automatic crawling of content, and fine-grained sentiment analysis
for intelligence and predictive analytics. Software tools will be made available
to researchers in academe and industry. Distribution of free, open-source
software for implementing the techniques developed will enhance existing
research infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.