* 1838336
* RoL: FELS EAGER: Environmental drivers of intraspecific variation in animal behavior and consequences for ecosystem functions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Alexander Reisinger, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 152,941.00

Differences in traits among species are widely understood to influence key
processes that occur in ecosystems, such as the cycling of nutrients and
transfer of energy within food webs. However, substantial variation in traits,
such as behavior, also occurs among individuals within a single species. It is
an important scientific challenge to understand whether variation in traits
within species is also important for ecosystem processes. Behavioral traits are
often the first to respond to changes in the environment, and it is now widely
appreciated that many species exhibit critical behavioral differences both
within and among populations. This project will test the novel hypothesis that
within-population differences in the behavior of two widely distributed
freshwater crayfish affect energy transfer and nutrient cycling. In addition,
the project will evaluate whether behavioral traits that vary among crayfish
populations are related to environmental characteristics, to predict how
environmental change may influence the ecological impacts of these species.
Crayfish often play a central role in stream ecosystems, and there is
substantial variation in feeding behavior among crayfish populations, which is
likely to influence their ecological impacts. This project is potentially
transformative in considering whether behavioral variation within species is
essential for predicting ecological processes. In addition, it will enhance the
ability of researchers to predict the ecological consequences of human-induced
changes to species' traits. The project will also provide outreach to educators
and scientific training for multiple graduate and undergraduate students.

The objectives of this project are to determine whether behavioral variation
within crayfish species: (1) affects stream ecosystem functions and (2) is
predictably associated with differences in local and regional environmental
characteristics. This project will be accomplished using two crayfish species
that inhabit streams across a latitudinal gradient from Wisconsin through
Alabama and Tennessee. Specifically, in streams across each species' range,
researchers will quantify stream metabolism (photosynthesis and respiration) in
different habitats and measure local (resource availability, predation) and
regional (climate) environmental variables. Researchers will also examine
within-species differences in the behavior of crayfish collected from these
streams using laboratory behavioral assays. Finally, researchers will use
larger, semi-natural experiments to examine the effects of crayfish populations
that differ in behavior on critical ecosystem functions including leaf litter
decomposition, nutrient cycling, and ecosystem metabolism. This high-risk
project spans levels of biological organization by connecting organismal
behavior to larger, ecosystem-scale dynamics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.