* 1838427
* Student Travel Support for the 26th ACM International Conference on Multimedia 2018 (ACM MM 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2020
* Vivek Singh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,543.00

This student travel grant supports about 15 graduate/undergraduate students
enrolled in U.S. institutions to attend the 26th annual ACM Multimedia
Conference 2018 (ACM MM 2018) to be held in Seoul, Korea October 22-26, 2018.
This is the worldwide premier conference and a key world event to present and
discuss scientific achievements and innovative industrial products in the field
of multimedia computing. Participation in such an event allows students to
learn/experience innovative research, develop professional networks, and
interact with industry and academia leaders involved in practical applications
and technology transfer. The opportunity will be broadcast widely to the
technical community; students from underrepresented groups will be particularly
encouraged to apply. The active participation in ACM Multimedia 2018 will be
valuable for students to prepare for the success of their research career.
Ultimately, the participation by U.S.-based students will support development of
the next generation multimedia researchers and foster US competitiveness.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ACM Multimedia covers a broad spectrum of technical areas,
including: Understanding (Multimedia and Vision, Multimodal Analysis and
Description, Deep Learning for Multimedia); Engagement (Emotional and Social
Signals in Multimedia, Multimedia Search and Recommendation, Social Multimedia,
Multimedia Art, Entertainment and Culture); and Experience (Multimedia human-
computer interaction and Quality of Experience, Multimedia Art, Entertainment
and Culture, Multimedia for Collaboration in Education and Distributed
Environments, Music, Speech and Audio Processing in Multimedia). The supported
students will greatly benefit from participating in the conference, where they
will interact with research leaders from a variety of disciplines and will be
exposed to the most recent developments in multimedia research as showcased in
keynote addresses, latest technical papers, technical demos, grand challenge
competition, open source software competition, doctoral symposium, and also an
interactive art program stimulating artists and computer scientists to meet and
discover together the frontiers of effective communications. Further, each
supported student will be paired with a senior mentor who would spend one-on-one
time with the student and advise them on strengthening their current research
work as well as their broader future research agenda. This will ensure that
students will be actively engaged and will receive valuable advice. More details
on the conference are available at ACM MM 2018 website
(http://www.acmmm.org/2018/) and the proceedings of the conference will be
available via the ACM Digital Library
(https://dl.acm.org/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.