* 1838463
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: 2D metal oxides (2DTMOs) hosting strongly bound excitons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Charles Ahn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical description: This project aims to create ultra-thin materials for
producing quantum bits - qubits - the basic building blocks for quantum
computers. The materials of interest are truly two-dimensional in that they are
only a single atom thick and are made from oxidized transition metals. These
materials are of significant interest for qubits since they are expected to
absorb light and store that energy for long periods of time, where each quantum
of absorbed light functions as a single qubit. This project involves a close
collaboration between experimenters who fabricate and characterize materials and
theorists who design and model them. The project evaluates whether ultra-thin
TMOs satisfy all the key scientific and technological properties needed for
realizing high fidelity qubits. The project also provides significant
educational and training impact. Two graduate students are expertly trained in
the requisite science and methodology, working in a collaborative environment
that brings together theory and experiment. In addition, two summer
undergraduate students are mentored each year as part of collaborative research
teams working on the key scientific questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The proposed activities for this project involve collaboration
between theory and experiment to design and study a new class of two-dimensional
transition metal oxides (2DTMOs) that can host strongly bound excitons for use
as quantum information platforms. First principles theory screens multiple
2DTMOs for their energetic stability, structure, and electronic and optical
properties by using many-body Green's function methods. The most promising
candidate materials are then grown using molecular beam epitaxy and their
structure and optical properties characterized using synchrotron and
photoluminescence methods. While the growth of 2DTMOs is challenging, they have
advantages over other 2D materials such as graphene or transition metal
dichalcogenides in that 2DTMOs have widely tunable chemistries, can be produced
in a scalable manner, and are generally environmentally stable in typical
operating and device processing environments that expose the 2D materials to
oxygen and water. The broader impacts of this project are: (i) two graduate
students are being trained to become experts in materials physics for quantum
information, (ii) two undergraduate summer students participate in the work as
part of collaborative research teams, and (iii) the successful design of 2DTMOs
that host long-lived qubits mark a milestone in materials design for quantum
computation and are of significant interest to materials physicists and quantum
device researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.