* 1838420
* EAGER: Developing a Unified Framework for the Dynamics and Structure of Organisms, Cities and Companies
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Geoffrey West, Santa Fe Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The major thrust of this project is to develop a quantitative and predictive
unified framework for understanding the coarse-grained structure and dynamics of
biological and social systems across all scales from cells and multicellular
organisms to ecosystems, cities and companies. Techniques from mathematics and
physics such as network theory, field theory and non-linear dynamics, scaling
and the renormalization group, as well as numerical simulations, will be used
where appropriate but crucially and necessarily in convergent collaboration with
theorists, experimentalists, and practitioners in the multiple fields with which
the work overlaps. Developing a science of cities to complement traditional,
more qualitative approaches is urgently required to address global
sustainability. Can we maintain a vibrant, innovative society driven by ideas
and wealth creation or are we destined to a planet of slums, conflict and
devastation? The ever-increasing pace of life and increasingly rapid rate of
change driven by positive feedback mechanisms in social networks induces serious
stress across all aspects of life. Is this sustainable or are we headed for
major disruptions to the socio-economic fabric? To address these issues a new
conceptual framework is needed, encompassing a quantitative theory of cities, a
Grand Unified Theory of Sustainability that integrates across the multiplicity
of challenges we face.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an ambitious program that
transcends conventional disciplinary boundaries, ranging across the
mathematical, physical, biological and social sciences, with potentially
important implications for addressing societal issues such as aging, cancer,
urbanization and global sustainability. The two main categories to be explored
are i) a generic theory of aging, damage, sleep and repair; and (ii) developing
a science of cities, urbanisation and global sustainability. Although the
overall goal will be to explore the development of a potential unified framework
for quantitative understanding of how these diverse, highly complex evolving
systems can be understood from a parsimonious mathematically quantifiable set of
underlying principles and concepts, this will be carried out in the context of
focusing on several specific problems such as: how are lifetimes whose scale is
years generated from microscopic molecular time scales associated with genes and
respiratory enzymes? Why is the half-life of US publicly-traded companies about
10 years? Why, on average, do all companies and organisms stop growing and die
but almost all cities keep growing and remain viable? Does the scaling of sleep
times from babies to adults recapitulate how it scales from mice to elephants?
Is there a maximum or optimum size of cities?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.