* 1838991
* Workshops on Mathematical Challenges in Many-Body Physics and Quantum Information
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Bruno Nachtergaele, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2019
* USD 22,960.00

This award provides funding for US participation for three workshops and a
school that are part of the thematic program "Mathematical Challenges in Many-
Body Physics and Quantum Information" to be held at Centre de Recherches
Mathematiques (CRM) located in Montreal, Quebec, Canada. The first workshop,
"Quantum information and quantum statistical mechanics", will be held October
15-19, 2018. The school "Mathematics of Non-equilibrium Statistical Mechanics"
will be held October 24-26, 2018. The scond workshop, "Entropic fluctuation
relations in mathematics and physics" will be held October 29-November 2, 2018.
The third workshop, "Spectral theory of quasi-periodic and random operators"
will be held November 13-16, 2018.

The individual workshops and school focus on recent developments in Analysis,
especially in the field of mathematical physics and quantum information science.
A number of distinguished mathematicians have agreed to attend and speak at this
conference series. This award gives early career researchers, members of
underrepresented groups, researchers not funded by NSF and the like an
opportunity to attend and participate in this conference. The organizing
committee will strive to make this funding opportunity known to target groups
through a number of different activities. More information will be made
available at the thematic conference webpage:
http://www.crm.umontreal.ca/Quantum2018/index.php/

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.