* 1838230
* BIGDATA: IA: Collaborative Research: Intelligent Solutions for Navigating Big Data from the Arctic and Antarctic
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Maryam Rahnemoonfar, Texas A&M University Corpus Christi
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2019
* USD 612,823.00

The objective of this research is to investigate artificial intelligence (AI)
solutions for data collected by the Center for Remote Sensing of Ice Sheets
(CReSIS) in order to provide an intelligent data understanding to automatically
mine and analyze the heterogeneous dataset collected by CReSIS. Significant
resources have been and will be spent in collecting and storing large and
heterogeneous datasets from expensive Arctic and Antarctic fieldwork (e.g.
through NSF Big Idea: Navigating the New Arctic). While traditional analyses
provide some insight, the complexity, scale, and multidisciplinary nature of the
data necessitate advanced intelligent solutions. This project will allow domain
scientists to automatically answer questions about the properties of the data,
including ice thickness, ice surface, ice bottom, internal layers, ice thickness
prediction, and bedrock visualization. The planned approach will advance the
broader big data research community by improving the efficiency of deep learning
methods and in the investigation of methods to merge data-driven AI approaches
with application-specific domain knowledge. Special attention will be given to
women and minority involvement in the research and the project will develop new
course materials for several classes in AI at a Hispanic and minority serving
institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In polar radar sounder imagery, the delineation
of the ice top and ice bottom and layering within the ice is essential for
monitoring and modeling the growth of ice sheets and sea ice. The optimal
approach to this problem should merge the radar sounder data with physical ice
models and related datasets such as ice coverage and concentration maps,
spatiotemporal meteorological maps, and ice velocity. Rather than directly
engineering specific relations into the image analysis that require many
parameters to be defined and tuned, data-dependent approaches let the machine
learn these relationships. To devise intelligent solutions for navigating the
big data from the Arctic and Antarctic and to scale up the current and
traditional techniques to big data, this project plans several approaches for
detecting ice surface, bottom, internal layers, 3D modeling of bedrock and
spatial-temporal monitoring of the ice surface: 1) Devise new methodologies
based on hybrid networks combining machine learning with traditional domain
specific knowledge and transforming the entire deep learning network to the
time-frequency domain. 2) Equip the machine with information that is not visible
to the human eye or that is hard for a human operator to consider
simultaneously, to be able to detect internal layers and 3D basal topography on
a large scale. Using the results of the feature tracking of the ice surface in
radar altimetry, the research effort will also develop new data-dependent
techniques for predicting the ice thickness for following years based on deep
recurrent neural networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.