* 1838616
* Refugee and European Cities Panel
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Maria LasalaBlanco, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 07/31/2021
* USD 31,894.00

General Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal studies how advanced democracies help
or hinder the integration of immigrants. It seeks to identify when, how, and
under what circumstances individual immigrants acquire positive attitudes toward
democratic values, institutions, and toward the receiving country. This is a
topic of great importance, as it is clear that not all immigrants adopt pro-
democratic values, as evident by instances of hostility on the part of
immigrants directed at the receiving country. The project will study refugees in
order to assess their attitudes toward the host country upon their arrival, and
then subsequently track the respondents' attitudes over time. With an increasing
number of individuals seeking to flee their home countries to move to advanced
democracies, the topic is timely and important. By assessing how immigrants
acquire (or fail to acquire) pro-democracy attitudes, the research is poised to
help determine strategies to help integrate the new arrivals into democratic
society. Successful programs that foster integration can help to reduce the
negative consequences often associated with large influxes of refugees. Those
findings would be of great values to both the scholarly and policymaking
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
studies how, when, and why some immigrants successfully integrate into
democratic societies, while others do not. The research design allows for the
investigators to evaluate the immigrant respondents' attitudes toward democracy
upon arriving in the receiving country, and subsequently at multiple points over
time. Unlike previous studies, the team is able to study refugees fleeing a
specific country, but who ultimately end up dispersed across multiple advanced
democratic countries. This will allow the team to assess how different
conditions across countries may contribute to the successful integration of
immigrants and the adoption of pro-democratic values by these immigrants. To do
so, the team will utilize state-of-the-art cellular technology, an experimental
research design, and a panel data survey design to assess the success or failure
of host states to integrate newly arrived immigrants. By identifying factors
that contribute to successful integration efforts that foster democratic values
among newly arrived immigrants, this research will provide valuable insights to
scholars who study civic values and political socialization. Likewise, the
findings will be of great importance for policymakers who must design
appropriate and effective integration programs and policies for particular
immigrants to their country.