* 1838289
* EAGER: Pace of Life as an emergent outcome of variation in metabolic rate at a lower level of organization
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Dhruba Naug, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,957.00

Individuals of different species, as well as individuals within a species, can
differ in their life history along a slow-fast continuum such that those showing
slower growth and delayed reproduction but higher survival are said to have a
slow pace of life while those with faster growth and early reproduction with
lower survival are said to have a fast pace of life. Since metabolic rate
determines the rate at which an animal acquires and spends energy, it has often
been considered the fundamental driver of pace of life. The influence of
metabolic rate on pace of life can be complex. A higher metabolic rate, by
allowing more activity and resource acquisition, can lead to a faster pace of
life, but, burning more energy can also lead to a slower pace of life. Studies
investigating the relationship between metabolic rate and pace of life often
produce ambiguous results. The broad objective of this research is to select
genetic lines of honeybees with different metabolic rates and experimentally
test how differences in metabolic rate interact with resource availability to
determine pace of life. Using the honeybee colony as an experimental model
allows an understanding of not only how metabolic rate determines pace of life
at the individual level but also how interindividual variation in metabolic rate
determines pace of life at the colony level. Understanding this important
relationship between metabolic rate and life history can contribute to
biomedical sciences as metabolic rate critically influences various health
parameters. The development and maintenance of genetic lines of bees with
different metabolic rate will also be a novel biological resource for research
and potentially to the beekeeping industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metabolic rate
(MR) is often considered the fundamental rate that drives all biological
processes at all levels of biological organization. A central question in
biology therefore is how the functional properties at any level of organization
are determined by the MR of its constituent parts. By selecting and breeding
genetic lines of honeybees with different MR and creating colonies with
different metabolic (rate) compositions, this research will provide an
experimental test of the relationship between MR and pace of life (POL) at the
individual and the colony level. The project will use an integrative approach
based in genetics, physiology and behavior to ask how MR of an individual
impacts its POL and its social contribution, how the POL at a group level is
determined by the MR and POL of its individual members, and how MR interacts
with the resource environment to regulate individual and colony POL. The
integrative experimental approach combined with path analysis will allow a
causal test of the connection between MR and POL, providing answers regarding
the functional links that connects physiology to life history evolution. By
combining measurements of MR with economic analysis of individual work
contribution in a social insect colony, the research will add to our
understanding regarding how interindividual variation in MR and POL scale up to
drive POL at a higher level of biological organization in the evolution of
eusociality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.