* 1838960
* FAIR Publishing Guidelines for Spectral Data and Chemical Structures in Support of Chemistry and Related Disciplinary Communities
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Vincent Scalfani, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 24,671.00

In this project the PIs will convene a meeting to establish publishing
guidelines for sharing machine-readable files of commonly reported chemical data
classes. The workshop organizers seek involvement from researchers, publishers,
funding agencies, libraries, database and repository managers, tool developers,
chemical societies, and standards organizations. Topics to discuss include
formulating value propositions for data (that is, what data should be kept and
for how long), and formulating criteria and stakeholder roles to better support
data that are Findable, Accessible Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR). Several
outcomes are expected, including best-practice publishing guidelines specifying
FAIR criteria for spectral and chemical structure data; and workflow models for
capturing, managing and sharing these data in domain repositories. This workshop
will build on momentum from the Research Data Alliance (RDA), the International
Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the American Chemical Society (ACS)
and other related scientific societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the National Science Foundation?s Public Access Initiative which is
managed by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure on behalf of the
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.