* 1838291
* RoL:  FELS:  EAGER: Mining for ancient toolkits: Emergence of planar structures across kingdoms
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Edward Golenberg, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 10/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Both Animal and Plant Kingdoms have evolved flat lateral (planar) appendages,
for example, wings and leaves. Despite the lack of obvious functional
similarity, planar structures in animals and plants may result from the merging
of dorsal and ventral tissues, each of which is defined by different gene
regulatory networks. This study will carry out a series of comparative gene
expression analyses across homologous and analogous organs within Classes and
across Kingdoms in order to determine whether there are shared, and perhaps
universal, gene expression networks regulating the development of planar
appendages. The data and insights may enable the development of new fundamental
concepts in biology. This project will also enhance student learning in
undergraduate and graduate courses and provide opportunities for participating
undergraduate students to develop their critical thinking. Due to its location
and university mission, Wayne State has a deep commitment to encouraging
underrepresented and first-generation college students to explore careers in
science and to develop a deep appreciation of science with respect to our
national welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of multiple organisms
demonstrate that although dorsal/ventral (adaxial/abaxial) gene regulatory
networks (GRNs) are necessary for planar structures, they are not sufficient.
This fact suggests that there must be additional, presently undefined, emergent
GRNs that are required for planar development. The experimental design is based
on comparative transcriptome analyses between planar and non-planar homologous
organs and planar and non-planar non-homologous, analogous organs in selected
lineages of angiosperms and arthropods. These comparative analyses will seek to
detect regulatory modules at different levels and help identify shared and
perhaps universal toolboxes governing the development of planar structures. Data
from RNAseq libraries will be mapped to de novo assemblies to quantify
expression, and to determine gene functional identities. Expression counts of
genes will be comprehensively analyzed to identify functional co-expression gene
networks. Finally, detailed biological patterning across Classes and Kingdoms
will be performed through analysis of protein domains within networks to detect
deep overlapping regulatory modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.