* 1838939
* SCH: INT: Transabdominal Fetal Oximetry for Improved Intrapartum Fetal Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Diana Farmer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,215,999.00

This project will improve the current state of fetal health monitoring during
labor and delivery, an healthcare issue that touches almost every family. Since
introduction of electronic fetal monitoring (EFM) to the labor and delivery
rooms about half a century ago, the national rate of Cesarean section deliveries
has risen five-fold. The main need driving Cesarean sections is a concern for
oxygen deprivation in the fetsus' brain or hypoxic brain injury. These injuries
result in problems such as cerebral palsy. While the number of Cesarean sections
has increased, the rates of various health conditions associated hypoxia remain
unchanged. The fundamental problem with EFM is that besides hypoxia, a number of
innocuous factors can cause alarming EFM traces, which may lead to unnecessary
medical interventions. The project aims to address this problem by research,
development and validation of technology for non-invasive transabdominal
measurement of fetal arterial blood oxygen saturation. Furthermore, the project
includes specific education and outreach activities that are driven by
integration of research results into courses, and recruitment and retention of
students from underrepresented backgrounds into STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal to address these issues through
development of non-invasive measurement of fetal blood oxygen saturation. The
project develops a comprehensive set of tissue models that consider inter-
patient variation and intrapartum dynamics, to allow investigation of the
fundamentals of light propagation in the abdominal area in the context of labor
and delivery. The project involves shining near infrared light at several
carefully selected wavelengths into the maternal abdomen, followed by
transabdominal sensing of diffuse reflectance light, and isolation of very weak
fetal photo-plethysmographs from the maternal and other noises contributing to
the sensed signal. Several approaches to improve system robustness in face of
intrapartum dynamics, such as adaptive noise canceling, time-resolved
spectroscopy for dynamic calibration, and correlated measurements via a sensor
array will be investigated. An extensive evaluation plan involving hypoxic
pregnant sheep models and human subjects will be carried
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.