* 1838403
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Scalable, Controllable and Tunable Room- Temperature Quantum Emitters in Mono-layer WSe2
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Nicholas Borys, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 06/30/2021
* USD 128,164.00

Nontechnical description: Many modern technologies - including low-energy-
consumption light bulbs, traffic lights, lasers, and computers - rely on the
controlled emission of light. Light is composed of individual packets of energy
called photons, and this project seeks to demonstrate the ultimate control of
light emission by creating a device architecture capable of emitting single
optical photons at will while also tuning their color in real time. While some
new classes of tunable light emitters have recently been discovered, most of
them operate only at very cold temperatures (less than -420 degrees Fahrenheit).
The project is developing an approach for overcoming this major limitation by
combining new light emitters with miniature antennas, potentially allowing for
operation at room temperature - a critical requirement for most optical
technologies. The researchers envision applications spanning maximally secure
optical communications to the development of quantum computers. This research
activity is integrated with efforts to train the next generation of materials
scientists, engineers and physicists. These efforts include highly
interdisciplinary PhD research, as well as a ''tiered mentoring'' focused summer
program titled Engineering the Next Generation, which serves highly motivated
underrepresented high school students from local partner schools and involves
both lab work and supplemental programming to develop students' academic and
professional skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The discovery
of single-photon emitters (SPEs) in monolayer WSe2 in 2015 ushered in a
revolutionary class of solid-state quantum emitters with potential for
deterministic positioning, facile tuning and control capabilities, and
integrability into photonic architectures that do not exist for other classes of
solid-state quantum emitters. However, a major limitation of these localized
light sources is that the bound exciton states on which they rely are only
active at cryogenic temperatures below 20 K. Very recently, it has been
demonstrated that a model nanoscale architecture, a nano-optical antenna and
extrinsic strain due to a nanobubble, activates the optical activity of bound
exciton states at room temperature and under ambient conditions in monolayer
WSe2. The overall objective of this project is to establish that the newly
discovered room-temperature localized bound exciton states can be developed into
tunable SPEs for quantum photonic technologies. The research is organized into
two tasks: (1) directly probing the new class of room-temperature emitters to
understand their origin and activation, and to identify potential pathways to
develop optimized SPEs; and (2) leveraging the new knowledge of these emitters
to implement a nanoplasmonic-WSe2 architecture demonstrating activated, tunable
room-temperature SPEs. The envisioned emitter architecture consists of a
monolayer of WSe2 overlaid on top of a nanoneedle plasmonic antenna, which is
able to simultaneously provide the localized strain and nano-optical activation
of the bound excitons. The detailed study of these room-temperature localized
bound exciton states fills key knowledge voids currently limiting the
development of quantum technologies in high-quality 2-dimensional
semiconductors. More broadly, a demonstration of large-scale, tunable on-chip
room-temperature SPE pixel arrays immediately impacts next-generation device
design, providing a direct pathway to SPE technologies for quantum logic
applications. These research objectives are integrated with educational efforts
that emphasize mentoring and hands-on learning about photonic materials for
students in high school through the graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.