* 1838368
* I-Corps: An Individualized 3D Printed Silicone Bottle Nipple
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Rasim Guldiken, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is improved
health and economic impact as a result of a 3D printing technology, combined
with fluid dynamic modeling, that has the potential to prolong breastfeeding. An
individualized, 3D printed silicone bottle nipple, that closely mimics a
mother's breast, creates continuity between bottle and breast, reducing the
primary barrier to breastfeeding, nipple confusion. Prolonged breastfeeding and
skin to skin contact enables breast milk to continually act in establishing
immunity, enabling protective neurological development, and genetic optimization
through microbiome establishment. The core technology of this project has a
commercialization potential to solve issues mothers face every day and the
global societal impact of the innovation could be substantial. It is projected
that increasing rates of breastfeeding could save the lives of more than 820,000
children under age five, annually, prevent 20,000 breast cancer deaths, while
saving $300 billion annually in health care costs worldwide.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to evaluate the
commercialization potential of a baby bottle nipple concept which replicates a
mother's nipple in terms of shape and texture while matching the flow rate to
that of the maternal flow rate. One of the intellectual merits of the innovation
is its individualized 3D printed silicone bottle nipple which addresses nipple
confusion related to shape based on a 3D survey of a mother's nipples. The 3D
scanning technology allows mothers to use an application to scan their breasts
to be able to select which 3D printed mold fits their breasts the best, leading
to seamless bottle to breast continuity. The innovation also appropriately
addresses nipple confusion related to flow rate in its design. The team
conducted fluid dynamics analyses to determine the flow rate through the printed
nipple that matches the flow rate from a small data set from preterm mothers.
The core technology has the potential to allow better continuity between the
breast and bottle, help enable mothers to overcome the barriers they face so
they can continue breastfeeding for the recommended minimum of 2
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.