* 1838193
* BIGDATA: IA: Multiplatform, Multilingual, and Multimodal Tools for Analyzing Public Communication in over 100 Languages
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Derry Wijaya, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

In today's information age, understanding public communication flows around the
world is important to United States policy and diplomacy. The challenge for
research is to collect, analyze, and interpret information as it is presented
worldwide, creating big data that is flowing at high velocity, in large volumes,
with much variety in perspective, language, and platforms. Analytic methods for
studying textual and visual public information worldwide are limited by language
hurdles. This project aims to solve data analytics problems in the domain of
international public information flows by developing methods that effectively
leverage natural language processing, machine learning, and computer vision
tools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will involve collecting multilingual,
multiplatform, and multimodal corpora of text and images originating in the U.S.
and reported worldwide, developing an interactive budget-efficient methodology
for annotation by experts and crowdworkers that scales effectively, using
machine learning and deep learning techniques that exploit multilingual and
multimodal representations to develop data analytics tools for entity and frame
recognition, sentiment analysis of entities and frames, and curating balanced
real-time content collections for many languages. This project is expected to
generate analytical tools for social scientists and others to better examine the
international flow of public communications. The annotated data will provide
training and benchmark datasets that can propel research in entity and frame
recognition, sentiment analysis, and other related natural language processing
tasks for many languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.