* 1838993
* Native Science Report: Strengthening STEM Education and Research Within Tribal and Native-Serving Colleges
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Paul Boyer, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,629,642.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the discipline-based research and STEM
curricular offerings at these institutions expands the opportunities of their
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be culturally significant, and encourages a
community and generational appreciation for science and mathematics education.
This project supports that goal by disseminating the achievements and findings
of the colleges that have been realized with federal funding, and to increase
the knowledge and understanding of tribal colleges and their role in economic
and community development for a subset of the Nation's Native
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
now represent the largest and most dynamic parts of the curriculum within most
of the nation's tribally controlled colleges and universities. While small and
underfunded, these colleges are graduating students ready to work or earn
graduate degrees in fields ranging from electrical engineering to Native
environmental science. Additionally, all are pioneering new approaches to STEM
education by incorporating traditional cultural values, student research
opportunities, and community development projects into their degree programs.
However, few people working outside of the tribal colleges are aware of these
accomplishments. Because tribal colleges represent a relatively young
educational movement, many Americans do not know they exist. Even those familiar
with the colleges are often surprised by the diversity and sophistication of
their rapidly expanding STEM programs. The purpose of this proposal is to
address the need for greater national awareness of STEM education programs
within tribal colleges and, additionally, to promote greater communication
between tribal college STEM faculty through the development of Native Science
Report , a new online journal focusing on STEM education within tribal and
Native-serving colleges and universities (nativesciencereport.org). This young
publication, which is sponsored by Sisseton Wahpeton College, is significantly
expanding its capacity to report on trends in STEM education within the tribal
college movement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.