* 1838911
* 2018 EFRI ACQUIRE Grantees Meeting
* ENG,EFMA
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Michael Duncan, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2019
* USD 36,000.00

This proposal requests funds for the "2018 EFRI ACQUIRE Grantees Meeting", the
second annual meeting for the NSF-funded Advancing Communication and Quantum
Information Research in Engineering (ACQUIRE) program. It will be held, this
year, on September 20, 21 in Washington, DC. The goal of this grantees meeting
is to review current grantees research progress, hear about latest international
research progress in this area, discuss future research opportunities and
challenges and provide feedback to ACQUIRE researchers. The support requested in
this grant will be distributed to students to partially defray travel costs, and
to help cover a portion of other key logistical and organizational costs. This
meeting provides an opportunity for grantees students to make poster
presentations to, and get feedback from reviewers, ACQUIRE PI's and keynote
invited speakers. The workshop will provide inter-disciplinary interactions
between engineering and physics disciplines for enabling student participation
and learning opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this grantees meeting is to review current grantees research progress,
discuss future research in the ACQUIRE program, and provide feedback.
Engineering and physics researchers are confronting major challenges in a four-
year quest to engineer micro-scale quantum communication system components for
large-scale networks. The challenging goal is to create a compact and practical
quantum communication technology operating near room temperature with low energy
in a fiber optic network with entangled photons. A diverse range of topics and
techniques are being investigated, including sources, detectors, up-converters,
quantum memories, synchronizers, error correctors, etc. with various material
platforms. This annual grantees meeting offers an opportunity for
recommendations for the ACQUIRE program and future growth of the related and
broader topics of quantum optical communications research, and secure optical
communications with key researchers and decision makers from academia, industry,
government laboratories and funding agencies. &lt;br/&gt;In terms of educational
aspects, this meeting provides an opportunity for grantees students to make
poster presentations to, and get feedback from reviewers, ACQUIRE PI's and
invited speakers. Students will benefit and learn from attending discussions
involving different perspectives ranging from university experts and industry
scientists, and be exposed to diverse aspects of quantum optical communications
which bridge traditional physics and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.