* 1838523
* EAGER: Building CT Readiness: An EAGER Proposal to Refine and Study a Framework for Integrating Computational Thinking Across Subjects in High-Poverty Elementary Schools
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2022
* Heather Sherwood, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 03/31/2022
* USD 299,881.00

Education Development Center (EDC) and its partners at the Research Alliance for
NYC (New York City) Schools and Dr. Maya Israel of the University of Illinois
propose an eighteen-month EAGER grant for research and development in the area
of computational thinking (CT) integration in elementary education. The primary
purpose of the proposed work is for the research team to collaborate over 12
months with a group of 18 geographically dispersed school principals, teachers,
evaluators, and subject-matter experts to iteratively refine an existing draft
framework, self-diagnostic tool, and rubric for computational thinking
integration across multiple school subjects. Subsequently, we will pilot test
the revised tools over three months in six elementary schools in high-poverty
areas in three states (New York, Illinois, and Florida) to investigate whether
there is promising evidence that systematic use of these resources is associated
with the successful integration of CT across elementary school curricula. These
tools are meant to help high-poverty (and eventually all) schools clarify their
definitions of CT and CT integration; to articulate their visions and plans for
CT implementation; and to monitor the effectiveness of teacher professional
development in CT instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.