* 1838730
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Data-driven Stratification and  Prognosis for Traumatic Brain Injury
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Chandan Reddy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 695,600.00

Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) is a global health problem affecting over 10
million people worldwide and is a leading cause of death and disability among
children and young adults in the United States. While the understanding of
biological mechanisms related to acquired brain injuries has improved
significantly in the past two decades, none of these advances have translated to
a successful clinical trial and therefore, there has been no substantial
improvement in treating such critical conditions. The heterogeneity of TBI and
the ability to reliably stratify critically-ill patients who will likely have
better outcomes for a certain intervention are amongst the major challenges in
clinical research. To address these challenges, this project develops a
comprehensive set of machine learning methods that can be broadly applied to a
variety of problems. Data sources include both in-patient bedside data as well
as remotely monitored telemedicine data, thus connecting data at multiple levels
for specific patient populations. This research is crucial to support the
development of pilot computational models for stratification of critical care
patients and potentially inform ways to reduce the overall healthcare and
societal costs for this patient population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
aims to develop novel computational algorithms for reliably stratifying brain
injury patients and predicting their short-term and long-term outcomes from
multi-modal physiologic and clinical data. Specifically, the research objectives
of this project are: (i) Develop a scalable and effective algorithm for
personalized subgroup identification for any given patient using an efficient
subcluster model that groups patients using only a subset of coherently relevant
variables. Discriminative subspace models will also be built to distinguish
subgroups of patients. (ii) Propose a new machine learning paradigm called
'Label-Bag learning' to identify and predict changes in TBI Patients. The goal
of label-bag learning is to learn a group of labels and their corresponding
outcome variable in the data. The project includes a new framework based on
Bayesian correlations that can adaptively transform any existing machine
learning algorithm and implicitly handle this label-bag problem formulation
through constrained modeling. (iii) Develop a novel approach to long-term
outcome prediction through differential subset modeling framework. Through
outreach and educational activities, the project will promote computational and
systems thinking among high school, undergraduate, and graduate students along
with clinical trainees. Methods developed in this project will be integrated
into courses and tutorials that have both computational and biomedical
emphases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.