* 1838873
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Patient Specific Multisite Pacing of Diseased Human Hearts
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Yingyan Lin, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,214,125.00

Cardiovascular disease is the number one cause of death worldwide. For example,
heart failure is a significant source of mortality within the U.S; it is
responsible for 1% of all emergency room presentations and contributes to one in
every nine deaths. A significant proportion of heart failure patients have
concurrent conduction system disease, which will lead to their eventual death.
Cardiac resynchronization has proven to be a useful therapy for improving
cardiac function as well as reducing mortality in some patients. However, a
significant number of patients fail to respond to resynchronization therapy,
often due to inadequate pacemaker lead placement. There currently exists no
pacemaker system that provides the 'potential' benefits of multisite temporally
and spatially precise pacing for resynchronization. To reach the audacious goal
of eliminating cardiovascular diseases, new technologies must be developed that
will monitor the diseased heart with unprecedented temporal and spatial
precision and will manage the pacing of the heart to restore a healthy function
of the heart. This project will process data recorded from multiple sites and
will generate a pacing therapy specific to the patient in real-
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award revisits the core foundation of pacemakers
to develop temporally and spatially precise pacing at multiple sites for
resynchronization. The researchers will develop a robust, well-annotated
database of intra-cardiac electrograms (IEGM) from multiple cardiac sites. The
focus will be on identifying challenging cases that are clinically difficult to
differentiate and, thus, stand to reap the greatest benefit of being able to
direct overall algorithm development. This information will be added to the
associated metadata file. Data will be collected from a minimum of 150 patients
with at least 50 patients from each identified pathophysiology. Pathology of
each patient based on data from multiple intra-cardiac recording sites will be
identified. The proposed machine-learning pipeline explores the representation
of time series using wavelets and then learns transformations of multiple time
series using the Lie group framework. This pipeline clusters time-series data to
identify the right pathology for the specific patient. In addition, the project
explores implementation as an application specific integrated circuit (ASIC)
that will be implanted subcutaneously to continuously process intracardiac
multi-site recordings as well as to generate temporally and spatially precise
pacing patterns. The overall approach is to holistically develop a methodology
that can address an extremely low-power implementation of machine learning and
signal processing algorithms, by not only combining, but jointly optimizing,
algorithmic-, circuit- and architecture-level
innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.