* 1838327
* RoL: FELS: EAGER: Simple scaling rules that define how genome size constrains metabolism: a test among photosynthetic pathways
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Adam Roddy, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2022
* USD 331,039.00

The coordination between changes in metabolism and cellular structure, and
between genome size and cell size, have been widely observed across all life.
The nature of these relationships and their implications for generating
organismal diversity remain obscure. This project will address the gap in our
understanding of this potential 'rule of life' by investigating how cellular
anatomy and genome size of vascular plants evolve over time in correlation with
changes in photosynthetic metabolism. Researchers will combine comparative
anatomical, phylogenetic, and genomic data from across the vascular plant tree
of life to clarify how changes in the basic structure of a genome -its size-
relates to the size of cells and, subsequently, how individual cells and entire
organisms process energy. The project will train undergraduate students,
including individuals from under-represented groups, and facilitate
collaboration among project team members having diverse expertise, most of whom
are early-career researchers. Societal benefits of the research include the
potential for discovering a new, fundamental scaling law in biology as well as
new pathways for developing more productive agricultural
crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will test whether coordination between
genome size, cell size, and metabolism represents a fundamental 'rule of life'
that constrains the phenotypic diversity of organisms. Researchers will use
vascular plants as a model system because its lineages have shifted repeatedly
among C3, C4, and CAM photosynthetic metabolisms over evolutionary time and
therefore provide multiple, independent tests of the overarching hypothesis.
Researchers will determine the dependence of different photosynthetic
metabolisms on genome-cellular allometry across about 360 vascular plants
species that encompass multiple transitions among photosynthetic pathways.
Sampling will include flowering plant clades known to have many C4 and CAM
transitions, including the grass and bromeliad monocot families and the eudicot
order containing cacti (Caryophyllales). Genome size and anatomical traits (leaf
epidermal, guard cell and vein sizes and densities) will be quantified for all
species. For a subset of species, the three-dimensional structure and
organization of leaf cells will be measured using microCT imaging. Researchers
will then characterize how vascular plant genomes have changed in size and
composition by analyzing 288 whole plant genomes. Comparative analyses will
reveal genomic architecture associated with shifts in photosynthetic metabolism
and will uncover how early-diverging flowering plants reduced their genome size
as compared to their gymnosperm relatives. Project outcomes will provide a
direct test of genome-metabolic scaling as it applies to autotrophic metabolism
and elucidate the evolutionary genetic mechanisms by which genomes expand and
contract in response to selection on photosynthetic
metabolism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.