* 1838159
* BIGDATA: F: Advancing Deep Learning to Monitor Global Change
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Philip Pardey, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,478,398.00

Growth in the world's population and the acceleration of industrialization and
urbanization are straining already scarce natural resources and food supplies,
which must scale up to keep pace with growing demand. The consequences of the
resulting large-scale changes include tremendous stresses on the environment, as
well as challenges to our ability to feed the world's population, which could be
calamitous at the current rate of change if not managed sustainably. Meeting
this challenge will require timely information on global changes; for example,
the changing productivity performance of land in agriculture; the conversion of
forest to farmland or plantations, and the loss of productive farmland due to
urbanization; and soil and water degradation. To address these challenges in
monitoring global change, this project will develop advanced machine learning
techniques, especially deep learning. The project's primary focus will be on the
analysis of remote sensing data, available from a variety of instruments and
sensors aboard satellites through United States and international agencies.
These rich datasets capture multiple facets of the natural processes and human
activities that shape the physical landscape and environmental quality of our
planet, and thus offer an opportunity to study and better shape the nature and
impact of global changes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to greatly
advance the state-of-the-art in machine learning techniques for analyzing the
multi-scale, multi-source, spatio-temporal data about earth system processes.
Specifically, this project will advance deep learning techniques to meet the
challenges involved in using remote sensing data for global change monitoring.
Deep learning has been successful in addressing problems in a number of domains
involving complex data sets with spatial and temporal (sequential) information
such as vision, video, and natural language processing. The promise of deep
learning mainly stems from its capacity to exploit complex mapping relationships
and extract discriminative features over space and time using large volumes of
training data. Consequently, there has been a flurry of activity in applying
deep learning techniques to remote sensing data. However, due to challenges that
are unique to environmental applications, off-the-shelf deep learning techniques
developed for related applications such as computer vision have limited utility.
This research will address these challenges and advance the state-of-the-art in
deep learning techniques by developing techniques that can make use of the
underlying complex, multi-scale, spatio-temporal earth system processes for
global change monitoring. Methods developed in this project are expected to also
have an impact across many disciplines that deal with large-scale time-varying
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.