* 1838277
* EAGER: Imaging of Element-Specific 3D Distribution Dynamics in Working Bimetallic Catalysts by in situ Anomalous Small-Angle X-Ray Scattering
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Yugang Sun, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program and the
Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Sun at
Temple University is developing a real-time imaging tool to map the spatial
distribution of chemical elements at atomic resolution based on x-ray
scattering. He works closely with scientists at the synchrotron light sources at
national laboratories to look for technical solution that could be used to
provide new insights about the structure-activity relationship of catalysts
during catalytic reactions. There is a significant risk to achieve the desired
imaging resolution in real time and under operando conditions. However, if
successful, the outcomes of Professor Sun's work could help to guide the design
and synthesis of efficient catalysts, an important research area that could
potentially lead to significant impacts in many industries, ranging from
petroleum refineries to pharmaceutical discoveries to fuel cells. The use of the
state-of-the-art large-scale facilities at national laboratories trains the
students to become specialists in a significant area that is underrepresented in
the typical chemist?s skill set. More broadly, performing this research educates
students (with emphasis on underrepresented groups) with multidisciplinary
knowledge and prepares the technical workforce for academic and industrial
positions relevant to efficient catalysis. In synergy with the research and
professional training, Professor Sun is committed to a range of education and
outreach programs to work with local Community College students, students and
teachers from urban/high need schools in the Philadelphia School District, as
well as students participating in a newly awarded NSF-REU site program located
at Temple University and the Temple TUteach program.

The integration of small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) measurements with ab
initio modeling and calculations results in a capability of determining three-
dimensional (3D) geometry of uniform nanoparticles. This project is to develop
an imaging protocol to enable the study of the element-specific evolution of 3D
atom distributions in bimetallic nanoparticles catalysts, requiring two
consecutive steps of development. First, an imaging protocol is developed to
reconstruct 3D compositional distribution in nanoparticles with a mass
discontinuity through ab initio modeling of SAXS patterns of porous and hollow
nanoparticles. Second, the imaging protocol for nanoparticles with a mass
discontinuity is applied to extract the element-specific 3D images from the
element-specific anomalous SAXS (ASAXS) patterns of uniform bimetallic catalyst
nanoparticles using ab initio modeling and calculations, so-called ASAXS
imaging. Successful development of the ASAXS imaging protocol enables the
development of in-situ ASAXS imaging technique by coupling with in-situ reactors
and devices, benefiting the study on the time-resolved evolution of element-
specific 3D distributions of metals in working bimetallic catalysts under
operando conditions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.