* 1838595
* In situ Determination of Phase Equilibria in the Quaternary Hafnia-Tantala-Titania-Tungstate System
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Waltraud Kriven, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2024
* USD 634,382.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: This project addresses the need for a new, more
efficient way to elucidate and measure very high temperature (HT) diagrams of
phases or different forms existing under specific conditions of temperature and
composition called "phase diagrams" in oxide ceramics. Current methods are slow
and based on heating ceramics at high temperatures, cooling them and measuring
them at room temperature (RT). However, we do not know that the phase or form
observed at RT is the same as what existed at HT. Within this project, new
experimental tools have been developed enabling measurements to be made at
temperatures up to 3400 C, thereby providing correct and accurate basic
scientific knowledge. It is transformational to understand that such ceramic
phase diagrams could be determined expediently in a short timeframe. The same
techniques can be widely used to make significant and rapid advances in the
underlying solid state physics and chemistry knowledge, so as to identify the
next generation of complex materials for devices. Both undergraduate and
graduate students trained in this research may be subsequently employed in the
aircraft design and manufacturing sector, or as basic science researchers,
particularly at high intensity, synchrotron X-ray laboratories. Outreach to high
school students and teachers is also carried out. This research is relevant to
identifying ceramic materials for space exploration and next generation
electronic devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: This research
demonstrates a method by which the quaternary, tantala-hafnia-titantia-tungstate
(Ta2O5 - HfO2 - TiO2 -WO3) phase diagram can be measured in situ, at
temperatures up to 3400 C, in air or under controlled atmospheres. This work
combines experimental techniques of (i) homogeneous powder synthesis by the
organic steric entrapment method (ii) the quadrupole lamp furnace capable of
2000 C in air and (iii) the conical nozzle levitator capable of 3400 C in
controlled atmospheres. Techniques (i) and (ii) were invented at the University
of Illinois Urbana- Champaign and (iii) was developed and refined by two small
companies. In addition, this research has resulted in theoretical modeling
techniques to explore mathematical lattice correspondences for orientation
relationships between crystal structures as they change with temperature
(thermal expansions, phase transformations, invariant reactions) as well as
across compositional ranges. These approaches will be applied to the four-
component phase diagram constituting the quaternary system. Alongside the
development of experimental and theoretical techniques that are being developed,
graduate students are being fully trained, i.e. the scientists of the future. In
turn, these graduates will use these new techniques to increase the basic
science knowledge necessary to invent new, extremely high temperature ceramics
and composites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.