* 1838445
* Regulation of nutrient assimilation in streamlined oligotrophic microorganisms
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 07/31/2022
* USD 423,935.00

This project concerns cells that compose the "dark matter" of microbial
diversity. Many of these organisms are adapted to life in Earth's oceans, where
much of carbon flux takes place at very low nutrient concentrations. Some
microbes that grow at these low nutrient concentrations' oligotrophs - do not
regulate biochemical pathways for nutrient assimilation involving carbon
oxidation. In contrast, among the more commonly studied copiotrophs - cells that
grow rapidly at high nutrient concentrations - regulation of nutrient
assimilation is ubiquitous. An example of a cell that has reduced regulation is
Pelagibacter, the most abundant organism in the oceans. At present there exists
no explanation for the lack of regulatory systems for nutrient uptake in cells
that live in low nutrient ecosystems. In this study, a combination of laboratory
experiments, mathematical modeling and genome analysis will be used to examine
hypotheses about the costs and benefits of regulating nutrient assimilation.
Studying the costs and benefits of different strategies for nutrient
assimilation in microbes will aid in the prediction of behavior of nutrient
cycles and will lead to a better understanding of aquatic ecosystems. This
research may also help scientists understand why so many common microbial cell
types have been challenging to grow and study in scientific laboratories. The
educational component of this project will involve training a graduate student
and a postdoctoral scholar. A workshop on carbon cycling by microorganisms will
be presented to teachers and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, the investigators will test the hypotheses that nutrient uptake systems
may evolve to be unregulated due to (A) cost/benefit of regulation at different
frequencies and magnitudes of nutrient pulses, (B) molecular biological
constraints that prevent effective operation of a regulatory system at very low
nutrient levels (excessive stochastic noise in the regulatory system), or (C)
synergy with chemotaxis, which is typically not done by oligotrophs, so they
experience nutrient patches at lower concentrations and for shorter times, or
some combination of these mechanisms. A model will be developed to explicitly
resolve the assimilation systems and their regulation at the gene level,
accounting for the dynamics and metabolic costs of protein synthesis and
function (Hypothesis A). An agent-based (aka individual-based) modeling approach
will be used to explicitly resolve population heterogeneity (Hypothesis B) and
individual transport by chemotaxis and diffusion (Hypothesis C). The
investigators will also perform nutrient upshift experiments with a number of
oligotrophs, copiotrophs and nutrients, to characterize the response times and
induction concentration thresholds by measuring transcript abundance and uptake
of radiolabeled nutrients. A subset of experiments will additionally include
measurements of nutrient and cell concentrations, proteins and metabolites,
nutrient uptake and oxidation rates, and growth rates. The data obtained from
these experiments model will be used to calibrate and fine tune the model. The
synergy between regulation and uptake (Hypothesis C) will also be tested by
comparing genomes of oligotrophs and copiotrophs. A postdoctoral scholar and
graduate student will be involved in the research and outreach will be performed
to high school teachers and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.