* 1838380
* EAGER: Enabling Quantum Leap: Room-temperature Photon Blockade and Quantum Gates Using Quantum Dots in 2D Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Tony Heinz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Edgar
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical description: Remarkable progress in the development of quantum
computers has been made in recent years, but leading-edge quantum hardware still
suffers from major limitations, including operation only under extreme
environments (such as ultracold temperatures) and difficulties in scaling to
larger systems. This project focuses on a platform that may alleviate these
drawbacks and enable operation of building blocks for quantum computers in
friendly environments such as at room temperature, as well as facilitate system
scaling. The platform consists of two-dimensional ultrathin materials with
quantum dots capable of controllably emitting single photons of light. Such
materials are coupled to optical resonators that are able to recirculate
photons, ultimately allowing control of the flow of light, and therefore the
information in the system. The project includes educational and outreach
activities integrated with research, which the PIs have already initiated,
including active recruitment of minorities and women for science and engineering
careers, development of new classes and textbooks, undergraduate research and
advising, and participation in outreach programs for K-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Photon blockade - in which
the presence of a single photon in a system (resonator) blocks another photon
from entering it - is the ultimate demonstration of a nonlinearity at a single
photon level. It is the underlying phenomenon behind many proposals for
implementation of nontrivial two photon qubit quantum gates and quantum
simulators. This project focuses on the demonstration of photon blockade using a
new platform: a single quantum dot created in a two-dimensional material coupled
to an optical nanocavity. The platform of 2D materials, which has already been
shown to allow single quantum emitter behavior in a variety of systems, provides
important advantages in terms of ease of placement of the quantum dot and its
spectral tunability. The planned experiments constitute a new approach for
quantum science and engineering using two-dimensional materials and have the
potential to advance quantum engineering and cavity quantum electrodynamics by
enabling room-temperature, scalable experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.