* 1838815
* Exploring Physiological Computing Education in the Alabama Black Belt
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Andre Denham, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 07/31/2021
* USD 306,910.00

Physiological computing systems have the potential to benefit society through
wearable technologies such as smart watches, electronic textile clothing, and
brain-computer interfaces in general. Currently, most work at the intersection
of computer science education and physiological computing focuses on using
physiological technology to augment learning experiences or predict performance.
There is a lack of research investigating ways to enable K-12 students in
acquiring the knowledge and skills needed to design and build future
technologies and applications that leverage physiological sensors. This project
will design, develop, and implement an educational physiological computing
learning tool, and evaluate the tool's impact on upper secondary student's
acquisition of computational thinking skills. The proposed work will provide the
computer science education community field with foundational research on how
best to leverage novel physiological sensing technologies within K-12 education.
In addition to contributing findings to the broader research community, the PI
team will build a summer outreach program that exposes high school students from
the Alabama Black-Belt (ABB) to novel brain-computer interface sensing
technologies. As a result of the powerful innovation and application of
computing in STEM disciplines, the STEM+C program supports research and
development of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the
integration of computing within STEM teaching and learning for preK-12 students
in both formal and informal settings. This pilot project will advance the
integration of physiological sensing and data processing with computational
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will use a user-centered approach to
identify effective designs for educational physiological computing tools. This
includes studies that address knowledge gaps related to students' and educators'
attitudes and understandings of novel physiological computing technology.
Researchers will conduct semi-structured user interviews with Alabama Black Belt
Exploring Computer Science (ECS) students and educators to advance knowledge
regarding their perceptions and mental models of physiological sensing
technologies. Insights gained from these interviews will inform the iterative
design of pilot low-fidelity prototypes. Qualitative and quantitative data on
students' experiences with each prototype will be collected during user
experiments. Feedback gained during the low-fidelity prototype studies will
guide the development of design solutions. The project will employ hybrid
computer programming approaches such as data-flow and block-based programming
for the learning tool development. User studies with students will be used to
evaluate the tool influence on students' patterns of computational practice
including incremental and iterative programming, testing and debugging,
abstracting and modularization, computational perspectives of expressing and
questioning, and knowledge of physiological computing systems. This project will
contribute a web-based educational physiological computing tool designed for
K-12 education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.