* 1838509
* I-Corps:  Prosthetic Sleeve Liners
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Reza Foudazi, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is based on a
new material that has the capability to reduce skin morbidity in amputees. Skin
morbidity is an especially critical concern for patients with decreased wound
healing capability because of vascular diseases such as diabetes and
endovascular disease. Most current commercially available wound liners intended
to avoid decreased wound healing have additions or modifications to base
materials that target skin health. These include medicated coatings, cooling
systems, and vacuum attachments. However, they do not correct the root of the
problem - they aim to treat the secondary problems caused by those materials:
heat, sweat, pistoning, and potential of microbial growth. Thus, more
preventative technologies are called for than those that will only treat already
developed skin wear or infection. This project's technology will not only
transform the prosthetic liner industry, but also offer a new approach for other
situations that might lead to skin infection issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project combines multiple materials with favorable properties into a
single polymeric system that retains a liner's mechanical robustness while
wicking away heat and sweat from limb-prosthesis interfaces. While similar
polymeric structures have been used as membranes as well as drug delivery
systems, they could be incorporated to the liner materials to improve the liner
functioning. This project produces a breathable sleeve with minimal skin
irritation, essential for amputees. The in situ production of these liners
enables prosthetist and physicians to customize the shape of liners in real time
to best meet the need of individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.