* 1838369
* I-Corps:  Innovative Nano Catalysts for Automobile and Fuel Cell Applications
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Eon Soo Lee, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project has to do with
impacts on global markets that involve catalysts. Catalysts influence many
fields in science and technology such as material science, electrochemical
processes, nano science and energy storage technologies. These areas represent
some of the most rapidly evolving global sciences and applications. The novel
catalyst material that is the basis of this project will likely have commercial
impact in global markets in that 60% of chemical synthesis and 90% of chemical
transformations in chemical industries are currently dependent on the catalysts.
According to the North American Catalysis Society, approximately 35% of global
GDP depends on catalysts and the use of catalysts in the industry is increasing
by 5% every year. With the growing market need of catalyst materials and the
facile synthesis methodology for large scale production, this project's catalyst
can be a potential game changer in the global market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is primarily intended to identify the market need and
characterize the technological gap to commercialize a recently developed nano
catalyst based on metal-organic framework-modified nitrogen-doped graphene
(N-G/MOF) for oxygen reduction reaction applications. The modification of the
nitrogen-doped graphene (N-G) catalyst by metal-organic framework materials
(MOFs) has been developed to enhance the catalytic and electrochemical
performance of N-G catalysts. The MOF-modified N-G catalyst (N-G/MOF) has high
catalytic performance due to high surface area and porosity, which has better
performance than the conventional precious group metal (PGM) catalyst. The
innovative and economically viable synthesis method using nano high energy wet
(NHEW) ball milling was developed for the synthesis of nitrogen-doped graphene
catalyst in room temperature environments. The NHEW ball milling synthesis
method offers a long-term solution to the primary challenges generated during
the high-temperature synthesis process, and serve as the primary synthesis
method for the industry-scale production of the N-G/MOF catalyst in the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.