* 1838222
* BIGDATA: F: Collaborative Research: Optimizing Log-Structured-Merge-Based Big Data Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Vassilis Tsotras, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,390,073.00

Modern big data management systems support fast read and write operations based
on the unique identifier (key) of a record. That is, they are fast when
inserting key-value pairs, and given a key they quickly return the value
associated with that key. To do so, most such systems rely on a Log-Structured-
Merge Tree (LSM) structure that batches writes together before writing them to
persistent storage. This project will study how to efficiently support more
sophisticated operations on LSM-based storage systems, that is, operations that
do not simply specify the key of a record. Examples of such operations include
searching for records based instead on their location or time. By optimizing the
storage and management of big data, this project has the potential to cut the
storage costs and energy consumption in data centers. Further, the successful
completion of this work will allow users to manage more data with the existing
hardware infrastructure, which is critical given the new wave of big data being
generated by sensors and the Internet-of-Things. The project will capitalize on
the student diversity at two Hispanic Serving Institutions, and thus broaden the
participation of under-represented groups in the research
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To support richer data modeling and querying
capabilities on top of LSM key-value stores, this project will develop novel LSM
indexing and access algorithms to support query plans that utilize both primary
and secondary LSM components. In addition, it will design and evaluate flow
control policies to dampen or eliminate the notoriously bursty data ingestion
behavior that LSM-based storage structures exhibit. It will also study how to
automatically and dynamically change LSM compaction policies and parameters
based on the query workload. Data-semantics-aware compaction techniques will
also be studied. The project will additionally develop novel LSM-aware query
optimization techniques; the LSM storage layer is currently treated as a black
box by most query optimizers. The planned methods will be deployed and evaluated
on the open source Apache AsterixDB system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.