* 1838702
* SCH: INT: Connected Smart Hospitals Enabled by Visible Light Communication
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Yehuda Kalay, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

Transformation in health and medicine calls for innovation and integration of
information science and engineering approaches to revolutionize healthcare
delivery systems, including high-performance wireless communication and sensing
technologies. Radio-frequency (RF) wireless technologies can interfere with
sensitive medical equipment, hence are not universally accepted in hospitals.
This research will develop and apply a visible light communication platform
technology, overlaying the existing lighting infrastructure using emerging
greener solid-state light-emission diode bulbs, for live tracking and efficient
networking to enable smart, connected and efficient hospitals. The scope of work
and contributions include developing a novel radio-frequency-free harmless
light-emission diode based visible light communication platform technology to
enable two-way real-time light-based tracking and networking for smart and
connected hospitals, a dynamic event-based behavioral model to simulate
building-user interactions in hospital settings, and an artificial intelligence
enhanced algorithm to facilitate people-data-system-connected intelligent
healthcare ecosystems. Success of the proposed research will transform the field
of medicine and health, and achieve affordable and efficient healthcare
delivery. The research outcomes will have tremendous societal and economic
impacts to the nation and humanity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this four-
year project is to develop and apply a transformative tracking, networking and
operation technologies, using visible light communication (VLC) technology, to
enable smart, connected and efficient hospitals. The technical approach will be
to overlay the innovative light emission diode (LED) based VLC platform
technology on the existing LED lighting infrastructure in a hospital to provide
a wireless network for real-time visible light tracking and communications
without using radio-frequency (RF) signals, which can interfere with sensitive
medical equipment. The technical contributions include novel RF-free LED-based
VLC platform technologies and system-on-a-chip solutions to enable two-way real-
time visible light tracking and networking for smart and connected hospitals,
new dynamic event-based behavioral models to simulate building-user interactions
in hospital settings, and innovative artificial intelligence enhanced algorithms
to facilitate people-data-system-connected intelligent healthcare delivery
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.