* 1838281
* 2019 Water Disinfection, Byproducts, and Health GRC/GRS
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Michael Plewa, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The 2019 Gordon Research Conference entitled "Water Disinfection, By-Products,
and Health: Finding Solutions to Emerging Issues Related to Disinfection
Byproducts by Advanced Multidisciplinary Approaches" will be held at Mount
Holyoke College in South Hadley, MA on July 27-August 2, 2019. The Conference
will succeed a 1.5-day Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), organized by early career
scientists. The GRS will feature presentations by graduate students and
postdoctoral fellows, and a mentoring panel for young professionals. At the 2019
GRC/GRS, about 160 participants including academics, regulators, graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, industrial scientists, and water professionals
from around world will present cutting-edge research to address challenges in
providing sustainable safe drinking water. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Disinfection
of drinking water is one of the major public health achievements to prevent
waterborne-diseases in the last century. Multiple global issues, including
contaminated and diminishing water supplies, demand innovative technologies for
effective treatment of new and existing water sources to provide safe drinking
water to consumers. Different source waters (e.g., those impacted by domestic or
industrial wastewater) require different disinfection strategies and therefore
generate different types and amounts of disinfection byproducts (DBPs). When
choosing disinfection treatment processes, many water utilities prioritize the
reduction of specific DBPs to comply with regulatory guidelines. However, a
treatment process that yields low levels of the regulated DBPs may produce
higher concentrations of other more toxic DBPs. This raises new challenges in
balancing microbial and chemical risks. Epidemiological studies have shown
potential associations of DBP exposure with increased risk of bladder and
colorectal cancers as well as adverse developmental effects. However, the DBPs
responsible for the observed health effects remain unclear. Although hundreds of
DBPs have been identified, the majority are still unknown and unclassified.
These knowledge gaps present tremendous challenges in choosing treatment
strategies, monitoring water quality, assessing health risks, and improving
regulatory guidelines. The objectives of the 2019 GRC/GRS are (1) to fill the
knowledge gap in identifying unknown DBPs of health relevance by integrating
advanced analytical and toxicological testing technologies; (2) to get a better
understanding of the mechanisms of DBP formation and transformation to engineer
innovative disinfection schemes for better control of DBPs; (3) to discuss
recent advances in exposure and epidemiological assessment for improving future
guidelines. The cutting-edge research in the fields of engineering, chemistry,
toxicology, epidemiology and regulatory policy will contribute to the central
goal of protection of human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.