* 1838464
* Collaborative Research: Using seismic tremor to constrain seasonal variations in subglacial hydrology at the bed of the Greenland ice sheet
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Jeffrey McGuire, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 09/30/2023
* USD 330,124.00

Estimates of the Greenland ice sheet's contribution to sea level rise over the
next century range from a few centimeters to over one meter. Differences of a
few millimeters per year may be significant in low-lying, populous coastal areas
where planning with such a large range of uncertainty has high economic and
social costs for governments, communities, and businesses. This study will
improve our understanding of how increases in surface runoff will influence ice
flow and subsequent loss of water mass from the Greenland ice sheet to the
oceans. The investigators will employ a novel approach that uses seismic tremor
to quantify seasonal changes in the subglacial hydrologic system and ice surface
velocities on the Greenland ice sheet. The project will support two graduate
students, a postdoctoral scientist, and an early career scientist. In addition,
a reporter will accompany the science team to the study site to produce a range
of media for general audiences, including a daily radio diary to air on National
Public Radio stations other outlets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, the
investigators will deploy co-located seismic and GPS arrays simultaneously to
monitor subglacial meltwater flow and ice surface velocities at a well-studied
site on the western margin of the Greenland ice sheet. The site has strong
seasonal velocity variability, experiencing dramatic acceleration in the early
summer (&gt;100% greater than winter velocities) and pronounced slow-down in the
late summer. The team will use co-located measurements of subglacial fluid flow
and surface velocities to assess whether seismic tremor can resolve seasonal
changes in subglacial hydrology in regions of thick (&amp;#8805; 1 km) ice.
Specifically, the data will constrain if and when channelization of sub-glacial
flow occurs and how characteristics of subglacial channels, such as density and
spacing, vary with time. Finally, ice surface velocities will be correlated with
sub-glacial channelization to determine whether this process is consistent with
existing models for the characteristic seasonal velocity variations observed in
this region. This approach has the potential to provide a powerful new technique
to study subglacial meltwater flow in regions that are difficult to
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.