* 1838961
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2018 IEEE International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Omer Khan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The 2018 IEEE International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD) will be held in
Orlando, Florida on October 7-10, 2018. The ICCD for the past 35 years has been
the premier academic forum where emerging trends and novel concepts in computer
systems and design are explored. The conference brings together professionals
from academic and industrial background to address the challenges, and discuss
practical and theoretical work covering systems and applications, workload
characterization, computer architecture, security, verification and test, design
tools and automation methodologies, and nanoscale design technologies. Highly
original ideas, new approaches, and groundbreaking results are
expected.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel support will make possible the
participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend. ICCD
conference will expose students to the discipline and encourage them to pursue
careers in emerging issues in computer system design. Particular attention is
paid to directing support towards under-represented groups, e.g., gender or
ethnic minorities and students from smaller or less well-known institutions. A
small number of undergraduate applicants will also be considered to better reach
out to potential researchers in this field. The support will provide students
who attend with the opportunity to interact with a diverse group of mentors and
peers, furthering their education and research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.