* 1838402
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social-Environmental Feedbacks Between the Use and Governance of Water and Soil in Dryland Irrigation Megaprojects
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Karl Zimmerer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 12/31/2021
* USD 17,998.00

This Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement project will examine dryland
irrigation megaprojects and related changes in the use and governance of water
and irrigated land. Irrigation megaprojects in arid landscapes feature
prominently in agricultural development worldwide. Planning and policy entities
often focus on the economic benefits of irrigation water for farmers. However,
irrigated soils are often central to ecological and social conflicts that follow
the construction of irrigation districts. Such conflicts include reduced soil
quality, water contamination via agricultural runoff, and displacement of
regional farmers by investors' large land acquisitions. Therefore, this research
will investigate the social and ecological effects of irrigation megaprojects
and the related governing policies and practices of irrigation water and soils.
This research will contribute to scholarly and policy considerations of social-
environmental feedbacks in governance. The broader impacts of this project will
(1) work toward improved irrigation infrastructure development, (2) strengthen
management of irrigated land to ensure increased sustainability of soil and
water resources, and (3) encourage policy that ensures more equitable access to
irrigated land. During this research diverse university students will receive
training in mixed methods research. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish an independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This
dissertation investigates the interactions and feedbacks between irrigation
megaprojects, soil management practices, and soil and water governance.
Scholarship of environmental governance related to irrigation has focused on
issues of water access and control. While important, more scholarly attention
must examine the centrality of soils within irrigation megaprojects. The
coupling of and tensions between water and soil use and governance require
detailed empirical examination that leverages key literatures within geography
and the spatial sciences, particularly environmental governance, coupled human-
environment systems, and feminist political ecology. Three questions guide this
research: (1) How does access to water from irrigation megaprojects shape soil
management practices, specifically crop selection, crop rotations, and
applications of agrochemicals? (2) How do social and environmental stressors
inform soil management practices? (3) How do social and environmental stressors
feedback into environmental governance? This research employs a mixed methods
approach including change detection analysis, environmental archival research,
participant observation, a survey, farm transect walks, and semi-structured
interviews with farmers, irrigation managers, and government officials. This
research project will provide new insights regarding sustainable and equitable
approaches to irrigation development and governance in dryland areas in Colombia
and elsewhere, including the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.