* 1838650
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Novel Computational Methods for Continuous Objective Multimodal Pain Assessment Sensing System (COMPASS)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Edwards, Brigham & Women's Hospital Inc
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 406,411.00

Few objective pain assessment techniques are currently available for use in
clinical settings. Clinicians typically use subjective pain scales for pain
assessment and management, which has resulted in suboptimal treatment plans,
delayed responses to patient needs, over-prescription of opioids, and drug-
seeking behavior among patients. This project will investigate science-based
methods to build a robust Continuous Objective Multimodal Pain Assessment
Sensing System (COMPASS) and a clinical interface capable of generating
objective measurements of pain from multimodal physiological signals and facial
expressions. COMPASS will allow objective measurements that can be used to
significantly improve pain assessment, pain management strategies, reduce opioid
dependency, and advance the field of pain-related research. The educational plan
will include activities to engage patient training, K-12 students, minorities
and underrepresented groups, as well as general public. These outcomes will also
lead to development of a diverse work force needed to support advanced medical
technologies and services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using advanced biosensing
systems, data fusion algorithms and machine learning models, this project will
develop a robust, reliable, and accurate pain intensity classification system,
COMPASS, for estimating pain intensity experienced by patients in real-time on a
0-10 scale, which is the standard scale used by physicians in clinical settings.
In the initial phase of the project, the team will conduct a pilot at Brigham
and Women's Hospital to experiment with the different elements for developing
the sensing systems and collect data to develop data fusion algorithms and
machine learning models. In the later phase of the project, the team will
collect an extensive set of data to train and validate the fully implemented
COMPASS. Physiological sensor data from electroencephalograph, facial-
expression, patient self-reported pain scales, and physician/nurse assessed pain
scales will be collected from the subjects as they experience pain modulated by
medical therapies that cause patients pain. The project will investigate
evidence-based machine learning and feature extraction methods for physiological
signals and facial-expression images. This highly interdisciplinary research
will make significant contributions to the areas of pain assessment and
management, human factors and patient safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.