* 1838386
* CAREER: Plasticity and Jamming
* MPS,DMR
* 08/14/2017,07/31/2018
* Craig Maloney, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2018
* USD 125,626.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research aimed at understanding the relationships between
plasticity of amorphous solids and the jamming transition. It is generally
accepted that the mechanical properties of crystals are controlled by their
defects; however for amorphous solids, no such consensus has been reached. There
is now mounting evidence for two different kinds of critical behavior in
athermal, repulsive systems such as suspensions of soft particles or granular
materials. On one hand, amorphous solids exhibit a kind of dynamical critical
behavior similar to other depinning systems as they are driven at vanishing
shear rate. On the other hand, confined random packings of repulsive particles
exhibit critical behavior in their elastic response as the confining pressure
vanishes. The key issue of the interplay between these behaviors during slow
shear at low confinement pressure remains relatively
unexplored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will perform massively parallel computer
simulations of suspensions of soft and hard particle systems under shear to
identify the mechanisms for stress buildup and relaxation in various regimes of
particle stiffness, packing density, and shearing rate. The spatio-temporal
structure of these processes will be studied using emerging tools developed for
supercooled liquids and glasses. The PI will address whether the dynamically
critical behavior observed in systems above jamming persists at the jamming
transition and, more generally, how proximity to the jamming transition affects
spatio-temporal structures that allow shear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
educational activities lie along three main thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The
undergraduate curriculum development will involve the infusion of numerical
modeling into core upper division coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The
graduate curriculum development will involve the design and implementation of an
introduction to statistical physics for engineering and theoretical mechanics
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) The secondary education outreach will be done
in conjunction with the Pittsburgh Supercomputing Center in the context of a
program which involves high school teachers from the Pittsburgh public schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
award supports theoretical and computational research aimed at a fundamental
understanding of how amorphous materials behave when subjected to external
forces. Many amorphous materials behave like ordinary solids without external
forces. Even though they lack any underlying crystalline order, they hold their
shape. A few of the many examples from everyday experience include windows (made
of glass or plexiglass), mayonnaise, and sand on the beach. When the external
forces become sufficiently large, the particles which make up these solids start
to flow as if the material were a liquid and the material is said to undergo
"plastic yield". In crystalline materials, plastic yielding has been understood
for many decades to be governed by extended defects in the crystal structure
known as "dislocations". In the amorphous solids, a microscopic understanding of
plastic yielding is only beginning to emerge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a certain
subclass of these amorphous solids, e.g. the grains of sand, the constituent
particles interact through purely repulsive forces. In this repulsive case, the
materials can only behave like a solid when external forces confine the
particles and force them to interact with each other. In such a confined state,
the particles are said to be "jammed". At the transition point when the
confinement is just about to be released, the elastic properties of the material
are known to be completely anomalous, unlike anything observed in ordinary
solids. Therefore, it is important to ask whether the system will yield via the
same mechanism near jamming. The PI will perform very large-scale computer
simulations and theoretical analysis to address this
question.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities lie along three main
thrusts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) The undergraduate curriculum development will
involve the infusion of numerical modeling into core upper division
coursework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) The graduate curriculum development will
involve the design and implementation of an introduction to statistical physics
for engineering and theoretical mechanics students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) The
secondary education outreach will be done in conjunction with the Pittsburgh
Supercomputing Center in the context of a program which involves high school
teachers from the Pittsburgh public schools.