* 1838435
* RAISE: TAQS: On-Chip Entanglement, Preparation, Manipulation, and Detection for Integrated All Quantum Information Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Juliet Gopinath, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,024,000.00

The past six decades have witnessed unprecedented progress in humanity's ability
to compute, enabling applications that were previously unimaginable. This has
been achieved with the advent of the electronic integrated circuit, where
billions of electrical elements are built together on a single chip. Humanity's
ability to exchange information has undergone a similar paradigm shift, due to
the recent commercialization of the photonic integrated circuit, the optical
analog of the electronic integrated circuit, which encodes information on light,
rather than electricity. The emerging field of quantum information processing,
where quantum mechanical properties of electrons and/or photons are used to
encode and process information, offers the potential for more secure and energy-
efficient communications and computation. Unfortunately, there is no established
toolkit of materials that can perform all of the necessary quantum information
processing functions on a single integrated circuit chip. The goal of this
project is to demonstrate such a materials platform and to harness it to perform
fundamental scientific measurements of key quantum properties of light. Research
results will be integrated with education through important curricular
development by offering a broadly accessible, interdisciplinary course on
quantum information that is essential for workforce
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental resource for universal linear
optical quantum information processing is the ability to create and characterize
Bell states on a chip that can be extended to cluster states. This is a key
building block for quantum computing, quantum cryptography, and quantum networks
(nodes of the Quantum Internet). Photonic integrated circuits have
revolutionized modern optical fiber communication systems, but are unable to
address the needs of future quantum information systems. This award supports an
ambitious effort to create a scalable photonic integrated circuit platform for
quantum information processing at telecommunications wavelengths and employ it
to generate and manipulate Bell states on-chip. This project will leverage the
existing technology infrastructure of Indium Phosphide (InP)-based chips, the
dominant platform for long-haul photonic integrated
circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.