* 1838627
* SCH: INT: New Machine Learning Framework to Conduct Anesthesia Risk Stratification and Decision Support for Precision Health
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Heng Huang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,182,305.00

With advances in anesthesia techniques, surgery has become increasingly
applicable to a wider range of diseases and patients. Worldwide more than 230
million major surgical procedures are carried out each year. In terms of patient
safety and medical economics, an important issue is how to reduce the incidence
of postoperative complications and mortality. At least half of postoperative
complications can be prevented, while improvements in anesthesia-associated
factors contribute greatly to the prevention of complications. Anesthesia
information management system is a specialized type of electronic health record
that allow the automatic and reliable collection and storage of patient data
during the perioperative period. The electronic anesthesia data not only provide
a rich data set to assist both anesthesia providers and hospitals with their
goals to improve patient safety during the fast-paced intra-operative period,
but also capture detailed data to allow end users to access information for
management, quality assurance, and research purposes. This project addresses the
computational challenges in large-scale electronic anesthesia data mining,
develops and validates an automated anesthesia risk prediction and decision
support system to identify risk factors and detect patients at risk of
postoperative complications and in-hospital mortality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops novel large-scale machine learning
framework to integrate the emerging key computational techniques, such as semi-
supervised generative adversarial learning, interpretable deep learning, large-
scale optimization, and unsupervised hashing, to analyze large-scale electronic
anesthesia data for enhancing anesthesia risk stratification and improving the
quality of care for precision health. Specifically, the PIs investigate: 1) new
computational tools to automate electronic anesthesia data processing, 2) novel
semi-supervised generative adversarial network for anesthesia risk
stratification, 3) interpretable deep learning model for clinical markers
discovery, 4) scale up deep learning models for big data computation via new
large-scale optimization algorithms, 5) new unsupervised deep generative
adversarial hashing network for fast and accurate clinical case retrieval, and
6) evaluate the proposed methods and system using real large-scale anesthesia
data. It is innovative to integrate large-scale machine learning and data-
intensive computing for electronic anesthesia data mining that holds great
promise for predicting postoperative outcomes using the comprehensive
preoperative and intra-operative patient profiles. The developed methods and
tools impact other public health research and enable investigators working on
electronic health data to effectively test risk prediction hypothesis. This
project facilitates the development of novel educational tools to enhance
several current courses at University of Pittsburgh.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.