* 1838346
* RoL:  FELS: EAGER:  Metabolic asymmetry: An energetic rule for linking biology across scales
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2022
* John Crawford, Lewis and Clark Community College
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2022
* USD 342,192.00

Ecosystems are composed of animals often referred to as being either 'warm' or
'cold' blooded. While warm-blooded organisms (endotherms) can generate their own
body heat, cold-blooded organisms (ectotherms) rely on outside temperatures to
determine their internal body temperatures. This difference between organisms
can influence how they grow and develop, when they can be active, and the amount
of food resources they require. This study explores the role of changing
environmental temperatures on the way endotherms and ectotherms evolve and
interact with each other. For example, warmer temperatures may cause declines in
the hunting success and abundance of endotherms feeding on cold-blooded prey.
The goal of this study is to develop general rules about the biology of endo-
and ectotherms that can be applied to understand their relationships within and
across ecosystems. The results of this study will inform conservation efforts
through a focus on how different types of organisms respond to environmental
change. The development of general rules that shape life on Earth will be used
to engage the public through an on-line film and photo essay, and the
development of an interactive website for students and the public to explore how
temperature influences species behavior, interactions, and evolution. This work
will provide opportunities to mentor and engage undergraduates through research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although energetic constraints on organismal and ecosystem
processes are well recognized, general rules for how individual energetics shape
biotic interactions and diversity are rare. This ambitious project addresses
this gap in understanding by exploring the energetic basis of movement,
foraging, and competitive behavior to derive a quantitative framework for
'metabolic asymmetry'. The work explores how the metabolic differences between
antagonistic species drive ecological interactions and shape biodiversity across
space and time. Objective I is to derive and develop a general theory of biotic
interactions based on metabolic asymmetry that links physiology, behavior, and
community ecology. An initial focus will be endotherm/ectotherm interactions,
which best exemplify metabolic asymmetries in nature. Objective II will
experimentally assess and refine theory using laboratory and field foraging
experiments on endothermic shrews (Soricidae), their ectothermic salamander and
lizard competitors, and shared ectothermic invertebrate prey. Objective III will
explore macroecological and macroevolutionary implications of the metabolic
asymmetry theory, by a) assessing metabolic escalation - the progressive
increase in metabolic rates - across space for 376 extant species of shrews; b)
evaluating metabolic escalation across deep time, using recent phylogenetic
methods to reconstruct basal metabolic rates across the tree of life, and c)
forecasting ecosystem-level shifts in the relative dominance of endotherms and
ectotherms across the globe, given future climate warming
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.