* 1838419
* Strengthening and Supporting the Community College Leadership Role in Advancing STEM Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ellen Hause, American Association of Community Colleges
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 4,999,982.00

The Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program focuses on educating a
skilled technical workforce to keep the United States advanced technological
industries globally competitive, and has supported this goal for the past 25
years. A critical partner in this effort has been and continues to be the
American Association of Community Colleges (AACC), which provides a direct link
between the program and US community and technical colleges. The AACC has
supported community college leaders to make the connections needed to build and
sustain STEM programs. The AACC has also mentored faculty and catalyzed new
collaborations that have strengthened technician education programs across the
nation. This project will continue this work by supporting the networking and
professional enrichment provided by the ATE Principal Investigator (PI)
Conferences and the MentorLinks program. It will also create a new program for
senior leaders of community and technical colleges, to enhance understanding of
advanced technological education and nationally expand its
implementation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the AACC aims to: broaden
the impact of community college leadership in advancing STEM technician
education; encourage greater numbers of community colleges to develop and/or to
strengthen existing ATE-related programs; create and support venues for STEM
professional and leadership development; support STEM capacity building through
direct engagement with community college presidents and senior administrators;
and disseminate the value, resources, and accomplishments of the ATE program.
Project activities include organizing four ATE PI Conferences and expanding the
AACC's successful MentorLinks program to enable 20 community colleges to develop
new or strengthen existing STEM technician education programs. It will also
develop and implement an ATE Administrative Leadership Engagement program,
designed to provide peer-to-peer professional development for community college
presidents and senior administrators, to raise awareness of and support for the
implementation of ATE awards and STEM capacity building. This Administrative
Leadership Program will offer: (1) ATE Presidents' Breakfast Discussion
Roundtables at the AACC's annual convention; (2) A workshop for community
college presidents with resulting proceedings report, held in conjunction with
the 2020 ATE Conference focused on identifying and sharing promising strategies
to support the successful implementation of ATE awards on their campuses; (3) A
webinar series targeting topics relevant to administrators, as identified
through the workshop and roundtables; The project will also disseminate ATE
program resources, information, and opportunities through the project website,
feature articles, presentations, conference proceedings, and the use of social
media; evaluate project activities including two ATE focus groups designed to
strengthen the annual ATE Conference; and publish research findings on AACC's
MentorLinks program resulting from a 2018-2019 longitudinal study covering the
program's impact over a period of 14 years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.