* 1838393
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Aridification and Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Douglas Kennett, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/2019
* USD 31,652.00

The intrinsic and economic values of biodiversity make species extinction a
significant societal concern. To conserve the existing variety of species, it is
important to understand past and present drivers of biodiversity loss.
Archaeology and paleoecology provide relevant, long term perspectives on
interactions among humans, other organisms, and climate that contribute to
extinctions. This project will answer several longstanding questions regarding
how a drying climate and the early colonization of Madagascar by humans and
associated introduced species may have contributed to past extinctions of large
animals on the island. For example, to what extent did humans hunt the now
extinct animals? Did introduced animals compete with now-extinct natives, and
were introduced animals drought-tolerant relative to natives? Recognizing
feedbacks among sources of regional change is a challenge, but this case study
of datasets from Madagascar is broadly applicable to the study of past
interactions among organisms in the face of aridification. Given the relevance
of this research to present environmental concerns and the ongoing development
of drought-related policy in arid southwest Madagascar, community and local
government outreach is a project priority. This interdisciplinary work involves
students and faculty at Malagasy universities, and the students trained through
the field component of this research will gain skills applicable to data
gathering and natural resource management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
investigates some of the many ways in which the arrival of humans and introduced
species in a novel environment may have contributed to past and ongoing
biodiversity loss. The field component of this project focuses on the coast of
southwest Madagascar. This region is ideal for studies of environmental changes
associated with human activity, because humans and human-introduced animals
(e.g. goats, pigs, cattle, dogs, cats, and rats) arrived on the island several
thousand years ago, and the bones of extinct endemic animals (e.g. pygmy hippos,
giant tortoises, elephant birds, and giant lemurs) are abundant along this
coastline. Survey and excavation of a series of coastal ponds with traces of
past human presence serve to recover the material record of past human activity
and biodiversity loss. Radiocarbon dating of bone recovered from fieldwork and
museum collections provides the chronological control that is necessary to infer
past interactions among humans, other organisms, and environmental change. A
series of chemical analyses of radiocarbon-dated bone protein is used to trace
aspects of organisms' diets and environments through time. These analyses,
coupled with a separately-funded effort to reconstruct the past climate of the
region through the chemical analysis of ancient lake sediments, make it possible
to examine potential synergies between past human activity and the changing
climate that may have driven past extinctions on the
island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.