* 1838315
* EAGER: ISN: Modeling Operations of Human Trafficking Networks for Effective Interdiction
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Kayse Maass, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 10/31/2020
* USD 328,969.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will enhance the
national health, prosperity, and welfare by contributing to our understanding of
and ability to disrupt the operations of illicit sex trafficking networks. Sex
trafficking within the United States is a complex social and criminal enterprise
interwoven within the illegal labor market for sex, and entails highly
exploitative, often violent, means to extract profit. Because trafficking is
hidden, illegal and dangerous it is difficult to gather the data needed to
develop effective quantitative operational models of trafficking networks and
their response to interventions. To tackle this challenge, the project will
build a collaborative team of social scientists, operations researchers, law
enforcement personnel, and sex trafficking survivors to analyze law enforcement
data for network modeling. This award will support identification of unique
aspects of sex trafficking networks that will inform mathematical models that
can support effective decisions to disrupt these networks. The project will
produce sex trafficking network data that can be used as a basis for testing
such models. Sex trafficking victims disproportionally come from our most
vulnerable communities, including those who live in poverty and have had prior
experiences of sexual assault, family violence, out of home placement,
homelessness, and other traumatic experiences. This project is expected to have
a particular impact on the health, prosperity, and welfare of these
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will apply qualitative analysis
of law enforcement case files and stakeholder interviews to identify the most
important features of sex trafficking networks, including their composition, how
they adapt to interdictions, and the dependencies between their physical and
cyber networks. The research team will identify the underlying structure and key
features of sex trafficking networks in these cases, construct node-arc network
representations of the data, and identify key changes to current network
interdiction models to ensure applicability in disrupting sex trafficking
operations. The project will begin to fill the most significant gaps in the
interdiction literature that limits its applicability to disrupting human
trafficking networks. The resulting network data will be made publicly available
and the study team will detail methods for replicating the network generation
process to develop additional trafficking network datasets, including labor
trafficking networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.