* 1838504
* EAGER:  Enabling Quantum Leap: Topological Nanoparticles as Potential Room-Temperature Qubits
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Matthew Doty, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 11/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Nontechnical description: Over the past half century, computer chips have become
smaller and faster, enabling a technological revolution that encompasses
everything from cell phones to space ships. Unfortunately, further improvements
in speed and miniaturization are limited by fundamental materials constraints.
One solution is to move to quantum computation, a new type of computing that
uses quantum science to conduct computations faster than traditional computers.
Quantum computers, however, have very different material requirements than
traditional computers. This project investigates a relatively new class of
materials called topological insulators to see if they are suitable as a
platform for quantum computation when confined to nanoscale dimensions. A
partnership with the Delaware Teachers Institute lets the research team present
a twelve-week seminar related to the research to local K-12 educators who create
teaching modules based on the seminar content. The partnership also allows the
principal investigators to recruit Research Experience for Teachers participants
for hands-on summer research.&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: Quantum
computation relies on qubits, two-level systems that can be entangled and used
to perform computations. Ideally, these qubits work at room temperature, are
robust to decoherence, and may be fabricated by scalable methods. Theoretical
predictions indicate that topological insulators confined to nanoscale
dimensions can exhibit discrete surface states that retain the topological
protection of the bulk material, reducing decoherence. The objective of this
proposal is to explore the existence and properties of these states, to assess
whether their inherent topological protection makes them viable as room-
temperature qubits. Topological insulator films are grown using molecular beam
epitaxy and patterned into nanoparticles using standard lithographic techniques
before being characterized by optical spectroscopy. The aim is to understand how
the discrete state energies vary with particle size and Fermi energy position.
The goal of the project is to have detailed measurements of the optical
properties of topological insulator nanoparticles, to assess their viability as
an entirely new platform for topologically-protected room-temperature qubits. A
partnership between the principal investigators and the Delaware Teachers
Institute (DTI) allows the principal investigators to present a twelve-week
seminar to local K-12 teachers on the optical properties of materials. The
teachers then create units on this topic to disseminate through DTI channels, as
well as for use in their own classrooms. Research Experience for Teachers
supplements allow local teachers to take part in hands-on research on this
project in the summers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.