* 1838131
* BIGDATA: F: Collaborative Research: Theory and Practice of Randomized Algorithms for Ultra-Large-Scale Signal Processing
* CSE,IIS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Michael Mahoney, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 11/30/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The dramatic increases in our abilities to observe massive amounts of
measurements coming from distributed and disparate high-resolution sensors have
been instrumental in enhancing our understanding of many physical phenomena.
Signal processing has been the primary driving force in this knowledge of the
unseen from observed measurements. However, in the last decade, the exponential
increase in observations has outpaced our computing abilities to process,
understand, and organize this massive but useful information. In this project
the investigators plan to blend efficient hashing algorithms with Randomized
Numerical Linear Algebra, which can overcome these computational barriers. The
project will engage diverse graduate and undergraduate students in computer
science, statistics, ECE, and applied mathematics both at UCB and Rice. The
efforts of this project will also be utilized to push data science for social
good, through collaborations with a human rights data analysis group in
leveraging hashing algorithms to reduce human efforts in estimating the extent
of war crimes. The results of the project will be made available to a wide
audience through OpenStax CNX, which will to disseminate course materials free-
of-charge to anyone in the world and thereby foster the growth of vibrant
communities around the subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will achieve
two complementary goals: first, extend the foundations of RandNLA by tailoring
randomization directly towards downstream end goals provided by the underlying
problem, rather than intermediate matrix approximations goals; and second, use
the statistical and optimization insights obtained from these downstream
applications to transform and extend the foundations of RandNLA. The
investigators will propose and extend several fundamental ideas, including
probabilistic hashing, sketching, streaming, sampling, leverage scores, and
random projections, to make SP significantly resource-frugal. Precise
mathematical quantification of these tradeoffs will be
provided.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.