* 1838098
* RoL:  FELS:  EAGER:  A Predictive framework of metabolism as an engine of functional environmental responses across levels of biological organization
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kristi Montooth, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 354,998.00

Life inhabits nearly every corner of the planet, with organisms using diverse
strategies to survive. Despite this, tremendous diversity in ecology,
physiology, and behavior, biological processes are fueled by a set of highly
similar reactions that govern metabolism. The general rules of how biological
processes operating at higher levels of biological organization emerge from the
reactions of metabolism and how this determines organism responses to
environmental conditions are unknown. The research aims to explain a fundamental
rule of life that holds across single- and multi-celled organisms: the
observation that an organism's performance increases as a function of
temperature to an optimal level, after which it declines as temperatures
increase (i.e., the thermal performance curve). The research will test the
hypothesis that the response of metabolism to temperature determines thermal
performance curves through levels of biological organization, culminating in the
survival and reproduction of organisms and the subsequent growth of populations.
The research may have broader impact for science and society, as it will provide
an experimental and mathematical research framework that can be applied to
diverse systems, including socio-economically important systems, such as
agricultural, pest, and disease species. Because the components of metabolism
are shared between humans and the organisms studied, fundamental links between
metabolism and an organism's performance will provide critical information on
health issues related to metabolic disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
integrates molecular, physiological, ecological, and mathematical approaches to
measure how organisms respond to change in environmental temperature. The
experiments will measure change in thermal performance curves in response to
shifts in temperature at multiple levels of biological organization, from
mitochondrial function to population growth. This measurement will be done in
two well-studied systems - the fruit fly Drosophila and the ciliate Paramecium -
to test the general hypothesis that plastic and adaptive metabolic responses to
temperature will scale up through levels of organization to affect population-
level properties such as growth rate. The research will develop a general
mathematical framework using a nested set of functions to describe causal and
predictive relationships that link metabolic responses up through population-
and ecosystem-level responses to the environment. The framework aims to identify
where rules exist, but also to discover where emergent properties arise in the
biological hierarchy. This framework can be adopted by researchers working in
diverse systems to link functional trait responses across levels of biological
organization, and to predict how the organisms and communities that they study
may be impacted by changes in the environment. The experimental design
explicitly sets the stage for future work that will link (epi)genome- to-phenome
responses and incorporate systems genomics approaches within this framework. The
research may enhance research infrastructure for a broad community of scientists
working at very different scales of biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.