* 1838535
* Information Technology Skill Standards, 2020 and Beyond
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Peter Maritato, Collin County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,755,825.00

In 2003, the ATE National Workforce Center for Emerging Technologies (NWCET)
developed and published the "Building a Foundation for Tomorrow: Skill Standards
for Information Technology". This document has not been updated since 2003, and
it no longer aligns with current information technology (IT) industry needs.
This project will develop a new employer-led and verified IT Skill Standards
document for the top eight to ten IT industry job clusters supporting positions
requiring a two-year or a four-year applied IT degree. Initial discussions with
industry experts have identified at least four new job clusters that did not
exist in 2003, along with an additional five to six job clusters that need to be
updated. Skill standards make IT careers more accessible as they provide
transparency regarding the knowledge, skills and performance standards needed
for success in the industry, and educators use skill standards to develop
relevant curricular materials to better prepare students for the
workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a future-facing set of
IT Skill Standards for the most critical IT job clusters, led by employer
subject matter experts. In addition to creating a set of skill standards for
each job cluster, the standards within each job cluster will be stratified by
the top four to eight critical work functions. The project will also compile a
list of the certifications valued by employers as of the date of publication.
For each cluster, a national group of educators and Business and Industry
Leadership Team (BILT) members will determine which portions of the standards
apply to two-year and four-year programs, to facilitate ease of use in
development of employer aligned curriculum. These stratifications will assist
both employers and educators to more easily apply the standards. Subject matter
experts will be asked to predict trends in IT and the knowledge and skills that
will likely to be needed to support emerging trends. It is expected that this
effort will increase the use and longevity of the developed standards.
Dissemination efforts will use ATE Central and the Convergence Technology Center
website, will feature multiple strategies to increase awareness of the skill
standards, and will provide tools for their use and
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.