* 1838679
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award:  Long Term Human Adaptation in Beringia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Kelly Graf, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2020
* USD 8,834.00

Angela Gore, PhD candidate at Texas A&amp;M University, will undertake research
in central Alaska to understand the timing and settling-in processes of the
First Americans and their descendants. Archeological and genomic evidence point
to eastern Beringia as a gateway through which ancient peoples first migrated
from Northeast Asia, therefore the rich archaeological record of central Alaska
is key in unraveling questions of adaptation and behavior of the earliest
Alaskans through time. The Alaskan record exhibits sizeable technological
variability from 14 thousand to 5 thousand years ago and answers to questions
about the first Alaskans are still elusive: how did ancient Beringians utilize
and learn the landscape around them as they first encountered it? How did they
adapt their technologies and mobile strategies through millennia of shifting
climate and resulting resource fluctuation? This research expands knowledge of
modern human adaptation and settlement of extreme northern environments and
sheds light on the impact of climate change on human populations. This research
provides a graduate student with a transformative research experience to be
shared with academics, the public, and with Native Alaskans and First Nations
peoples to whom it is directly relevant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gore will begin
to unravel questions of landscape learning and behavioral variation in the
archaeological record of central Alaska through the lens of stone tool
procurement and use as evident in ancient toolkits. Mapping and sampling of the
lithic sources within the Nenana River valley area, from outcrop to creek and
river alluvium will reconstruct the lithic landscape exploited by prehistoric
Alaskans. Geochemical analysis of non-obsidian volcanic stone sources in the
valley provides a fingerprint of these sources against which artifacts from
archaeological sites spanning 14 ka to 5 ka will be compared to reconstruct
mobile strategies, landscape use, and changes in these behaviors through time.
Gore will integrate geochemical toolstone sourcing with lithic analysis of these
same archaeological collections to provide a comprehensive description of
behavior and behavioral change of ancient Alaskans from colonization to
settling-in on the landscape. Together, these methods provide a better
understanding of the nuanced and complex interactions between landscape,
environment and human culture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.