* 1838024
* BIGDATA: IA: Collaborative Research: Protecting Yourself from Wildfire Smoke: Big Data Driven Adaptive Air Quality Prediction Methodologies
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Heather Holmes, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 684,689.00

The objective of this project is to develop a framework to achieve real-time
smoke transport prediction and air quality forecasting. Wildfire smoke can
transport very fast and pose significant health hazards to communities. State-
of-the-art smoke forecasting models typically have infrequent updates and
provide predictions with a coarse spatial resolution due to spatiotemporal
resolution limitations of input data and the tremendous computational power
required to simulate atmospheric conditions. This project will develop real-time
smoke transport and air quality prediction methodologies with better spatial
resolution for improving the scalability and efficiency of the underlying data
processing system to enable timely air quality alerts. While this project is
applied towards smoke transport and air quality prediction, this work can be
generalized to solve many other big data problems that require such design. The
principal investigators will use the materials and topics from this project to
enhance education by creating new big data analytics related courses and
developing a Big Data Minor program at the University of Nevada, Reno. The
project will also provide opportunities to engage more students from
underrepresented groups and impact the education of several students, via K-12
outreach and mentoring undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is in
establishing a novel big data driven air quality prediction for wildfire smoke
to provide timely and effective health alerts. The planned new prediction
methodology will integrate the novel Gaussian Markov Random Field based real-
time spatiotemporal prediction with statistical-based long-term spatiotemporal
prediction. To tackle the challenge of missing high-resolution data, a data
fusion methodology is planned to integrate fine-grained image data collected
from camera networks with air pollution monitoring data to increase data
resolution. A Deep Neural Network based smoke density detection process will
extract air quality information from camera image data. The planned novel
signature time-series based prediction methodology will open opportunities to
process larger amounts of spatiotemporal data using limited resources. By
identifying critical data based on spatiotemporal properties, the project will
develop a communication framework that enables efficient camera data transfer.
Efficient parallel and distributed data processing is utterly important to
support processing large scale data in real time. The planned decomposition-
based parallelization methodology and a performance model driven scheduling
framework will enable efficient dynamic computing resource management, which is
key to the success of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.