* 1838976
* RAISE: TAQS: Engineering high quality, practical qubits in diamond
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jelena Vuckovic, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,033,459.00

Color centers in semiconductors, such as diamond, have emerged as a promising
platform for implementation of scalable quantum technologies (quantum computers
and quantum internet). However, most of the results so far are impractical,
proof-of-concept demonstrations in laboratories, and rely on experiments at
ultracold temperature, with long experiment times resulting from poor system
efficiencies. In order to enable a true quantum leap, this research will develop
a low noise, high fidelity and efficiency, practical and scalable quantum
technology which operates in friendlier environments and could thus be
ubiquitous. The proposed research will impact quantum engineering and devices,
fundamental physics, and materials science. The interdisciplinary team consists
of world leading experts in the areas of quantum optics theory and experiment,
materials processing and nanofabrication, quantum technologies, and optimized
photonics design. The project includes educational and outreach activities
integrated with research, which the PIs have already initiated, including active
recruitment of minorities and women for science and engineering careers,
development of new classes, undergraduate research and advising, and
participation in outreach programs for K-12 students and teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on engineering high quality, practical qubits based on diamond color
centers with inversion symmetry (Si, Ge, and Sn vacancy) which are more robust
to their environment than their non-symmetric counterparts (such as nitrogen
vacancy). The effort will be focused on engineering high quality qubits with
excellent optical interfaces, where strain, as well as optical and acoustic
phonon density of states will be locally controlled by fabrication methods (such
as deposition of stressors, annealing) and by structure geometry. The goal is to
increase quantum efficiency and enable long coherence times at elevated
temperatures (potentially up to ~77K). In addition, photonic optimization
methods will be used to increase efficiency of quantum circuits and to increase
the yield of functional, optically interconnected quantum devices on chip. The
proposed effort has the potential to revolutionize the field of quantum
engineering and cavity QED by enabling scalable experiments in friendlier
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.