* 1838979
* RAISE-TAQS: Symmetry Protected Quantum Bits through Fluxon Pairing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Michael Gershenson, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 09/30/2023
* USD 991,764.00

Non-technical description: With the current pace of quantum technology
development, the realization of a superconducting quantum computer is fast
approaching. Quantum computers offer the possibility for exponential speedup in
computation in comparison to classical computers on some of the hardest problems
relevant to humanity today. Over the past decade, the performance of the
elements of a quantum computer, the quantum bit (qubit) has improved
tremendously. Despite this progress in performance, it has been shown that there
is still a long way to go in improving qubit performance to realize a practical
quantum computer. The goal of this project is to design, fabricate, and
characterize a new class of fault-tolerant logical qubits for a quantum computer
decoupled from the environment and protected from local noises. The logical
qubit is based on incorporating error correction at the hardware level utilizing
nontrivial symmetries and engineering quantum mechanical interactions in the
circuit which makes up the qubit. This research project contributes to a better
understanding of how certain quantum interactions which have typically not been
exploited in quantum computers can be utilized to improve qubit performance and
scalability. The educational outreach portion of this project addresses the need
to train future quantum electronics engineers for positions which are currently
in high demand in the quantum technologies industry encompassing both tech
industry giants and a quantum startup ecosystem. Such activities encompass the
introduction of a series of short courses on introductory quantum information
sciences targeted at physics and electrical engineering students early on in
their careers, exposing them to opportunities in the ever-expanding quantum
technology industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The project
investigates transformative ideas of realizing highly coherent qubits through
symmetry-protection of a quantum state encoded in the parity of fluxons in a
superconducting loop. The proposed qubit provides a Hamiltonian realization of
an error correction code where the ground states of the Hamiltonian can be
regarded as the logical basis states. The realization of a full-fledged
topologically protected quantum state in a circuit has been elusive primarily
because alternative approaches have required elements not found in the
conventional superconducting circuit toolbox. This project utilizes two newly
developed circuit elements, the charge-based quantum interference device and a
superinductor, to realize a protected fluxon-pairing quantum circuit, a
cos(phi/2) Josephson element whose lowest-energy states are different by the
parity of fluxons in a superconducting loop. It is expected that such a circuit
could be decoupled from local noises and demonstrate very long coherence in the
protected state. The objectives of this project are: (1) to develop a highly
coherent fluxon-pairing qubit by first enhancing the Aharonov-Casher
interference through symmetry improvements in the design of the qubit; (2) to
further develop superinductor technology; (3) to demonstrate protection against
energy relaxation and de-coherence in the protected state of the fluxon-pairing
qubit; (4) to demonstrate fast adiabatic switching between the protected and
unprotected states for state preparation and measurement operations; and (5) to
demonstrate fault-tolerant single and two-qubit gate operations on the sub-
microsecond time scale. The project also supports the education of graduate
students who enjoy broad exposure to the state-of-the-art tools of modern
quantum information research. The multi-component educational and outreach
component, an essential part of the project, is designed to develop a program to
train future quantum electronics engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.