* 1838344
* RoL:  FELS:  EAGER:  Design Rules for Multidomain Proteins Across the Tree of Life
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Marie Dannie Durand, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Peter McCartney
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,853.00

This project seeks to discover how the biology of the cell shapes the design
rules of multidomain proteins. Multidomain proteins are mosaics of sequence
fragments that encode structural or functional modules, called domains. The
modular nature of a multidomain protein is integral to its function because
different constituent domains play different functional roles. For example, in
signaling proteins, some domains are responsible for the recognition and others
for the transmission of an environmental signal. These modular proteins allow
cells to interact with their world, via cell-cell signaling, cellular adhesion,
and cellular migration. In human health, multidomain families are fundamental to
apoptosis, innate immunity, inflammation response, and tissue repair. The
multidomain architectures that are observed in nature represent a tiny fraction
of possible domain combinations. These domain combinations are the product of
the mutational processes that give rise to new sequence mosaics and the
selective forces that promote or discourage their retention. In a given species,
mutation and selection are both dependent on genome organization, mechanisms of
DNA replication, transcription and repair, and the interaction of the cell with
its environment. Multidomain architectures vary substantially across species, as
do genomic and cellular properties. This project exploits this comparative
framework to investigate how the biology of the cell shapes the processes of
multidomain evolution. This research has the potential to transform our
understanding of protein evolution by identifying multidomain design rules that
may provide a foundation for predictive models linking evolution and function,
with concrete applications for human health and protein engineering. This
project advances research infrastructure through the development and
distribution of computational tools that may contribute to national scientific
resources. This project also contributes to building a broadly inclusive
scientific work force through research experiences for women in Carnegie
Mellon's undergraduate program in computational
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a three-pronged approach to
investigate the universal and lineage-specific design rules of multidomain
proteins. First, computational tools will be developed to infer evolution on the
domain, gene, and species levels, by modeling a multidomain family as a set of
domains that are co-evolving with the associated genes and species. Each entity
is represented by an evolutionary tree. The history of evolutionary events is
inferred using topological comparison of the domain, gene, and species trees.
Combining information from three levels of biological organization reveals when
domain events occurred relative to events in gene, genome, and organismal
evolution, providing the information required to investigate how changes in
domain architecture correlate with changes in genomic and cellular properties.
Second, these methods are applied to reconstruct multidomain evolution in
vertebrate and proteobacterial genomes, revealing shared and lineage-specific
evolutionary patterns. Third, comparison of these evolutionary patterns with
differences in genome organization and cellular machinery in vertebrate and
proteobacterial cells will support the inference of design rules for multidomain
evolution across the tree of life. The resulting data and computational tools
will be available at
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/??durand/Lab/multidomain.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.