* 1838444
* Collaborative Research: Full waveform inversion for P and S seismic structure beneath Tibet
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Stephen Grand, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/28/2023
* USD 244,471.00

A fundamental event in Earth evolution is when two continents collide. The
India-Asia collision is the premier example of this happening today. The
collision has produced the Tibetan Plateau, the region with the highest
topography in the world, as well as deformation resulting in earthquakes and
volcanic activity throughout eastern Asia affecting over a billion people.
Despite more than 150 years of research on the topic, the evolution of the crust
and mantle (lithosphere) beneath the Tibetan Plateau remains an enigma. There is
surprisingly little agreement on the configuration of where Indian lithosphere
is beneath Tibet and thus little agreement on the processes driving plateau
uplift and growth as well as the evolution of the mantle beneath. This proposal
is to develop a comprehensive high-resolution P and S wave seismic image of the
crust and mantle beneath Tibet and surrounding regions. The goal is to better
understand the dynamics of crust-mantle evolution during continental collision.
This work will help in understanding past continental collisions and thus
provide a better understanding of the geology of continents and the occurrence
of natural resources. In the past 500 years more than one million people lost
their lives in earthquakes within the study area of this project. The detailed
lithospheric structures to be imaged in this work will improve our understanding
of seismicity in this vast tectonically active zone of continental collision.
This work involves international collaborations with scientists in China and
India, as well as training of graduate and undergraduate students at
collaborating institutions in the US and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic images will be developed through
the application of full waveform inversion of three component regional broadband
data that sample the crust and mantle beneath Tibet. The investigators will also
incorporate teleseismic travel-time measurements and receiver functions in their
model development. A large regional waveform database will be created using all
available stations within and around the Tibetan plateau, taking full advantage
of the enormous resources that have been dedicated to studies of Tibet in the
past. Based on prior experience the team expects to be able to constrain
structures with dimensions on the order of 50 km, both laterally as well as
vertically. Their main goal is to map the Indian continental lithosphere (ICL)
from northern India to regions below the Himalayas and the Tibetan Plateau. The
investigators expect to be able to make relatively precise estimates of the
thickness of the mantle lithosphere beneath northern India and various parts of
Tibet and the surrounding regions. This should put constraints on thickening of
the Indian mantle lithosphere as well the location of a possible transition from
very thick Indian cratonic lithosphere to thinner Indian continental marginal
lithosphere. Further goals will be to see if any instabilities can be imaged at
the base of either the Indian or Tibetan lithosphere, and if and where Indian
lithosphere is descending into the deeper mantle. Descent of cratonic
lithosphere into the deeper mantle has implications for the permanence of
cratonic mantle. With accurate P and S images, as well as improved transition
zone discontinuity depths, the team hopes to distinguish chemical and thermal
anomalies in the deeper mantle beneath Tibet. Using a full 3D image of the upper
mantle in this region, they should also be able to see whether the colliding
Indian lithosphere is segmented at depth and exhibits variable behavior along
strike of the collision. Finally, they hope to place constraints on the behavior
of the Tibetan lithosphere and determine whether there is any evidence for
southward subduction of Eurasian lithosphere and whether any of the original
Tibetan lithosphere been delaminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.