* 1838462
* EAGER: An Exploration of a Psychological Space for Human Motor Generalization
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jordan Taylor, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 296,493.00

While we routinely perform similar actions, we can never repeat any single
action in precisely the same way. This is because we are constantly adapting our
movements to compensate for changes in the state of the body (e.g., muscle
fatigue) and world (e.g., a slippery sidewalk). Thus, each new action can be
thought of as a form of generalization based on previous actions. Current
theories seeking to explain the pattern of generalization rest on the idea that
the brain's representation of motor behaviors is rooted in the physical features
of movement, such as in the muscles and joints involved. This EArly-concept
Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project takes an alternate approach to
consider more psychological aspects of motor behavior - such as whether an
individual thinks that the goal of two given actions is the same and
consequently the individual believes they should behave in the same way.
Exploring the possibility that generalization may be governed by representations
rooted in a psychological dimension will lead to a more comprehensive theory of
generalization and greater effectiveness of practical applications. Modern
society includes many tools and digital devices that people learn and interact
with. Principles gleaned from this project will inform better design of tools
that speed user learning by leveraging generalization of previously existing
skills. Additionally, results of this work could optimize neurorehabilitation
protocols for patients of stroke and other causes of loss of motor
ability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Approaches from the fields of motor control and
cognitive psychology will be used to determine if the pattern of human motor
generalization is better characterized by representations in a psychological
space. First, to gain insight into psychological factors, participants will be
asked to judge the perceptual and subjective similarity between two movements in
various task configurations, which are common to traditional studies of motor
generalization. Participants will then experience a standard sensorimotor
learning task, the visuomotor rotation task, to determine how their judgments of
psychological similarity predict how they generalize learning in one region of
space to new regions of space. Correlations between the pattern of similarity
judgments and the pattern of motor generalization will provide the first step
toward establishing the influence of psychological factors on generalization.
Next, the exploration of psychological factors will be deepened by determining
if broader conceptual assumptions regarding the goals of the task govern the
pattern of generalization. To test this idea, participants' knowledge of tool
functions will be used to define a psychological similarity space. Here,
participants will categorize various tools in terms of similarity and
multidimensional scaling techniques will be employed to determine a distance
metric between these tools in a psychological space. Participants will then
train to move with these tools in the visuomotor rotation task to determine the
extent to which generalization between tools is defined by their relative
distance in a psychological space. Critically, throughout the project, the
physical aspects of these movements will be controlled, such that any changes to
the pattern of generalization will provide evidence in support of a more
psychological representation underlying generalization. If successful, these
studies will lead to a more comprehensive theory of human motor generalization,
one that accounts not only for how the mind interacts with motor function in the
manipulation of tools, but also how tool function may shape and influence mind
and motor function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.