* 1838799
* SCH: INT: Collaborative Research: Aging In Place Through Enhanced Mobility and Social Connectedness: An Integrated Robot and Wearable Sensor Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Yi Guo, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 12/31/2023
* USD 927,247.00

The concept of "aging in place", using advanced technology to improve the health
and well-being of older adults at home, has become popular as away to reduce
costs and allow older adults the dignity of living their final years in the
community. This project will use an integrated autonomous system that consists
of a mobile robot and smart insole sensors to assist older adults to
independently live in their own homes and interact with their communities. The
system will have two initial goals: supporting exercise and enhancing social
connections. The target exercise is walking, the most preferred and accessible
exercise modality among older adults. Regular walking exercises may result in
enhanced balance, increased muscle strength, and reduced risk of falling. The
system guides individuals in regular walking exercises, autonomously assesses
gait states, and provides real-time personalized feedback to engage older adults
into the exercise. The robot will also be used to connect older adults with
family and friends through a virtual connection. The project team will evaluate
the system at a senior center in New York City using objective and subjective
performance criteria measuring older adults' experiences with the system. This
project serves the national interest because the integrated social assistive
robot and wearable sensor system enhances mobility and social connectedness of
older adults thus should improve their health and well-being. The project will
involve an educational component that provides engineering and research method
training to graduate and undergraduate students, as well as STEM outreach to
middle and high-school students. Additional efforts will be made to attract and
retain women and underrepresented minorities into careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates human-robot-sensor
interaction, and aims to enhance mobility and social connectedness of older
adults through the use of an assistive service robot. Methods to be developed
include autonomous gait analysis combining sensing capability of robot onboard
image sensors and the smart insoles through parametric and learning-based
calibration models. The use of inverse reinforcement learning to explore cost
function representation for robot motion planning. The use of dynamic recurrent
neural networks and vibrotactile rhythmic stimuli for collaborative human-robot
walking tasks. The project also examines the use of autonomous task scheduling
to increase social contacts through telepresence robotic techniques. Finally,
the implementation and experimental testing of the integrated system will be
conducted in a senior center using objective and subjective performance
criteria. The project fills a gap in aging-in-place research by providing an
integrated robot and wearable sensor solution for enhancement of mobility and
social connectedness. The developed methods will be implemented on open-source
platforms, and the experimental and evaluation data will be made available for
public use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.