* 1838485
* Fourth International Congress on 3D Materials Science (3DMS 2018); Helsingor (Elsinore), Denmark; June 10-13, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The International Congress on 3D Materials Science (3DMS) is the premier forum
for presenting research regarding the newest advances in three-dimensional
characterization, visualization, quantitative analysis, modeling, and
investigation into the structure and structure-property relationships among
materials. The Fourth International Congress on 3D Materials Science (3DMS 2018)
will bring together researchers, professionals, and engineers and provide
multiple settings for presentation, discussion, and networking. This atmosphere
will facilitate rich interactions between the experimentalists, modelers, and
computational and image processing experts who attend. Research within the 3DMS
community has historically given rise to significant advances in materials
science and engineering applications. 3DMS 2018 is the environment for leaders
in this field to showcase research, interact with peers, and hold important
discussions to continue to advance the state of 3DMS research. It is the goal of
the organizers to ensure a high-quality conference that holds a strong
international presence and aims to highlight the important advances in 3DMS
research on a global scale. As with previous 3DMS congresses, student
participation is greatly encouraged to give students exposure to recent advances
in this field. This grant will support student, postdoc, and young faculty
travel; the student poster session and awards; and other administrative costs.
This meeting is open to all interested individuals and will attempt to provide
the most advanced technical meeting possible, with a mixture of attendees from
research and development, industry, and education professions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field of 3DMS has revolutionized materials
characterization and has enabled the examination and modeling of 3D
microstructures, which is critical to understanding and predicting materials
processing-structure-property relationships. As with previous iterations of the
event, all materials classes will be considered as part of the congress.
Metallic materials have greatly benefitted from 3D characterization, analysis,
and modeling and research in this area will be presented along with additional
materials classes such as polymers, ceramics, and composites. Technical sessions
on the first two days of the conference will run in parallel, with two sessions
on related topics following an all-conference plenary session of invited keynote
speakers. The final day of the conference will also utilize parallel sessions,
but the plenary session will follow the technical sessions this time, to close
out the conference. This format provides the optimum balance of breadth of
information with depth of discussion and interaction opportunities. All types of
research institutions (academia, government, and industrial research
laboratories) will be represented. This meeting is open to all interested
individuals, with a mixture of attendees from academic research, industry and
educational professions, representing both senior and junior investigators,
post-doctoral trainees and students. The four overarching topical areas planned
for this international congress include: methods for materials simulation,
modeling, and characterization in 3D; 3D data processing and reconstruction
algorithms; process-microstructure-property relationships in 3D; and materials
dynamics in 3D.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.