* 1839007
* EAGER:REAL-D: Smart Decision Making using Data and Advanced Modeling Approaches
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Marianthi Ierapetritou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,000.00

The proposed exploratory research project aims to develop a next-generation
autonomous manufacturing process for pharmaceutical production that integrates
product and process informatics with knowledge management. The integration of
process data, process models, and information management tools will enable
adaptive adjustment to the operating conditions to compensate for variability in
raw materials and changing product needs. The research team will take advantage
of the facilities of the Center for Structured Organic Particulate Systems
(C-SOPS) at Rutgers University for proof of principle studies and generation of
experimental data for advancing fundamental understanding of each
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To enable the transition towards more autonomous
and de-centralized decisions across the entire manufacturing supply chain, it is
imperative to develop an integrated platform to: (a) acquire data regarding
process and product operations from the manufacturing facility using data
historian platforms; (b) utilize the data to extract further knowledge on
process understanding; and (c) use this knowledge to dynamically and adaptively
improve process operations. For task (a), the use of a data management system,
such as OSI PI, is proposed with the ability to receive data from multiple
sources including the control platform as well as the Process Analytical
Technology (PAT) data management tool. This platform has the capability to build
up recipe hierarchical structure using Event Frame functionality and
periodically push the data into a cloud system for permanent enterprise-wide
data storage and efficient sharing. For task (b), the use of advanced
statistical and machine learning methods is proposed, in combination with data
reconciliation methods. Finally, for task (c), information acquired will be
utilized to adapt the model feasible space by building accurate surrogate models
and adaptively refine them using the online data acquisition. Although the focus
will be on pharmaceutical production processes, the proposed work, if
successful, can have significant broader impacts on a variety of industrial
processes. Two PhD students will be trained on the development of a cutting-edge
framework for autonomous manufacturing processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.