* 1839021
* EAGER: Environmental drivers of biodiversity: leveraging a history of NSF-funded research to test models of butterfly responses to global change
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Leslie Ries, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,989.00

Our most pressing ecological priority is to determine how human activity is
driving global shifts in biodiversity and how we can balance preserving
ecosystem function with the needs of a growing human population. The PI proposes
new ecological research on the Pierid family of butterflies that have been the
subject of research on thermal responses over the last 40 years. The overarching
goal of this research is to extend and generalize Species Distribution Models
(SDM), the dominant modeling approach to understanding large-scale shifts of
biodiversity in the face of global change. The PI will leverage that 40 year
legacy of thermal response research to develop general models of how butterflies
respond to changing environments. In order to verify how well these models
perform and their ability to make both species-specific and general predictions,
models will be validated with large-scale monitoring data sets. There is a
growing resource of citizen-science monitoring data but there are also several
NSF-funded academic monitoring programs that have occurred over the years.
Another aspect of this project is to bring together those academic and citizen
science data into a unified publicly-available data set. The research is
expected to advance macrosystems ecology study of thermal ecology and responses
of biodiversity, especially ectotherms while also serving as a strong
demonstration of data reuse by focusing on a well-studied and wide-spread group
of butterfly species, the Pierids.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in
macrosystems ecology requires two disparate ecological data types that are
rarely generated or employed by the same research community: mechanistic,
experimental data and data from large spatiotemporally-replicated monitoring
programs. The two dominant environmental factors driving the distribution and
abundance of butterflies are thermal environment (impacted by climate) and host-
plant availability (impacted by land use change and climate). There are 14
previous and current NSF-funded projects focused on primarily thermal, but also
nutritional drivers of performance in one family of butterflies, Pierids.
Thermal environments have several impacts on butterfly performance. Indirectly,
temperature drives the seasonal timing and distribution of host-plant (food)
resources. It also provides energy for growth for developing caterpillars. Host-
plants are also a key component of butterfly development, not just for the
obvious reason that they acquire all their nutrition for growth from these
plants, but the quality of the plants also determines their growth rate. There
has been a long legacy of research on the thermal and nutritional constraints of
growth for many insects, but these models have not yet been fully employed to
make range-wide predictions for butterflies. We propose to bring together a
legacy of NSF-funded research on butterfly responses to environmental change
with long-term monitoring data that can be used, respectively, to generate and
test mechanistic SDMs over multiple spatiotemporal
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the National Science
Foundation?s Public Access Initiative which is managed by the NSF Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure on behalf of the
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.