* 1839271
* Quantum dynamics in driven and disordered systems: Floquet topological control and flow methods for many body localization
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2022
* Gil Refael, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2022
* USD 357,181.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education towards understanding and controlling the behavior of
quantum materials, and on using their unique quantum behavior for possible
technological applications. The PI will combine insights obtained from the
recent discovery of new materials and the idea of simulating extra dimensions,
whereby a periodically driven system appears to have an extra spatial dimension
for each periodic drive it is subject to. For example, using these two ideas,
one can take a microscopic magnet, illuminate it with two modulated light beams,
and turn it into an energy pump which draws energy from one beam and gives it in
full to another. The PI aims to show how this principle could be implemented
into solid-state devices based on newly discovered semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In addition, the PI will develop a microscopic theory for a new type
of phase transition, the many-body localization transition, which occurs when a
system of quantum particles, such as electrons, stops obeying the common rules
of thermodynamics due to the presence of sufficient disorder.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graduate students and postdocs will participate in the
research and will receive training and education in a subject of high national
priority. The PI will also conclude the writing of a textbook on how to model a
variety of technologies and natural phenomena using fundamentals known to any
physics undergraduate. This book will provide a unifying perspective, guiding
budding physicists and engineering enthusiasts on how to apply core physics
principles to obtain advanced understanding for a range of phenomena and
devices, ranging from medical devices and energy production to space travel,
cosmology, and living systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education towards developing new topological quantum control principles and new
analysis tools for the many-body localization transition. Quantum dynamics is
among the most challenging fields in condensed matter. Experiments can now
observe the dynamics of electrons, atoms, and light in a variety of
environments. The theory of quantum control needs to harness these developments.
Topological physics on the one hand, and disorder leading to many-body
localization on the other, present parallel themes that enrich quantum many-body
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will explore new tools for
controlling electromagnetic radiation that are based on topological physics. The
PI will study how these topological control tools behave when realized in
interacting light-matter systems. This will require developing a comprehensive
theory for multi-driven many-body quantum optics and solid-state electronic
systems. The emerging theory will predict the electronic response of complex
materials to strong external drives in the presence of electronic relaxation and
many-body interactions. In the second part of the work, the PI will derive a new
method for analyzing disordered and interacting many-body quantum systems
through study of the many-body localization transition. The method envisioned
combines unitary flow methods with strong-disorder renormalization group
approaches and will not be restricted by the nature or the range of the
interactions. It has the potential to lead to the discovery of fundamentally new
universality classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond education and training of
graduate students and postdocs, the work could pave the way to new photonic
devices based on topological principles. Potential technological impacts include
new tools for controlling low THz electromagnetic radiation for which only few
control tools are available. In addition, the PI will complete a book addressed
to all physics enthusiasts describing an analysis of real-world physics
problems, natural phenomena, and technological breakthroughs drawing on college
physics curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.