* 1839164
* RAISE-TAQS: Multifunctional Hybrid Quantum Systems for Spin-Based Quantum Control and Metrology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Evelyn Hu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,185,968.00

Quantum principles of coherence and entanglement augur transformative
capabilities for computation, sensor technologies and information processing.
While proof-of-principle demonstrations of quantum-enhanced performance have
shown promise in simple systems, their extension to scalable, integrated
platforms have been stymied by decoherence, dissipation and other deleterious
environmental influences. Intensive efforts have been made to further isolate
these quantum platforms from such environmental interactions, but this approach
grows increasingly formidable with growing complexity of the quantum system. An
alternate paradigm of "reservoir engineering" has suggested that artificially
imposed forms of dissipation can, counter-intuitively, lead to robust forms of
quantum behavior. Recent theoretical and experimental studies by the PIs have
identified forms of reservoir-engineered open quantum systems that exhibit novel
dynamical quantum states with robust, finite temperature entanglement. This
project seeks to build upon these studies to demonstrate reservoir engineering
techniques for state preparation, manipulation and quantum control of a
multifunctional hybrid system that interfaces ultracold atoms and silicon
carbide defect qubits within a MEMS-based optomechanical resonator. In addition
to elucidating universal principles governing reservoir-engineered open quantum
systems, this multifunctional hybrid system will also be used to demonstrate
quantum-enhanced metrology in a scalable, integrated platform.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multifunctional hybrid quantum system leverages unique
capabilities of this team including (i) fundamental conceptual advances in the
use of reservoir-engineering techniques to create topologically protected forms
of entanglement in an open quantum system, (ii) expertise in strong coupling of
ultracold quantum spins to MEMS-based optomechanical resonators for spin-
mediated control and sensing, (iii) expertise in fabrication of high quality
single crystal silicon carbide optomechanical resonators, (iv) expertise in the
deterministic placement and control of silicon carbide defect centers. The
achievement of augmented strain coupling between defect qubits and
optomechanical MEMS devices will enable the stabilization, state readout and
dissipation control of the hybrid system. As part of this program, this team
will also demonstrate the high quality devices with strong optomechanical and
strain coupling between ultracold spin qubits, SiC defect qubits and
microtoroidal optomechanical resonators. This multifunctional hybrid system is a
novel laboratory for the demonstration and validation of reservoir-engineering
paradigms for quantum state preparation, control and metrology. In addition, it
also enables the study of universal principles of open quantum systems including
dynamical states with novel broken symmetries, driven dissipative phase
transitions and critical behavior that have no counterpart in equilibrium
systems. Education and outreach efforts to augment the quantum science and
technology communities are important components of this program. Student
researchers will be provided with interdisciplinary training in the multifaceted
aspects of this project including atomic physics, optomechanics, materials
design and synthesis, and MEMS fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.