* 1839953
* 2018 Gordon Research Seminar and Conference on Marine Microbes: Italy - July 2018
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Kay Bidle, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 01/31/2019
* USD 18,975.00

The Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) and Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on Marine
Microbes together create an international forum for sharing cutting-edge
research on the ecology, evolution, and function of microorganisms in the ocean
biosphere. The meeting brings together top scientists from around the world with
diverse backgrounds and expertise to provide an integrated program on marine
microbial life, covering cutting edge research on viruses, Bacteria, Archaea and
Eurkarya protists, spanning pelagic and benthic realms, trophic food web
dynamics (photoautrophy, chemoautotrophy, heterotrophy and mixotrophy) and their
interactions and impact on biogeochemical cycles. Both the Seminar and
Conference are organized in thematic sessions, with the goal of highlighting new
methodological approaches and emerging questions in the field while stimulating
rigorous discussion. Requested funds enable early career participants
(postdoctoral researchers and graduate students in the marine microbiology
research community with diverse backgrounds) to attend both the 2018 Gordon
Research Seminar and Gordon Research Conference on Marine Microbes. The
rationale is to facilitate the attendance and participation of postdocs and
graduate students in the GRS so they have an opportunity to present their
research among peer scientists and gain confidence in this setting. The GRS will
expose young, early-career scientists to cutting-edge research on marine
microbes (ranging from evolution to biogeochemistry to ecology to meta-omics),
provide opportunities to network among peers, and foster relationships that will
hopefully lead to lifelong collaborations. It will also provide career guidance
and scientific mentoring through the participation of select senior-level
research mentors and discussion leaders. The GRS will also increase student and
postdoc participation in the subsequent GRC, which will expose them to the
state-of-the-art research occurring in the field. The GRC will have oral
presentations from a diverse group of young and established scientists who play
leading roles in marine microbial research. Discussion leaders, who are also
leaders in their field, have &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The respective themes of the
2018 Marine Microbes GRS and GRC are "Marine Microbial Strategies for Survival
in a Changing Environment" and "Elucidating Microbial Processes Across Spatial
and Temporal Scales". These GRC and GRS themes draw upon challenges and
opportunities in marine microbiology and the interactive microbial ocean in
order to help develop the conceptual agenda to help drive the community forward
in integrating microbial processes with an eye on putting them in an Earth
Systems context. The Marine Microbes GRC and GRS are arguably the only meetings
that coalesce such a diverse array of researchers (from various professional
stages) related to marine microbes. Its duration and unique format for
presentation and emphasis on personal interactions represents an exceptional
opportunity for exchanging scientific ideas, generating new ideas, and building
new collaborations. A critical part of achieving those goals is to help to get a
diverse array of scientists to the meeting site (both are co-
located).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.