* 1839116
* TRIPODS+X: RES: Collaborative Research: Scaling Up Descriptive Epidemiology and Metabolic Network Models via Faster Sampling
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Abraham Flaxman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 479,397.00

Sampling from a given distribution from a space with many attributes is a
fundamental problem in computer science. Over the past two decades, practical
applications of sampling have proliferated in areas such as statistics,
networking, biology, differential privacy, and, most notably, machine learning.
Sampling is used to evaluate models, as a subroutine for optimization, and more
generally for exploring large complex spaces. In these practical settings, the
time complexity of sampling is a severe limitation; known methods often require
either restricting sampling to very small instances or resorting to unproven
heuristics or overly restrictive assumptions. This project will develop a
toolkit for sampling and evaluate it on real data sets --- a large-scale, high-
dimensional toolkit for sampling smooth and non-smooth distributions, and a
suite of functions that can be computed or estimated using access to samples. It
will be developed working together with domain experts in health metrics and
systems biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the project is to
produce a general-purpose, open-source, and publicly accessible software for
sampling non-smooth log-concave distributions with millions of variables.
Achieving these goals requires overcoming complex challenges in both theory and
implementation. The new algorithms will be inspired by the investigators'
expertise in convex optimization, high dimensional geometry, and randomized
linear algebra, especially their breakthroughs in linear programming and volume
computation. In both target application domains, health metrics and systems
biology, the investigators have worked with experts to develop the current
state-of-the-art software tools and deployed them. Drawing from this experience,
they are poised to both develop general tools and make data-driven discoveries
in these domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.