* 1839220
* Collaborative Research: Southern Ocean Carbon Gas Observatory (SCARGO)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2019,01/31/2024
* David Munro, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 01/31/2024
* USD 67,110.00

The Southern Ocean plays a critical role in the global carbon cycle, yet there
remians uncertainty regarding air-sea fluxes of carbon dioxide in the region.
This project will initiate a novel airborne measurement program to address this:
the Southern Ocean Carbon Gas Observatory (SCARGO). This approach will map
distributions of carbon dioxide throughout the polar troposphere enabling robust
estimates of summertime air-sea fluxes. SCARGO will leverage an observational
platform of opportunity, the New York Air National Guard (ANG) LC-130 aircraft,
operating austral summer from McMurdo Station supporting the United States
Antarctic Program. Measurements will be made over three field seasons. Analysis
and modeling activities will quantify Southern Ocean air-sea carbon dioxide air-
exchange based on the observations, including the intra-seasonal evolution and
interannual variability of current and future carbon climate
fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCARGO will address two fundamental research
questions: (1) What is the magnitude and seasonal evolution of summertime
Southern Ocean carbon dioxide uptake? and (2) How large is interannual
variability in summertime carbon dioxide flux and what processes drive this
variability? Aircraft measurements have several distinct advantages over other
approaches to address these research questions. Additionally SCARGO also address
several ancillary research questions leveraging concurrent measurements of
atmospheric methane(CH4), carbon monoxide (CO), and water vapor (H2O). SCARGO
PI's will involve students in the project, providing education and mentoring on
the scientific and technical aspects of aircraft-based oceanography and
numerical modeling. A postdoctoral scholar on the project will be trained in
ocean biogeochemistry, Earth system and transport modeling. All analysis codes
will be publicly released on GitHub in clear, well-documented forms enabling
reproducibility. Finally, SCARGO will demonstrate the effectiveness of the NYANG
LC-130 for atmospheric surveys, thereby contributing to realizing
recommendations to establish an airborne research platform for the
Antarctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.