* 1839291
* TRIPODS+X:EDU: Foundational Training in Neuroscience and Geoscience via Hackweeks
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Maryam Fazel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2021
* USD 176,190.00

Data-driven science and engineering requires close collaboration and
coordination among researchers from different communities, including core
sciences, statistics, and optimization. This project will build on and broaden
the successful existing "hackweek" model to bring together participants from
neuroscience and geoscience with experts in machine learning and optimization.
The hackweeks will incorporate tutorials on core methods, hands-on sessions, and
group activities designed to promote deeper understanding and closer
collaboration of both data-driven scientific problems in neuroscience and
geoscience, as well as fundamental methodologies and how they apply to these
sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, the investigators plan to
redesign geo-hackweek and neuro-hackweek, two events that the have been held
annually at the University Washington by two of the PIs in recent years. Geo-
hackweek will be redesigned to include the discussion of geophysical data
interpolation and denoising, geophysical inverse problems, and Gaussian process
models, and connecting these to techniques in optimization, including sparse and
low-rank models, stochastic optimization, and PDE-constrained optimization.
Neuro-hackweek will be augmented to include tutorials on the use of optimal
transport models and Wasserstein distances in the analysis of neuroimaging data.
This project aims to&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) Expose participants from domain
sciences to foundational topics, so they better understand data science tools,
and in particular gain insight into how and when these algorithms work well (or
do not work well);&lt;br/&gt;(2) Train participants to consider methods in the
context of domain-specific problems, be able to identify domain-specific
challenges, and think critically about how to effectively leverage optimization
and machine learning tools for specific problem classes;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Expose
students with foundations background to application domains, to understand
practical challenges in application of machine learning tools;&lt;br/&gt;(4)
Generate pedagogical material that can used in similar events;&lt;br/&gt;(5)
Encourage collaborations between domain experts and experts on theory and
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.