* 1839361
* EAGER: Scalable Organic Shortwave Infrared Photodiodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Tse Nga Ng, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 01/31/2021
* USD 187,861.00

Photodetectors responsive to shortwave infrared (SWIR) light are critical to a
wide range of spectroscopic systems and optoelectronics that form the foundation
for scientific, industrial, medical, and defense applications. SWIR technologies
remain largely dependent on inorganic crystals, which require complex
manufacturing processes that are cost-prohibitive and not affordable for
widespread use. New alternative materials are highly sought after, especially
the ones that allow direct deposition to replace complex manufacturing
processes. Organic semiconductors allow direct deposition from solutions and
enable scalability but so far are limited to the visible and near-infrared
spectrum. This project will investigate a promising class of novel SWIR
polymeric photodiodes to reveal the fundamental properties necessary for
extending the utility of organics into the SWIR spectrum currently dominated by
inorganic materials. If successful, the proposed research will offer a
transformative capability to realize widely deployable SWIR systems that are not
achievable with conventional semiconductors and will potentially revolutionize a
wide variety of applications that rely on SWIR sensing. This project provides
graduate and undergraduate students opportunities for exchange visits and
internships with an industrial partner. The team will showcase research results
in outreach activities, which include hands-on workshops for high-school
students and teachers from under-served schools and summer research programs for
students from community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
goal is to find the fundamental limits on the spectral range and detectivity of
organic bulk heterojunction photodiodes for detecting shortwave infrared light.
This project will study structure-processing-property relationships and unveil
the essential characteristics for effective photocurrent generation from low-
energy charge-transfer (CT) states. Specifically, this study will measure the
device photoresponse and dark current to quantify the extent of spectral range
and noise increase with bandgap reduction. In Task 1, the objective is to
examine if CT exciton dissociation will become efficient with high permittivity
materials, because large permittivity presents a highly polarizable environment
that will reduce the Coulombic attraction between the electron-hole pair and
thus facilitate dissociation. The permittivity of the bulk heterojunction will
be adjusted by blending in high-k camphoric molecules and by using fullerene
derivatives with ethylene glycol units in solubilizing side-chains. The
dissociation efficiency will be obtained from transient photoconductivity
measurements in relation to a material?s permittivity. More effective
dissociation will enable photocurrent generation from low CT-state bandgaps and
extend spectral range. In Task 2, the objective is to determine the minimum CT-
state energy that still allows exciton dissociation before recombination
dominates, to understand and predict spectral range. The same SWIR polymer will
be paired with various fullerene derivatives to systematically lower CT-state
bandgaps and thus increase spectral range. As the CT-state bandgap is
significantly reduced, more thermal generation-recombination events will likely
lead to an increase in dark current noise. The charge recombination lifetime
will be measured via impedance spectroscopy to examine the balance between
spectral range and noise. The resulting knowledge will provide better
understandings of the photogeneration requirements for future development of
organic infrared photodetectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.