* 1839154
* CAREER: Catalyzing Polymerization in the Laboratory and Discussion in the Classroom with Artificial Metalloenzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Jared Lewis, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2020
* USD 158,712.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Jared C. Lewis at the University of Chicago is developing
artificial metalloenzymes (ArMs) comprised of olefin polymerization catalysts
covalently linked to protein scaffolds to control polyolefin structure and
function. This research involves the synthesis of cofactors based on known
olefin polymerization catalysts, the design and expression of different protein
scaffolds, and the bioconjugation of different scaffolds using synthetic
cofactors to generate the proposed ArMs. Detailed characterization of ArM
structure is being pursued using spectroscopic methods and X-ray crystallography
at Argonne National Labs. The ability of these ArMs to catalyze olefin
polymerization is being explored, and a combination of rational design and
directed evolution is being used to optimize the observed activity and
selectivity. Given the importance of polyolefins in every day life, this ArM
polymerization catalyst development program is being leveraged to develop
teaching modules on chemistry, catalysis, and materials with local middle school
(Grade 8) students at the Irene C. Hernandez Middle School for the Advancement
of the Sciences (HMS). This will provide HMS students with additional
curriculum-relevant discussion of materials chemistry and University of Chicago
students with real world opportunities for explaining science and receiving
feedback on their teaching. The broader impacts of this work include the
potential for discovering new mechanisms to control polymer structure and
function, new functional polymers, and unique training opportunities for
students and postdocs at the interface of chemistry and protein
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of
artificial metalloenzymes comprised of olefin polymerization catalysts
covalently linked to protein scaffolds to control polyolefin structure and
function. The ability of artificial metalloenzymes to catalyze olefin
polymerization is being explored, and a combination of rational design and
directed evolution is being used to optimize the observed activity and
selectivity. Given the importance of polyolefins in everyday life, this catalyst
development program will be leveraged to develop teaching modules on chemistry,
catalysis, and materials with local middle school students.