* 1839816
* EAGER: Real-Time: Learning-Mediated Control for Traffic Shaping
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Alireza Talebpour, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Efficient Management of Vehicular Traffic via Real-time Machine-Learning-
Mediated Control and Traffic Shaping&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While connectivity and
automation promise orders of magnitude gains in the safety and efficiency of
vehicular transportation networks, these gains cannot be realized without
monitoring, learning the behavior, and control of vehicles at different
aggregation levels. Indeed, current congestion mitigation methods, such as speed
harmonization that uses a sequence of variable speed limits along a highway do
not reliably control congestion, and may exacerbate it (e.g., via shocks
propagated through speed limit changes) due to the inconsistency between
congestion prediction and real-time control. The objective of this project is to
develop a holistic approach using machine-learning methods to identify and
predict macroscopic congestion behavior of traffic based on both vehicle-borne
and transportation infrastructure measurements, while designing fine-grain
control systems for individual vehicles that can help to mitigate congestion
effects. In doing so, the project recognizes that these designs must account for
the possibility of low take-up rates of connected, automated vehicles (CAVs)
over the next decade, and the consequent dominance of human-mediated vehicle
operation for some time to come. The project also includes the development of
educational materials on data analytics and vehicular control systems. Intrinsic
to the program are efforts at outreach to involve high-school students via
demonstrations and lectures based on the technology
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop the
theory of and evaluate a novel approach to traffic management entitled "real-
time learning-mediated control". The key idea is to meld large-scale real-time
learning about macroscopic phenomena in a physically interpretable manner, with
distributed dynamic control of individual vehicles in a provably safe and
efficient manner. The work comprises two thrusts, namely (i) Traffic State
Prediction, which offers a Graph Signal Processing (GSP)-based congestion
prediction approach for planned and unplanned congestion-causing events, and
(ii) Traffic Shaping and Control, which offers novel vehicular control methods
that shape traffic in a stable manner over the multiple dimensions of target
time headway and velocities over space and time, and candidate time-gap and
velocity profiles in a mixed environment of both connected, automated vehicles
and human driven ones. Thus, the overall aim is to combine the ability of
learning methods to provide predictions about complex interconnected systems,
with control laws that are safe and consistent with the laws of physics. The
value of this research to broader society is in combining traffic prediction,
control and learning, which can result in accurate congestion mitigation and
increased throughput. Incorporating analytical concepts into senior design
projects and courses enhances the project via educational impact. The project
also contributes to development of systems-design expertise for students, as
well as to diversity enhancement through minority student
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.