* 1839201
* EAGER: Towards the Web of Biodiversity Knowledge: Understanding Data Connectedness to Improve Identifier Practices
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jose Fortes, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,973.00

Biodiversity research investigates the variety and variability of life on Earth.
This field of science crosses many research disciplines such as genetics,
studies of organisms, plants and animals, habitats and ecosystems, and their
interactions. A long-standing challenge for biodiversity researchers is to find,
access, "mine", and integrate complex and diverse information from those
disciplines. New approaches have now become possible with the increasing
availability of "big data" techniques and infrastructure. This project will
explore and employ such advanced techniques for retrieval and mining of a wide
range of available open biodiversity data sources, with the aim of generating an
improved holistic picture or "knowledge graph" of Earth's biodiversity. The
project will also identify the data practices and discovered relationships that
were needed to accomplish this graph-building task, with the aim of informing
the development of future data systems and training on these techniques.

Many attempts have been made to link together biodiversity knowledge using
linked identifiers coupled with data standards and taxonomies, but satisfactory
results with such "exact matching" approaches have been elusive. This project
aims to develop new methods of relating records across datasets that do not rely
on matching identifiers but instead employ inferred rather than explicit
relationships between data records. This is an experimental approach that has
not yet been attempted at scale. Linkages between publicly available
biodiversity, genetic, literature, and other data will be explored; and software
infrastructure will be developed to combine and link multiple biodiversity
datasets. Another goal is to quantify the relationship between identifier
practices and the ability to construct links between available biodiversity,
genetic, literature, and other data. This project will draw on and complement
other large ongoing collaborative efforts that contribute to broad integration
of biodiversity knowledge, data science, and infrastructure such as the
Encyclopedia of Life (EOL) and the NSF-supported iDigBio project. The ultimate
aim is to understand which data practices provide the most value to the
biodiversity community and thereby inform policy, standards, and training on
identifiers. This, in turn, can enable the exploration of new fundamental and
cross-disciplinary research questions, and potentially improve practices of a
wide range of US and international data aggregators and data producers.

This project is supported by the National Science Foundation's Public Access
Initiative which is managed by the NSF Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure on
behalf of the Foundation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.