* 1839100
* RAPID: Seismic deployment in response to the 2018 Kilauea Lower East Rift Zone eruption and summit explosions
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2019
* Fan-Chi Lin, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 05/31/2019
* USD 48,510.00

The 2018 Kilauea volcano eruptive activities provide a rare opportunity to study
the dynamic process of a volcano eruption and image the detailed magma plumbing
system. In this RAPID seismic deployment project, the investigators plan to
deploy a temporary seismometer array around the Kilauea volcano system including
the summit within the Hawaii Volcanoes National Park and lower east rift zone in
the Puna District of Hawaii. The data recorded by the seismometers will help
improve knowledge on how magma moves underground and its eruption process at the
surface. The ongoing Kilauea volcanic activity produces a continuous threat to
the residents and visitors of the Big Island of Hawaii. A better understanding
of the magma pathways, the current status of the magma body, and the dynamic
process associated with the volcanic activity will help USGS and local
authorities to better develop future mitigation plans. The researchers will work
closely with the Hawaiian Volcano Observatory and Hawaii Volcanoes National Park
to conduct the experiment and disseminate the scientific findings through their
education and outreach programs to their over 2 million annual
visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this RAPID proposal is to deploy a
dense array of geophones on the southern region of the Big Island of Hawaii in
response to the recent Kilauea volcanic activity. The reserachers propose to
deploy three separate arrays that will cover the Kilauea summit, the Lower East
Rift Zone (LERZ), and the area in between these two regions. The investigators
plan to deploy ~110 autonomous three component Zland geophones to record
continuous seismic signals for 30 days. Combined with the existing permanent
seismic network, better earthquake and tremor source locations as well as 4D
subsurface structure can be determined. The experiment should provide an
unprecedented dataset to study Kilauea's volcanic plumbing system and magma
migration. The raw seismic waveforms collected through the experiment will be
archived at the IRIS DMC and distributed to the scientific community for
analysis and redistribution immediately following the conclusion of the
experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.