* 1839153
* RAISE-TAQS: Nonlinear Optical Properties and Novel Quantum Phases of Polar Molecules in Optical Lattic
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Christopher Bardeen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,232.00

Developing novel molecular materials relies on the ability to synthesize the
constituents (molecules) and assemble them under carefully controlled
conditions. The physical properties are determined by parameters like the
molecular spacing, degree of order, and orientation. These parameters are
typically fixed by self-assembly into the equilibrium crystal state and can only
be changed by synthesizing a new batch of materials. This award supports
research to use optical trapping methods to prepare molecular assemblies where
these parameters can be tuned by external fields. This capability will permit
the study of basic properties of solid-state materials in a cheaper, more
flexible way. Polar molecules will be trapped in optical lattices, mimicking the
molecular arrangement and properties of a solid crystal, and be oriented using
external electric fields. Such a lattice configuration renders systematic tuning
and exploration of relevant properties of solids feasible. Furthermore, this
approach has the potential to explore novel quantum phenomena, like collective
optical response, in such systems. In the future, this research has the
potential to inform the synthesis of real molecular materials, from molecular
crystals to nanocrystal assemblies to metal-organic frameworks. It provides a
new approach to "crystal engineering" by combining advances in Physics,
Chemistry and Materials Science. The project's broader impacts include student
training in various areas, including lasers, vacuum technology and optical
setups, as well as providing a broader, interdisciplinary research experience
than typically accessible. Finally, regular visits to K-12 schools to present
experimental demonstrations and lectures on trapping and manipulating particles,
e.g. molecules or ions, will be part of this research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this project is to load a
quantum degenerate gas of polar AlCl molecules into an optical lattice to study
novel quantum phases and simulate solid-state crystalline materials. This
research has four specific goals: First, perform precision measurements of
molecular properties, such as the energy spectrum and the Franck-Condon factors
of AlCl; Second, cool the polar AlCl molecules to quantum degeneracy and study
the dynamics and stability of dipolar Bose-Einstein condensates. The group will
also explore correlated phases due to the anisotropic dipole-dipole interaction,
including liquid crystal and density-wave phases, and probe the interplay
between superfluidity and charge-ordering in low-dimensional materials; Third,
create a one-dimensional optical lattice of polar molecules and study its non-
linear optical response by measuring the second harmonic generation. By varying
temperature and ordering, the optical lattice can be tuned from the limit of
independent, noninteracting molecules to a strongly correlated one-dimensional
crystal; Fourth, use Raman scattering to explore the transition from
intramolecular vibrations of noninteracting molecules to intermolecular phonon
structure by continuously tuning the lattice parameters. The experiments will
demonstrate that ordered structures of diatomic molecules can exhibit phenomena
that are directly relevant to solid-state materials. These results will motivate
future experiments to expand the lattice to two dimensions and finally to fully
mimic three-dimensional crystal systems. Their low temperature and tunable
structure could lead to totally new phenomena, like giant nonlinear optical
susceptibilities, that could inspire new research directions in the field of
"crystal engineering".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.