* 1839812
* EAGER: Real-Time:  Visual Analytics for Enhanced Decision-Making and Situational Awareness in Modern Distribution Systems, with a Focus on Outage Prediction and Management
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Zachary Wartell, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,237.00

This project addresses the need to develop a fully visible, controllable, and
resilient electric power distribution system. Although the distribution system
accounts for over 75% of the outages in the power grid, power system operators
currently have limited situational awareness at the distribution level, limited
visibility beyond the substations, limited information on the network and its
connectivity. With the rapid increase in amount and type of data accumulated in
the distribution system, i.e. from Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI) and
remotely monitored and controlled devices, the need to glean actionable
intelligence from it is of paramount importance. Integrating data from these
heterogeneous datasets (Geographical Information System (GIS), Supervisory
Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA), AMI, Outage and Distribution Management
Systems (OMS/DMS)) is a first step towards achieving this. The goal of this
project is to develop a visual analytics platform to leverage the integrated
dataset, enabling distribution system operators to visualize and analyze the
state of the distribution system over time, empowering them to identify
categorical patterns of events in space and time via highly coordinated
visualizations. The project comprises three main components: 1. A data-driven
approach to uncover useful information from streaming and historical data,
strengthened by 2. Situationally-aware modeling and simulation of the electric
power distribution system, and 3. A visual analytics system, leading to
prescriptive analytics, actionable knowledge for the indispensable human in-the-
loop. The developed infrastructure would enable and enhance real-time fast and
confident decision-making, thus supporting overall efficiency and reliability
improvements in the electric power distribution system, reducing current outage
times and improving reliability indices. Benefits would accrue in terms of
savings as well as in terms of customer satisfaction. The principal investigator
of this project is the founder and faculty advisor of the local student chapter
of IEEE Women in Engineering (WIE) and she plans to leverage that connection to
broaden participation in this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For complete
situational awareness leading to decision-making, there needs to be powerful,
automated analytics, enhanced by a deep understanding of the physical system,
but it is also essential that the human be placed in the loop at the right place
and time. For this reason, three components are integrated: 1. Data-driven real-
time probabilistic outage prediction, coupled with 2. Situationally-aware
modeling and simulation of the distribution system, and with 3. An interactive
visual analytics system to provide visual and exploratory analytics. Utilizing
real-time data streams coming from the distribution system (SCADA, AMI, Digital
Fault Recorders) and from weather stations, together with historical data,
advanced real-time data analytics algorithms are applied to strategically
process the data, obtaining, for example, accurate loading conditions and
developing probabilistic outage predictions. This sensed and processed
information is then utilized, as needed, by the now situationally-aware
distribution system electrical model to perform simulations. The simulations in
turn provide input feedback to probabilistic scenarios and define system
constraints for the analytics modules. Since human-in-the-loop is important,
these analytics are closely coupled to the representations and modes of
interaction in the interactive visual analytics system so that the right
information is presented to the user at the right time. Thus, the developed
framework results in a hybrid approach that leverages data-driven methodologies,
the physical system, and visual analytics, to provide much improved decision-
making capabilities. This project investigates the science of real-time learning
and decision-making, while also looking closely at the technology for data-
driven distribution system analysis coupled with deep understanding of the
physical system. The project will provide theoretical underpinnings and novel
methods to significantly move distribution modernization efforts forward,
including improvements in system reliability and resiliency, new modes for
management, new paradigms and paths for customer-utility cooperation, and a new
approach to handling big data in the electric grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.