* 1839598
* RAPID:  Funding the Drosophila Species Stock Center at Cornell University
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Patrick O'Grady, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 199,998.00

The genus Drosophila has served as a model system in biology for over 100 years.
Many advances in neurobiology, medicine, genetics, genome organization and
evolution, and the mechanisms of development are the result of basic research on
this group of flies. The Drosophila Species Stock Center (DSSC), recently
relocated to Cornell University, is a national repository for a diverse
collection of over 1400 living stocks from approximately 250 species of
Drosophila and related genera. The DSSC has maintained these cultures since the
1940s and distributes to researchers working in a variety of biological fields
to facilitate research aimed at studying the underlying principles and
mechanisms of life. DSSC staff provides technical expertise in the areas of
husbandry, natural history, systematics, evolution, and ecology of Drosophila.
Training for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral scholars will be
facilitated through independent research apprenticeships and via an annual
workshop on Drosophila Species Identification and Culture.

The DSSC maintains over 30 Drosophila species that have had their whole genomes
sequenced, a number that is increasing each year. This aspect of the collection
further adds to its value and utility as a resource for comparative research for
investigating the relationships between phenotypic change, genome evolution,
species divergence, and to address fundamental questions from molecular
mechanisms to morphological evolution. Resources of the DSSC are also directly
useful in applied sciences and other applications, for example, in agriculture
and pest control, as a resource of comparative data for Drosophila pest species
that impact the US and global economies. This project will also increase access
to information resources through the development of a new, user-friendly web
site (http://blogs.cornell.edu/drosophila/). The revised web site will contain
species pages for all taxa currently in culture, including information on stocks
available and rearing requirements, and phylogenetic relationships. Species
pages will be illustrated with photos and line drawings of morphological
structures used for species identification.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.