* 1839392
* Meeting: Allometry, Scaling and Ontogeny of Form; A Symposium for the Annual, SICB meeting, Tampa, FL January 2019
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* H Nijhout, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2019
* USD 14,990.00

The symposium "Allometry, Scaling and Ontogeny of Form" will showcase a talented
and diverse group of researchers examining the developmental and evolutionary
causes of morphological size and shape relationships across a variety of animals
and plants. Differences in the relative sizes and shapes of body parts are among
the most distinguishing features that define species, and understanding how
these differences come about is of compelling interest to the study of
developmental and evolutionary biology. This symposium will be held in Tampa,
Florida, in January 2019, at the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative
and Comparative Biology. The symposium will provide a platform to facilitate
conversation between junior and senior career scientists and will foster novel
integrative collaborations between evolutionary biologists, developmental
biologists, and physiologists. The symposium will feature the state-of-the-art
investigation of morphological allometry, showcasing cutting-edge tools and a
diverse array of study systems. By bringing together researchers specializing in
diverse species, ranging from insects to mammals and plants, with participants
of diverse technical expertise and research emphases, the symposium and its
publications will contribute to a deeper understanding of allometry by providing
an integrative synthesis of evolutionary and developmental phenomena. The mix of
attendees will allow early career people to interact closely with more senior
ones, and, in particular, it will place graduate students in a position to
develop professional networks and connect with potential scientific mentors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, the study of allometry was mostly
descriptive, and consisted of a diversity of methods for fitting regressions to
bivariate or multivariate morphometric data. During the past decade, researchers
have been developing methods to extract biological information from allometric
data that could be used to deduce the underlying mechanisms that gave rise to
the allometry. In addition, an increasing effort has gone into understanding the
kinetics of growth and the regulatory mechanisms that control growth of the body
and its component parts. Although there is general agreement about the new goals
for the study of allometry (understanding underlying mechanisms and how those
evolve to produce different morphologies), progress is hindered by lack of
coordination among the different approaches. This stems from the fact that
different investigators arrived at the problem from different disciplines
(genetics, cell biology, evolution, development, comparative morphology,
statistics), armed with different technical and conceptual approaches. The time
is now right for a rapid and coordinated push to take understanding of the
causes and consequences of allometry to a wholly new level, by integrating this
diverse body of information about genetic, cellular, and physiological
mechanisms of growth and morphogenesis into a new research program that embraces
diversity of approach. In order to do this diverse practitioners must interact
with each other. That is the main purpose of the symposium: to forge new
functional, conceptual, and collaborative connections among established and
novice practitioners selected to represent a diversity of perspectives.
Symposium papers and a synthetic overview paper will be disseminated by
publication in the journal, Integrative and Comparative
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.