* 1839204
* RAISE/TAQS: Quantum simulation of materials and molecules using quantum computation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Garnet Chan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2022
* USD 1,006,620.00

The objective of this award is to explore how transformative advances in the
simulation of quantum dynamics can be realized on quantum computers that will be
available in the next five years. Such near-term quantum computers containing 49
to 100 qubits, though modest in size, can represent and carry out operations on
quantum states that are intractable on classical computers. However, it is not
yet clear which physically relevant problems are infeasible on classical
computers yet solvable with near-term quantum computers. The goal of this
project is to delineate the boundary between efficient classical and quantum
algorithms for quantum dynamics, for which there is a strong theoretical basis
to believe that quantum computers can outperform classical computers for certain
kinds of physical simulations and observables. The outcome of this project will
be a significant advance in computational tools needed to describe quantum
dynamics in physically relevant problems in chemistry, physics, and materials
science, and will particularly address how quantum computers may serve as a
transformational new tool to study these fundamental
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will advance state-of-the-art tensor
network classical algorithms as well as with quantum algorithms that can be
implemented on near-term quantum computers with limited gate depth and noisy
qubits. The award addresses several long-standing scientific questions. First,
the researchers will investigate whether accurate simplifications exist for
classical algorithms if only simple observables are desired and how the presence
of noise affects these classical approximations. Second, the team will work on
determining the size of a physically relevant boundary problem between quantum
and classical simulation methods using the best available classical algorithms
and high performance implementations. Third, the researchers will identify
robust quantum algorithms for noisy real-time and imaginary-time quantum
dynamics on near-term architectures. Finally, the project will apply these
results to assess what are the best near-term chemical and materials systems in
which to study quantum dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.