* 1839551
* Detailed structure of gaseous detonations informed by ultrafast laser diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* James Michael, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2023
* USD 315,000.00

Combustible gas mixtures in confined spaces may sometimes detonate, releasing
energy rapidly, and creating a supersonic reacting wave driven at thousands of
meters per second. Understanding how and why this detonation occurs is essential
for safety in mining and industrial settings where large scale gas leaks may
occur. In addition, harnessing this energy may open new avenues for energy-
efficient power generation and vehicle propulsion. This project provides laser-
based measurements to resolve the detail of the detonation wave and inform the
theory of detonation to better understand when detonation occurs and how the
energy release may be harnessed in engineering systems. Advanced ultra-fast
laser techniques are used to provide measurements of the structure of the
detonation wave and provide experimental measurements necessary to test accurate
models of gaseous combustion detonation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
characterizes experimentally the detailed non-equilibrium structure of gas-phase
detonation waves and inform the role of the coupled compression and reaction
wave structure for both steadily propagating and accelerating detonation waves
with advanced laser diagnostic tools. Detailed structural information is
determined through temperature and species time-histories using recent
developments in ultrafast laser Raman spectroscopy and time-resolved
fluorescence imaging. An accessible and repeatable high repetition-rate micro-
scale detonation tube is studied as well. Detailed information on the structure
of the wave includes the translational, rotational, and vibrational energy
partitioning as well as species profiles through the wave. Detailed mapping of
the detonation wave structure to define the local thermodynamic state as well as
the simultaneous pressure and species profiles enable the development of
accurate predictive models taking into account non-equilibrium processes which
are critical to predicting the detonation wave structure during steady
propagation, acceleration, and failure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.