* 1839694
* EAGER: Free Energy Sampling of Biomolecular Dynamics at Biological Timescales
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Wei Yang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2019
* USD 95,010.00

Wei Yang of Florida State University is supported by the Chemical Theory, Models
and Computational Methods Program in the Division of Chemistry to study
biomolecular systems at biological timescales. Protein folding commonly occurs
at timescales ranging from hundreds of microseconds to milliseconds and even
seconds. This range presents a challenge to conventional computer simulation
methods that seek to provide a quantitative description of changes on a long
timescale. Only a few calculations of up to the one millisecond timescale have
been reported to date. These calculations have been hindered by the lack of
appropriate computational methods. Professor Yang is addressing this challenge
by providing rigorous, physically-motivated mechanisms in his computational
methods. The outcome of this research may improve our ability to perform
practical sampling of biomolecular motions at biological timescales. These
timescales have relevance in biochemical and biophysical processes such as
protein folding (important in Alzheimer's disease and others) and pharmaceutical
drug design. The new algorithms and codes are being disseminated through
community-based platforms. The researchers are also holding an annual workshop
hosted at Florida State University. The computational methods may be used by the
pharmaceutical industry to discover new drug binding sites and new treatments
for human health. This project has the potential to advance the health and
welfare of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is addressing the "hidden
barrier" challenge that has been the bottleneck for free energy sampling of
biomolecular dynamics, by realizing novel developments that qualitatively extend
Professor Yang's orthogonal space sampling (OSS) framework and algorithms.
Specific aims of this project include the development of an adaptive strategy to
dynamically modify the OSS Hamiltonian and associated biasing potentials during
the course of a simulation. The research group also implements higher-order
biasing functions, where a higher-order biasing term can accelerate energy flow
to the next lower order term in a chained relationship. Both strategies are
designed to improve dynamical coupling and energy flow between the environment
(orthogonal space) and the natural collective coordinate of the system, and
synchronize global structural relaxation with the evolution of the collective
coordinate. The new methodology is being assessed through applications to long-
timescale protein conformational dynamics for biologically-important proteins
that have been experimentally characterized, including adenylate kinase,
beta-2-adrenergic receptor; HIV protease; and human
glucokinase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.