* 1839165
* RAISE-TAQS: Integrated Circuits of Single-Photon Sources from Organic Color-Centers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Charles Clark, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project will unite complementary expertise in quantum materials chemistry,
theoretical physics, and quantum information science through an integrated
collaboration involving two departments at the University of Maryland (Chemistry
and Biochemistry, Electrical and Computer Engineering) and the UMD-NIST Joint
Quantum Institute. It will also leverage ongoing collaborations with Los Alamos
National Laboratory (LANL) on photophysics and with IBM on electronics
interfacing. The project will promote the progress of science by advancing
fundamental understanding of excitons at trapping defects and realizing a
single-photon source that operates at room temperature and can be driven
electrically. In addition to advancing an emerging frontier across chemistry,
physics, quantum information science, and engineering, the work in this project
is anticipated to also have a positive societal impact. First, the work will
contribute to the development of next-generation computing and information
technology by building interfaces between electronics and single-photon optics.
Second, the project will provide exciting opportunities to engage students and
reach a broader community. Particularly, this collaborative project will provide
unique training opportunities for the next-generation workforce in quantum
information science and technology through close collaborations with IBM and
LANL, which are expected to enrich graduate training in this quickly evolving
interdisciplinary field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RAISE project will focus on
probing and controlling the radiative recombination of electrons and holes at
organic color-centers with the goal of achieving electrically driven single-
photon sources that work at room temperature. Because the color centers are
directly created in a carbon nanotube semiconductor host that can be controlled
with established semiconductor technologies, electrons and holes can be
electrically injected and directed to the color center where they recombine to
produce single photons. This hypothesis is strongly supported by preliminary
results and will be fully verified by experimental and theoretical efforts. The
work is potentially groundbreaking and technologically transformative. First,
organic color-centers provide a chemical pathway to synthesize high-quality
single-photon sources. Unlike other color centers, which typically occur as
native defects, organic color-centers can be synthetically created with
molecular precision, thus opening vast opportunities for chemical innovation.
Second, organic color-centers act as a two-level system in a semiconductor,
effectively providing a "desktop atomic physics" laboratory for studying quasi-
particles such as excitons and trions in trapping defects. Third, single-photon
sources that can be driven electrically and work at room temperature will be an
enabling element for quantum information science. Single photons are ideal
quantum bits because they exhibit nearly infinite coherence time and can
propagate over long distances. However, currently available solid-state single-
photon sources suffer from limited scalability. Organic color-centers can be
synthetically created in a semiconductor with molecular precision, opening up
the possibility to address this significant challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.