* 1839136
* RAISE: TAQS: Fast multiqubit control of high-coherence transmons for efficient quantum chemistry simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Sophia Economou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Quantum chemistry is one of the most promising near-term applications of modest-
sized quantum computers. Quantum computers are devices that exploit the
principles of quantum mechanics for computation. The goal is to solve problems
that are intractable using even the most powerful supercomputers available. This
research project aims to advance the simulation of molecules using quantum
computers. The research team is developing methods to encode large molecules on
relatively small and highly specialized quantum devices. These devices are made
from state-of-the-art superconducting circuits operated with high-precision
control schemes. A transdisciplinary approach that combines expertise in
Physics, Chemistry, Engineering, and Materials Science is being taken to
simulate molecules of increasing complexity over the course of the four-year
project. The ability to perform such simulations could have a transformative
effect on scientific, technological, and medicine applications, such as
materials and drug design. Aspects of the proposed research also directly impact
quantum computing, which has well-known repercussions for national security.
Furthermore, this project contributes to the interdisciplinary education of the
next generation of researchers in quantum information science. The research team
also engages in outreach efforts which include mentoring high school students
and establishing activities aimed at attracting Chemistry students into the
field of Quantum Information Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modest-
sized quantum computers are expected to surpass the capabilities of classical
devices in solving quantum chemistry problems with high simulation accuracy.
This project aims to solve quantum chemistry problems in quantum devices by
developing an approach in which the orbitals are encoded in a smaller number of
highly optimized qubits, using state-of-the-art superconducting circuits
controlled with fast, high-fidelity quantum gates. The multi-disciplinary
research team designs, implements, and optimizes platforms of highly connected
transmons tailored to simulate strongly correlated molecules. Key elements of
this research are: (i) Novel mappings between molecules and quantum processors
that leverage effective Hamiltonians and additional levels in the transmons
(qudits); (ii) Highly efficient state preparation protocols implemented with
ultrafast two-qubit entangling gates and multi-qubit gates beyond the standard
toolbox; (iii) High-coherence devices based on Josephson junctions, with device
connectivity guided by the effective Hamiltonians, state preparation protocols,
and quantum gate designs. Molecules of increasing complexity are simulated
through mutually informed advances in quantum chemistry algorithms, devices,
materials, and quantum control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.