* 1839739
* Student Travel Support for MVAPICH User Group (MUG) Meeting
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

Modern High-Performance Computing (HPC) systems are rapidly evolving with
respect to processor, networking, and I/O technologies. In such a rapidly
changing environment it is critical that the next-generation engineers and
scientists get exposed to the modern architectural trends of HPC systems and
learn how to use the features of these technologies to design HPC software
stacks, learn about the process of open-source software developments and its
sustainability. The annual MVAPICH User Group (MUG) meeting provides an open
forum to exchange information on the design and usage of MVAPICH2 libraries,
which are open-source, high-performance and scalable MPI libraries to take
advantage of the RDMA technology. Travel funding from this project will enable a
set of students (undergraduates and graduates) to attend the MUG meeting. Their
participation will help them to enter the next-generation HPC workforce with
increased expertise on software design, reuse, and sustainability. The project
thus serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the
progress of science.

The MVAPICH project focuses on the design of high-performance MPI and PGAS
runtimes for HPC systems. Over the years, this project has been able to
incorporate new designs to leverage novel multi-/many-core platforms like Intel
Xeon Phis, NVIDIA GPGPUs, Open POWER, and ARM architectures coupled with Remote
Direct Memory Access (RDMA) enabled commodity networking technologies like
InfiniBand, RoCE, Omni-Path, and 10/25/40/50/100GigE with iWARP. An annual
MVAPICH User Group (MUG) meeting was created five years ago to provide an open
forum to exchange information on MVAPICH2 libraries. The funding under this
grant aims to achieve increased participation of undergraduate and graduate
students working in the HPC area (systems and applications) in the annual MUG
event. The requested student travel fund will help in attracting a set of
students from a range of US institutions. The participation in an international
event such as MUG will enable the students to get a global picture of the
developments happening in the rapidly evolving HPC domain and open-source
software design. The selection committee will stress on diversity to attract
students from minority and under-represented groups.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.