* 1839632
* EAGER: Real-Time: Learning, Selection, and Control in Residential Demand Response for Grid Reliability
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* David Parkes, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 09/30/2021
* USD 283,800.00

As renewable energy sources increase and conventional generators retire, demand
response (DR) has been utilized to address the reliability issue on balancing
real-time demand and supply in power grids. However, the potential of
residential DR, which is the largest share of electricity demands, has not been
fully exploited in practice. Existing pilots reveal many issues, such as i)
small monetary rewards which play a limited role in user participation, ii) user
dissatisfaction when utility companies exploit DR resources extensively, and
iii) the lack of reliability due to the unpredictability of user behavior. In
collaboration with ThinkEco Inc, this proposal will develop novel and applicable
approaches for residential DR with provable guarantees. The method will learn DR
behavior, select the correct residential users, and automatically control
residential appliances -- all in the service of enhancing system reliability.
The research will be tested and validated on real-world residential DR programs
using ThinkEco platforms. The research results will advance real-time learning
for human-in-the-loop societal systems with applications ranging from
transportation to power grids to AI-enabled systems of the future. The team is
strongly committed to providing opportunities in STEM to K-12, women, and under-
represented minorities. Moreover, the close collaboration between academia and
industry promises a fast and effective transition of academic results to
industry practice. Specifically, by understanding users' energy consumption
behavior from both historical and real-time measurements, and adjusting user
selection and control strategies in real-time, this proposed research will
invent DR learning and control mechanisms to satisfy various power grid
operation requirements. A major theme in this proposal is to close the loop
between learning (exploration) and control (exploitation) in human-in-the-loop
societal systems: how to learn (explore) user behavior while taking good control
actions (exploitation) at the same time. There is a fundamental tradeoff between
exploration and exploitation, and the proposed research aims to uncover the
tradeoff and design real-time decision-making rules to achieve near-optimal
performance for residential DR. Different from the conventional approaches to
learning in computer science or statistics, this proposal aims to tackle the
challenge of intertwined interactions between human users and the engineered
systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.