* 1839283
* TRIPODS+X:RES: Collaborative Research:Privacy-Preserving Genomic Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Vishesh Karwa, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 10/31/2019
* USD 72,564.00

Much of modern day medicine is driven by genomic data, with the size and
complexity of genomic datasets increasing at a rapid pace. Naturally, any use of
human genomic data raises grave privacy concerns. This is because the power to
query multiple genomic databases with seemingly innocuous questions such as "Do
you contain any genome that has mutation X?" is enough to determine whether an
individual's genome is present in the databases. Such re-identification attacks
have raised a germane question: can one implement privacy protection for genomic
data so that meaningful data analysis remains possible, but attacks such as
these become impossible? The main idea of this project is to achieve this goal
by making and exploiting statistical assumptions about the data, such that if
the assumptions are false, data analysis will suffer but privacy will not. The
project will also generate curricular material for a graduate class at the
intersection of data privacy, machine learning, and genomics.

The project considers three major research questions on preserving privacy in
the context of genomic data. The notion of privacy used is differential privacy,
which provably protects against re-identification attacks, and has found large-
scale adoption in both academia and industry. The first research question is the
estimation of allele frequencies, and of linkage disequilibrium, while
preserving individual privacy. Given a set of human genomes, the objective of
allele frequency estimation is to estimate the frequency of the different
mutations across various locations in the chromosome. Linkage disequilibrium is
the deviation from independence for pairs of alleles. The second question is
haplotype sampling. Haplotypes correspond to sets of genetic variations
(typically extending over multiple genes), that tend to be inherited together.
In haplotype sampling, the objective is to generate synthetic haplotypes given a
data set of human genomes, while respecting biology behind these genetic
variations. Finally, the project aims to estimate pathogenic variants of breast
cancer genes. Variants of the BRCA 1 and 2 genes are known to be pathogenic for
breast cancer. However, a lot of the variants are still not classified as
pathogenic / non-pathogenic and are VUSs - Variants of Unknown Significance. The
objective is to develop a privacy-preserving system to gather statistics about
the VUSs from individually sequenced genes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.