* 1839537
* Workshop: Computing, Information Science, and Access to Justice
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Ellen Zegura, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 10/31/2020
* USD 93,550.00

Title: Workshop: Computing, Information Science, and Access to the Justice
System&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social science research demonstrates that low and
middle-income people face significant barriers to obtaining access to the civil
justice system because of an inability to afford a lawyer. While experiments
with new approaches to access to the legal system have garnered much attention
from courts, legal aid organizations, and the bar, there is little research
about the efficacy of these new approaches. In other fields of human activity,
computer scientists are creating new and powerful technologies to study how
people interact with private and public institutions, as well as new
communication tools, such as apps and social media, to improve these
interactions. These computing-based approaches can lead to new knowledge about
interactions with the civil justice system and new tools to advance the goal of
improving access to the justice system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will
bring together several recent scientific, administrative, and technological
trends to develop a new research agenda focused on computing and access to the
justice system. These trends include emerging research on the civil justice
system, the expanding digitization of information in legal institutions and
organizations, and the recent rise of computational social science and the
fields of human-centered computing, machine learning, and computing
connectivity. The workshop will convene researchers engaged in access to justice
scholarship, data scientists, human-centered computing experts, and
representatives of courts, legal service providers, and other organizations
embedded in the civil justice system, to generate a collaborative research
agenda focused on the workings of the legal system. The workshop will produce a
framework for research that applies computing methods to the scholarship on
access to justice, while generating actionable knowledge about how to improve
the civil justice system and strengthen its role in the United States democratic
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.