* 1839102
* RAPID: High-Fidelity 3-D Digitization of Paleocene Vertebrate Fossils from Colombia: A Unique Opportunity for Science and Education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jonathan Bloch, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 07/31/2022
* USD 74,170.00

Fossils from the Paleocene (~58 million years ago) in northeastern Colombia
provide the oldest evidence of tropical rainforest ecosystems in South America
and include many new species of side-necked turtles, crocodyliforms and the
largest known snake Titanoboa, estimated to have been 40-50 feet long. These
fossils were collected over a seven year period and are now on loan to the
Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) where they are being described and
studied. Specimens must now be returned to Colombia, requiring that research
quality reproductions be produced and stored at the FLMNH for continuing and
future study. Many of the specimens are large and fragile and the time frame for
the completion of specimen preparation, reproduction and return to Colombia is
short. The project team will develop K-12 lesson plans that incorporate 3D
printed fossils for use in the classroom. All visualizations and associated data
will be available through Morphosource and freely available to researchers,
educators and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With recent advances in 3D
scanning and printing technology, it is now possible to more efficiently create
both virtual and physical models that are far more useful than traditional
molding and casting techniques. This project will create high-fidelity 3D scans
of all of the Colombian fossils on loan to the FLMNH. These scans will
facilitate quick completion of scientific studies focused on cranial osteology,
body size, life history, systematics, and ecology of Titanoboa. Additionally,
making these data freely available on-line through Morphosource will have a
lasting impact on educational communities. For example, K-12 lesson plans will
be further developed to extrapolate the size of Titanoboa from measurements of
3D printed vertebrae and infer past climatic conditions based on estimated body
length. Free access to these data will provide the basic resources for countless
important future studies that could catalyze rapid and innovative advances in
the field of vertebrate paleobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.