* 1839307
* TRIPODS+X:VIS: Data Science Pathways for a Vibrant TRIPODS Commons at Scale
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Faryad Darabi Sahneh, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,859.00

Scientists in diverse domains from astronomy and atmospheric sciences, to earth
sciences and genomics are generating massive datasets at an unprecedented scale.
Rapidly evolving computational and data management technologies for harnessing
value from these datasets are providing the foundation for a vibrant ecosystem
by establishing robust collaborations and building communities of domain
scientists, data scientists, and engineers. These collaborations are central for
transforming these datasets into information and knowledge. Barriers of both a
technical and non-technical nature can hamper productivity for such
transdisciplinary teams and collaborations, especially when highly productive
teams with diverse expertise and computational backgrounds work on common
problems. These barriers are often associated with frictions at the boundaries
of computational technologies and human communications, especially when working
at scale. Overcoming such challenges is critical for ensuring successful
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring together participants
representing thought-leaders and practitioners in data-driven open science
projects, TRIPODS+X project teams, and participants from the astronomy and earth
sciences communities through two Innovation Labs. The first Lab will introduce
participants to the national NSF-funded cyberinfrastructure and commercial cloud
infrastructure, providing the opportunity to evaluate and learn from exemplary
projects that have utilized these platforms for their collaborations, allowing
participants to explore how their communities can extend these platforms for
their data science projects in a reliable, scalable and reproducible manner. The
second Innovation Lab will establish an early prototype TRIPODS Commons, a
cohesive platform for showcasing, experimenting with, and sharing research
products (code, data, methods), eventually becoming an avenue that provides
visibility to the vibrancy and productivity of projects occurring at all NSF
TRIPODS Institutes. Through these Innovation labs, the project will provide
pragmatic approaches and pathways for establishing successful transdisciplinary
collaborations that enable teams to work across domains and institutional
boundaries, and at scales essential for addressing the research, education, and
advanced cyberinfrastructure needs as outlined in NSF's 10 Big
Ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.