* 1839509
* Testing the Validity of Inner-magnetosphere Shielding by the Region-2 Field-aligned Currents
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Joseph Baker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 346,976.00

The outer layers of the Earth's atmosphere interact with the solar wind.
Scientists still do not understand the process of how energy is transported from
the solar wind throughout each of these layers of low-density, plasmas. This
work investigates how these energy transport processes occur from the
magnetosphere into the ionosphere. The project is relevant to the National Space
Weather Action Plan since it will assist in identifying typical limits of
ionospheric disturbances generated from extremes of observed space weather
effects. These disturbances affect the orbits of satellites that can compromise
tracking and operations of our US commercial and defense assets. An early career
scientist and undergraduate researchers will be
supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The shielding electric field generated due to
charge separation associated with the Region-2 Field Aligned Currents (FAC)
plays an important role in determining the dynamics of the coupled inner
magnetosphere-ionosphere system. However, the paucity of global-scale
measurements of field-aligned currents and electric fields in the sub-auroral
region has restricted our understanding of the dynamics of inner magnetosphere
shielding and several questions remain unanswered. Specifically, (1) To what
extent is the paradigm of shielding valid?, (2) What are the timescales
associated with shielding?, and (3) How do season and local time influence
shielding? The overarching goal of this work is to answer these questions by
using measurements from the NSF-funded Active Magnetosphere and Planetary
Electrodynamics Response Experiment (AMPERE) dataset to determine the imbalance
between the Region-1 and Region-2 FACs as a proxy for the intensity of
shielding. Specific tasks will focus on combining AMPERE FACs with electric
fields from the mid-latitude Super Dual Auroral Radar Network (SuperDARN) to
determine the extent to which the paradigm of inner magnetosphere shielding by
Region-2 FACs is valid and to determine the modulating influence of ionospheric
conductivity and MLT on the magnitude, extent and timescales of over-/under-
shielding electric fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.