* 1839103
* Stability of Partially Wetting Droplet in Wind
* ENG,CBET
* 09/27/2017,08/31/2020
* Sungyon Lee, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2020
* USD 235,610.00

PI: Lee, Sungyon&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1605947&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed research is to investigate the behavior of drops that
partially wet surfaces under the effect of a cross-wind. The surfaces are
imperfect, more like realistic surfaces. Every day applications include the
motion of drops on windows, the de-icing of airplanes, chemical process
equipment (e.g., in condensers), ink jet printing, and the environment (where
rain drops or spray drops move on leave surfaces).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water
droplets that adhere to surfaces then run under wind or gravity are ubiquitous
in nature. Prediction of droplet depinning thresholds is a problem of
fundamental importance in fluid mechanics and is relevant to many other
engineering problems. While theories exist in the low Reynolds number regime,
the problem becomes more complex in the high-Reynolds-number regime of
engineering interest due to the unsteadiness associated with boundary layer
separation. The overall objective of this proposal is to gain fundamental
understanding of the stability limits of a partially-wetting droplet in the high
Reynolds number regime, through reduced modeling and state-of-art experimental
measurement techniques. The proposed work focuses on the development of a
theoretical model that captures the droplet dynamics in the presence of the
separated boundary layer flow. The newly developed droplet model incorporates
the effects of the external wind in a time-averaged sense to circumvent the
difficulties arising from inherent unsteadiness of the flow and droplet surface
oscillations. Preliminary results show that the model effectively matches the
stability limits of a single droplet on a rough surface in terms of macroscopic
properties and is extended to include the effect of solid protuberance. In
parallel, additional development of the measurement instrument will be conducted
to visualize the unsteady air flow around the droplet and to improve the
performance for contact-angle measurements necessary for theoretical validation.
The broader impacts of the project include outreach activities for high school
science programs in Texas. The droplet problem is an attractive one for science
outreach because droplet depinning is simultaneously familiar yet difficult to
understand. This project will use droplets as an example that illustrates how
abstractions introduced in high school math and physics can explain phenomena
seen in the physical world. The PIs will invite high-school science teachers to
work in the lab and to develop curriculum based on the experiment. These
teachers will deliver this content to their classes and report on their
experiences at a teachers' summit hosted annually at Texas A&amp;M.