* 1839252
* TRIPODS+X:RES:Collaborative Research: Improving Templated  Microstructures via Topological Data Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Tamal Dey, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The importance of microstructures in Material Science is well recognized. Their
local and global geometry influence the functional behaviors of the materials
being designed in a major way. Therefore, methodologies for their controlled
manufacturing have always been a focus of intense research. Now, with continuing
advancements in characterization of materials at higher resolution and faster
time scales there is intensified need for data driven digital simulation and
analysis of structure. This project focuses on leveraging the new area of
topological data analysis in advancing the design of templated microstructure
designs through a collaboration between material and data scientists at Rutgers
University and data scientists at the TRIPODS center at Ohio State University.
Templating is the ideal topical area for this collaboration because it so
definitively directs shape development during processing and can benefit greatly
from deeper topological and statistical analytics. The researchers will develop
a topology-related synergy between Materials Science, Computer Science, and
Statistics that will enable improved processing of materials using templating.
The geometrical and topological advances developed in this program are expected
to also be extensible to other areas of materials processing, each of which has
unique shape novelty, alignment effects, or texture development. The project's
work could also benefit a range of similar application fields such as medical
image analysis, computational neuroanatomy, geographic information systems, and
engineering designs. Indeed, collaborations to apply geometric/topological
methods to some of these other application fields are already underway at the
TRIPODS center at OSU and could benefit from close collaboration with this
Materials-focused program as it develops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research involves concepts from mathematical areas of algebraic topology and
geometry, applied statistics, and computational areas of algorithms and graph
theory. These will be applied to materials microstructures created by templating
to help understand topological interconnections, shapes, and dynamics, which
would be of benefit to functional improvements in device operation. Research in
topological data analysis has brought forth the need to investigate topological
concepts in the presence of finite data, approximations, and noise, constraints
that are always encountered in real materials characterization. Geometric and
topological computation with intentionally structured materials will yield big
and diverse data that can influence and improve future material and device
fabrication efforts. These new data methods will be of interest to the
topological and statistical communities as well as open up new avenues for
predicting and intentionally creating structures with enhanced
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.