* 1839340
* TRIPODS+X: VIS: Creating an Annual Data Science Forum
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jeannette Wing, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

This project aims to create an annual week-long Data Science Forum (DSF), co-
locating several events intended to advance knowledge, create networks of
researchers, and train students and faculty. The focus of this forum will be on
developing the next generation of AI technologies and researchers with the
underlying hypothesis that applications across the sciences and engineering
disciplines will be the context of the next major advances in data-driven
approaches. DSF brings together the Second Symposium on Machine Learning in
Science and Engineering (MLSE), a Women in Data Science Workshop (WDSW), and a
Foundations of Data Driven Discovery workshop (FDDD). A forum including multiple
events will bring more women to MLSE and FDDD, while juxtaposing MLSE with FDDD
will encourage cross-fertilization among the domain scientists and engineers and
the core TRIPODS (Transdisciplinary Research in Principles of Data Science)
community. The 2nd MLSE will conclude with a Visioning Working Group where a
select group of researchers will produce a white paper on the future of machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Data Science Forum will help catalyze machine
learning methodologies and collaborations across the sciences and engineering,
bringing together a diverse set of STEM fields applying machine learning to
fundamental and applied problems. Presentations will focus on adapting existing
machine learning methods to current research areas, developing new machine
learning algorithms specific to science and engineering, and identifying new
frontiers of research that may only be pursued using a data-driven approach.
Disseminating machine learning methods across science and engineering could have
lasting implications for US research. The forum will supplement the technical
research program with short courses taught by experts in machine learning on a
variety of cutting-edge tools that are critical in advancing these fields. Each
track will have a theme centered in a traditional domain, but each is aiming to
itself be interdisciplinary. Running these tracks in parallel will help foster
tight knit communities of researchers in each of the applied science or
engineering tracks, as well as the TRIPODS community, while fostering cross-
fertilization of ideas across fields through joint events and co-
location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.