* 1839130
* I-Corps:  Commercial Viability Discovery of the Elastic Filament Velocimeetry
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Marcus Hultmark, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
novel, unique flow sensor implemented with the Elastic Filament Velocimetry
(EFV) technology, to a number of markets and industries that will benefit from
its ultra-low cost, ultra-low power consumption, and high precision flow
measurements. For example, implementing a network of such inexpensive sensors
can provide superior flow monitoring in HVAC ducts, significantly reduces
controller costs and allows for improved system control to deliver better
comfort to people while increase overall system efficiency. With the EFV sensors
embedded in consumer appliances and fire sprinkler systems, early detection of
water leakage can be realized, saving valuable clean water resources and reduce
potential water damages to building management and homeowners alike. Utilization
of the EFV technology in medical injections (such as intravenous injections)
will fill the gap for precision real-time monitoring, and at the same time,
reduce injection errors, increase patient safety, saving healthcare cost, and
improve patient comfort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to
discover the commercial viability of the Elastic Filament Velocimetry, a
nanoscale, MEMS based, strain based technology, for flow velocity / flow rate
measurements. Mathematical models suggested that a high aspect-ratio,
electrically conductive freestanding structure can be sensitive to extremely
small fluid forcing when its size is reduced. Utilizing semiconductor
manufacturing techniques, a miniature metallic ribbon was fabricated and tested
in fluid flow, and the result matches theoretical prediction. This enables a new
concept of flow sensing and measurement using a strain based device. This
I-Corps project allows the opportunity to explore, learn, and engage in
entrepreneurship discovery activities in a real-world setting. Incorporating the
progressive learning techniques used by the program, lessons can be learned at a
much faster pace, inspiring entrepreneurship and promoting
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.