* 1839185
* Collaborative Research: Navigating the New Arctic (NNA): Soundscape ecology to assess environmental and anthropogenic controls on wildlife behavior
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Michael Mandel, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 535,581.00

Across North America, Arctic and boreal regions have been warming at a rate two
to three times higher than the global average. At the same time, human
development continues to encroach and intensify, primarily due to demand for
natural resources, such as oil and gas. The vast and remote nature of Arctic-
boreal regions typify their landscapes, environment, wildlife, and people, but
their size and isolation also make it difficult to study how their ecosystems
are changing. To overcome these challenges, autonomous recording networks can be
used to characterize "soundscapes" - a collection of sounds that emanate from
landscapes. Unlike traditional observing methods that are expensive, labor-
intensive, and logistically challenging, sound-recording networks provide a
cost-effective means to both monitor and understand the response of wildlife to
environmental and anthropogenic changes across vast areas. One particular
challenge with this sound-measurement approach is extracting useful ecological
information from the large volumes of soundscape data that are collected. This
project will develop the techniques necessary to overcome this
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers' goal is to understand the
influence of both environmental dynamics and increasing anthropogenic activity
on the behavior and phenology of migratory caribou (Rangifer tarandus),
waterfowl, and songbird communities in Arctic-boreal Alaska and northwestern
Canada. Through co-production of knowledge with local land managers and
indigenous communities, the research team will combine field observations,
modeling, and analyses that include: (1) soundscape measurements, (2) camera-
trap observations, (3) automated soundscape analyses, (4) analyses of camera-
trap caribou observations, (5) high-resolution modeling of environmental
variables, (6) statistical analyses including wildlife occupancy, diversity, and
phenology modeling, and (7) a human-computation game to collect descriptions of
our acoustic recordings that allows for the participation of local and
Indigenous players of the game. The project will contribute understanding of how
both avian communities and caribou populations are responding to spatiotemporal
variations in environmental conditions and increasing development of the oil and
gas industry in a region where such comprehensive, large-scale research has
rarely been possible. Further, at the request of various Tribal organizations,
our research will provide insight into how industrial noise influences
traditional practices. In addition, our research will provide baseline data on
all natural sounds, including data on bird and caribou activity, in the Arctic
National Wildlife Refuge prior to oil and gas development. These datasets will
be available to inform Indigenous practices and natural resource management, as
well as facilitate future Environmental Assessments required by land managers
and oil and gas developers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.