* 1839072
* I-Corps: Embedded Cooling
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Yogendra Joshi, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project's technology has
its basis in a range of microfluidic cooling products. The potential of the
technology is its positive impacts on several computing technologies where it
may expand the limits of processing frequency and therefore system
speed/performance. Commercial applications that can benefit from the project's
technology are broad, such as those requiring the acceleration of high-
performance computing in data centers, graphics computing in the fields of
artificial intelligence, self-driving transportation, videogame hardware,
digital currency (blockchain) technology, augmented and virtual reality, among
others. The I-Corps customer discovery activities will also provide useful
insights into other potential markets for this project's cooling technology,
confirming if there is a need/interest by other industries, such as lasers,
concentrated solar photovoltaics, and thermoelectric products, among many
potential markets that use liquid-cooling systems at some level.

This I-Corps project is motivated by a technology that consists of an embedded
microfluidic cooling layer that offers significantly enhanced heat removal
capabilities when compared with current thermal hardware -- this is as a result
of eliminating the thermal interfaces and heat spreaders commonly used in
microelectronic devices. The heat removal is directly managed by bonding the
microfluidic cooling layer to the silicon chip surface through a metallic joint.
The resulting micro-cooling layer replaces the need for the heat spreader used
in current technologies since the microstructures embedded in the cooling layer
have the appropriate feature sizes and layout with an appropriate flow
distribution through engineered manifolds for effective heat dissipation. This
technology provides the capability of unlocking the clock frequency on micro-
processing units by allowing the input of higher voltages to the computing
cores, while also keeping the device temperature below design limits. Laboratory
experimentation with these microfluidic cooling layers under a wide variety of
operating conditions and refrigerants has demonstrated capabilities for removing
heat fluxes of up to 500 W/cm2; a 5x increase when compared with the current
maximum heat fluxes of commercial, high-end central processing units (CPUs) and
graphics processing units (GPUs).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.