* 1839049
* I-Corps: Hybrid Halos for Biological Markers, Probes and Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Ming Tang, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broad impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
introduction of a novel class of nanoparticle-molecular hybrid materials with a
wide range of applications in the life sciences. These hybrid probes will enable
the non-invasive delivery of ultra-violet and visible photons deep in tissue
where the light could not otherwise penetrate, to mark targets for therapy or
diagnostics. For example, this light may be used to trigger the uncaging of
tumor drugs at local points of interest, excite fluorophores for imaging,
initiate neural firing or cellular signal transduction cascades in genetically
engineered species, etc. The application of our materials will enable more
advanced experiments, leading to better understanding of complex systems such as
the brain, which will ultimately help treat and prevent brain disorders. In
addition, since these particles perform photon upconversion at very low
excitation densities, much cheaper non-coherent light sources such as red LEDs
can replace the high power near-infrared lasers currently required today. This
is ideal for point of care testing for personalized medicine and the battlefield
where instant diagnosis and portability are essential.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
I-Corps project is based on a molecular-nanocrystal hybrid that upconverts light
via a multi-step energy transfer process. For the life science applications
mentioned above, our label exhibits much higher sensitivity than existing
commercial technologies by avoiding excitation at the optical window where
biological species absorb, scatter, and autofluoresce. Different components of
the system can be tuned to selectively produce high energy ultra-violet and
visible photons from incoming low energy near-infrared photons. Synthetic
control of both the nanocrystal light absorber and molecular transmitter and
emitter have resulted in a high photon upconversion quantum yield. Fundamental
understanding and further development of this technology involves
interdisciplinary research in the fields of photophysics, material science, and
synthetic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.