* 1839387
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Real-Time: Hybrid Control Architectures Combining Physical Models and Real-time Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Luis Duffaut Espinosa, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Landers
* 08/31/2020
* USD 149,879.00

Machine learning has become a focus of many researchers as effective solution to
many complex engineering problems. At its core machine learning are the methods
that provide computers ways to learn using available data. Artificial neural
networks (ANN) have traditionally been the backbone of machine learning methods.
While these learning systems certainly have their strengths, they also have
limitations in the context of control engineering. For example, physics based
models often provide key physical insight into the design of control systems for
power grids, autonomous vehicles, and robots. So completely discarding such
models in the context of learning based control systems is often
counterproductive. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
project aims to develop a new, foundational and innovative control architecture
which combines the advantages of model based design methods with those of real-
time learning. The architecture is based on recent advances in the mathematical
modeling of dynamical systems. While well suited for a variety of applications
in engineering, biology, and ecology, the target application is the safe and
reliable control of smart grids. The latter are clearly of vital importance for
future economic development and the security of the nation's constantly evolving
energy distribution system. Project outcomes will provide practical solutions to
complex energy management problems involving uncertain power demands, energy
limits, and use of renewable resources while at the same time maintaining grid
stability and reliability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hybrid control architecture
involves a given system and an assumed physical model both driven by the same
control input. The measured difference between their outputs defines an error
system. The key idea is to use a generic input-output representation known as a
Chen-Fliess functional series to describe this unknown error system. The series
coefficients are estimated in real-time via a minimum mean-square error
estimator. Effectively, the conventional artificial neuron is replaced here by
this new type of learning unit to approximate the error system. The control
problem is solved via predictive control using the assumed model and the learned
error system. The enabling technology is recent advances in the numerical
approximation of Chen-Fliess series which make it possible to implement the
scheme in discrete-time. The specific objectives of the project are to (1)
advance the theoretical foundations that underpin real-time learning for control
applications, including the cascading of these new learning units for deep
learning (2) optimize and adapt the novel theoretical results for real-time
control of smart grids to provide a priori performance guarantees. The main
problem here lies in the uncertainty coming from the over-simplified/poorly
modeled dynamics of the grid in addition to the action of renewable
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.