* 1839726
* WORKSHOP: The ASSETS 2018 Doctoral Consortium
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Shiri Azenkot, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2019
* USD 27,973.00

This grant supports 10 promising graduate students from the United States for a
Doctoral Consortium (workshop), along with about 5 distinguished research
faculty. The event will take place on Sunday, October 21, immediately preceding
and in conjunction with the 20th International ACM SIGACCESS Conference on
Computers and Accessibility (ASSETS 2018), to be held October 22-24, 2018, in
Galway, Ireland. The ASSETS conferences are the premier forum for presenting
innovative research on the design and use of both mainstream and specialized
assistive technologies in support of the needs associated with speech, motor,
hearing, and vision impairments, cognitive limitations, emotional and learning
disabilities, and aging, as well as the professionals who work with these
populations. Researchers and developers from around the world, in both academia
and industry, will meet at ASSETS 2018 to exchange ideas and present their
latest work. More information about the conference may be found online at
http://assets18.sigaccess.org/. A key component of building any community is
through its youth. The Doctoral Consortium will help expand the participation of
young researchers pursuing graduate studies in this field, by providing them an
opportunity to gain wider exposure in the community for their innovative work
and to obtain feedback and guidance from senior members of the research
community. It will further help foster a sense of community among these young
researchers, by allowing them to create a social network both among themselves
and with senior researchers at a critical stage in their professional
development. Because the students and faculty constitute a diverse group across
a variety of dimensions, including nationality/cultural and scientific
discipline, the students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the
field. The organizers will take steps to promote participation from institutions
with relatively large numbers of students from under-represented groups. To
further increase diversity, the organizers will aim for equal participation of
females and males in the consortium, and will not invite more than 1 or 2
students from the same educational institution; if two students from the same
educational institution are selected, the organizers will ensure that at least
one of them is from an underrepresented minority in STEM. In an effort to
further integrate the Doctoral Consortium participants into the conference
itself, a session has been set aside in the technical program to allow all
Doctoral Consortium participants to present their research to the full
conference.

The ASSETS 2018 Doctoral Consortium will be a research-focused meeting of an
international group of selected Ph.D. candidates and an international panel of
distinguished research faculty (the latter yet to be named). It will provide an
opportunity for graduate students from diverse backgrounds (computing,
engineering, psychology, architecture, etc.) to come together and explore their
research interests in an interdisciplinary workshop, under the guidance of the
PI and the panel of experts, so that they can appreciate the broader spectrum of
research and development approaches to assistive technologies and universal
usability, and also experience the community in which they can pursue their
endeavors. Student participants will make formal presentations of their work
during the consortium, and will receive constructive feedback from the faculty
panel. The feedback is designed to help students understand and articulate how
their work is positioned relative to related research, whether their topics are
adequately focused for thesis research projects, whether their methods are
correctly chosen and applied, and whether their results are appropriately
analyzed and presented. Thus, the consortium will help shape ongoing and future
research projects aimed at assistive technologies and universal access, will
promote scholarship and networking among new researchers in these
interdisciplinary fields, and will also expose the young researchers to a larger
community. In addition, the faculty will give a presentation on job
opportunities for researchers in both academia and industry, to better inform
the students when considering career options. An evaluation of the consortium
will be conducted and the results made available to the organizers of future
such events.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.