* 1839322
* Autocorrelation of Seismic Ambient Noise and P-wave Coda for Crustal Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Robert Nowack, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2022
* USD 220,320.00

This project develops new methods for exploring how to use noise in seismic
measurements to better image the Earth's crustal structure. These new methods
are important since many areas of the world are aseismic and controlled man-made
seismic sources are expensive. So new ways to use existing nonseismic signals,
called ambient noise, to image the Earth can be used in many places, such as the
Midwest. Twelve portable seismic stations will be deployed centered on the
Earthscope seismic station SFIN over a several month period. These methods will
then be applied to selected seismic stations in the upper part of the central
Midwest with similar ambient noise characteristics to test the consistency of
the approach and image a stretch of the crust from Iowa to Ohio. They will
compare this work by doing the same for a the recent "Large-N" IRIS Community
Wavefield Demonstration Experiment in Oklahoma. Since the Oklahoma array is
comparable in aperture to the small-scale array at SFIN, the relative
performance of the two arrays will be compared. The broader impacts of the
proposal come from improvements in the methodology and implementation of ambient
seismic noise technologies and extending these to seismic body-wave imaging.
Utilizing the deployed seismic stations, K-12 activities and displays will be
developed to engage younger students with recent new developments in seismology,
including the recording of ambient seismic noise and P-wave coda from
earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Seismic interferometry for body-waves is
studied for crustal reflectivity using autocorrelations of ambient noise and the
P-wave coda from earthquakes. The autocorrelation stacks of ambient noise
results in virtually coincident sources and receivers and effective zero-offset
reflection seismic traces. The influence of the ambient noise distribution on
the autocorrelation stacks can be approximately estimated using polarization
analysis on single three-component stations, but a more comprehensive analysis
can be done using beamforming from a small seismic array. Twelve portable
seismic stations will be deployed over a 10-km spiral-arm array configuration
centered on the Earthscope seismic station SFIN over a several month period, and
beamforming will be performed to estimate the regional illumination distribution
of the autocorrelated ambient noise signals to obtain illumination corrections.
These will then be applied to selected seismic stations in the upper part of the
central Midwest with similar ambient noise characteristics to test the
consistency of the approach and to obtain an effective zero-offset linear
section of crustal reflectivity. Several autocorrelation techniques are
investigated to provide higher resolution estimates of crustal reflectivity,
including tuned temporal and frequency normalizations, phase correlations, and
time-frequency phase weighted stacks of the correlated ambient noise. Correlated
P-wave coda of regional and teleseismic earthquakes are also investigated, where
stacking over events are used to reduce the effects of source side scattering to
better image the receiver side crust. The researchers will compare this array
with the Large-N IRIS community wavefield experiment in Oklahoma for for the
estimation of virtual crustal reflectivity from autocorrelated ambient
noise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.