* 1839175
* RAISE-TAQS: Photon-Number-Resolving Integrated Avalanche Photodiodes for Scalable Quantum Computing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Seth Bank, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,012,000.00

Non-technical description: Quantum computing and quantum communications are
emerging fields that harness fundamentally quantum mechanical properties to
process and exchange information. They offer transformative potential for
applications ranging from solving important classes of problems faster than
traditional digital computers, such as integer factorization and simulating
complex quantum mechanical systems, to creating secure communications channels
that cannot be hacked. Any quantum computer or quantum communication network
that uses light must have the ability to count the number of photons in order to
correct computation or transmission errors; specifically, a receiver is required
to detect and transduce the photons into an electrical signal that is
proportional to the exact number of photons that reaches the receiver at any
given moment. This project aims to demonstrate such a receiver and harnesses
this capability to perform measurements that are of both fundamental scientific
and practical importance for future quantum computing and quantum communications
systems. This research resonates strongly across several disciplines, ranging
from fundamental materials science, to basic physics, through engineering. It
provides unique interdisciplinary research opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate, and high school students. A key educational goal is to prepare
students for the cross-disciplinary challenges they may face as quantum
technology intersects engineering via a broadly accessible, self-contained
course in "quantum engineering" simultaneously at UT-Austin and UVA, with all
course materials and recorded lectures freely available to the general public.
The project also integrates research with outreach activities, such as inspiring
pre-K-12 students through classroom visits, public lectures, and collaborative
exhibits/tours with local museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
Quantum photonics is a key quantum technology. A critical element for quantum
photonics is the photon-number-resolving photodetector, which produces a signal
proportional to the number of incident photons, enabling full access to the
corpuscular nature of quantum electromagnetic fields. The latter is key to high
photon flux applications in quantum information, such as quantum repeaters in
quantum communication, entanglement distillation, quantum error correction, and
fault tolerant universal quantum computing over continuous variables using
squeezed states. A number of device technologies offer photon number resolution,
but typically operate at reduced temperatures, often requiring a large cooling
apparatus and large arrays for modest number resolution. This project
investigates a novel approach to this challenge, where a single photon avalanche
photodiode (SPAD) is decomposed into several waveguide-coupled "nanoSPAD"
segments, each detecting at most one photon via individual readout. The goal is
photon number resolution at room temperature, with the potential to cover
wavelengths from the visible to mid-infrared at high bandwidths - a combination
that is essential, yet inaccessible with any existing technology. With design
grounded in a fully quantum model and enabled by a new class of low noise III-V
avalanche photodetector materials, this structure offers the potential for
photon number resolution with high positive-operator-valued measurement purity.
The nanoSPADs are integrated monolithically onto InP, the platform of modern
long-haul telecommunications. The litmus test of the capabilities of the photon
number resolving nanoSPAD is the demonstration of quantum state tomography and
Fock-state filtering in real time. The quantum tomography protocol is, in turn,
used to characterize the photon number resolution. Beyond enabling these quantum
tomography experiments, it is expected that the nanoSPAD will accelerate new
scientific breakthroughs in quantum photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.