* 1839810
* RoL:FELS: A Summit on New Interdisciplinary Research Directions on the Rules of Life
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Laura Kubatko, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,741.00

Biological systems are extremely diverse and complex, possessing enormous
variation. Understanding the mechanisms by which biological systems work is one
of the fundamental scientific challenges of our time. Rules of Life offer
principles - which are broadly applicable across bacteria, plants, and animals -
that can be the basis for organized research programs that address the challenge
of understanding nature. Unlike a traditional workshop or conference, the format
of the Summit is designed to build interdisciplinary connections through
provocative talks, panel discussions, and focused break-out sessions.
Additionally, talks on emerging technologies and methods will broaden the
perspectives of participants who may not have prior exposure to these tools. The
two follow-up workshops will encourage participants to plan how connections made
at the Summit can be long lasting and lead to concrete
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Mathematical Biosciences Institute (MBI) will
organize a Summit on the Rules of Life in June 2019. This project will support
the development of a networked community of researchers seeking to better
understand the fundamental mechanisms that govern biological systems. This
community will be convened at a Summit on the Rules of Life held at the
Mathematical Biosciences Institute in Columbus, OH. Prominent biological
scientists from across the world, together with newer researchers and
individuals with expertise in emerging technologies and mathematical/statistical
methodologies, will jointly explore the common principles that govern biological
systems. Video of the plenary lectures, panel discussions, and emerging
technologies/methods talks delivered at the Summit will be live streamed and
archived on the MBI website for later viewing. The Summit will lead to two
shorter follow-up workshops on emerging themes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.