* 1839895
* UTTC's Intertribal Food, Energy, and Water Research and Resource Center
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Jeremy Guinn, United Tribes Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,500,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
intellectual leadership of TCUP institutions so that they can address scientific
or engineering needs or interests, specifically for their tribes or communities,
or broadly for the Nation. The TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers)
strand allows TCUP institutions to capitalize on their investments in STEM
instructional and research capacity. This project aligns directly with that
goal, and moreover will have a direct impact on tribal communities in the areas
of food, energy, and water resources. UTTC is inherently intertribal and is
uniquely positioned to serve many tribes through the development of an
Intertribal Research and Resource Center (IRRC). Moreover, given that these
factors are amplified in the Northern Plains where natural and anthropogenic
changes to the environmental, extreme and variable weather fluctuations, and
stressed food systems are becoming more common and apparent, this work could
serve as an international model for indigenous or rural communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IRRC will expand UTTC's record of serving the Northern
Plains as a research and training center and will operate on the four core
activities of Research, Outreach, Training, and Education (ROTE). To meet the
needs of our communities, the following goals will be met: 1) establish the
Intertribal Research &amp; Resource Center at UTTC, (2) develop the
institutional and regional capacity for applying science to address community
needs, and (3) enhance tribal natural resource and agricultural sustainability.
The IRRC will be immediately transformative for the institution, allowing
research faculty positions for the first time, a sustainable STEM research and
outreach model, and a coordinated interdisciplinary approach to research,
outreach, teaching, and education. The IRRC will conduct research and provide
training and assistance to tribes in planning and managing multiple resources. A
cohesive structure, strong institutional commitment, focus on communication and
community resilience, and tiered oversight, including a full time center
director will allow the IRRC to operate efficiently and effectively. A focus on
sustainability will enhance research productivity, collaborations, strategic
planning, and partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.