* 1839704
* EAGER: Real-Time: Ultrasonic Reconstruction and Localization with Deep Helmholtz Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Joel Harley, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 09/30/2022
* USD 273,118.00

Ultrasonic Reconstruction and Localization with Deep Helmholtz
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies physics-informed neural
networks to characterize and monitor materials and engineered systems with
ultrasound. Ultrasound is studied because it is a wireless, high resolution,
medically safe, and inherently secure technology that is driving innovations in
wearables, medical implants, secure / encrypted communication systems, and
imaging. The project's neural network algorithms can characterize materials and
engineered systems from the micro-level (e.g., micro-electrical-mechanical
systems) to the macro-level (e.g., pipelines, airplanes, or rail lines). The
neural networks characterize the materials by learning the general behavior of
ultrasound from simulated data, physical constraints, and measured data. That
learned behavior is then compared with the true measured behavior. To achieve
our goal, three significant challenges of applying neural networks (and machine
learning generally) to many engineered systems are studied: (1) experimental
training data is often scarce or unavailable, (2) data diversity and variability
is typically high, and (3) purely data-driven approaches offer few engineering
assurances. Data scarcity is addressed by training neural networks with
simulations rather than experimental data. Data diversity and variability is
addressed by using transfer learning theory to transfer generalized knowledge
from the simulation data into the analysis of the experimental data. Engineering
assurances are improved by incorporating physics-based constraints into the
neural networks. The resulting neural networks are referred to as Helmholtz
networks, named for the time-independent wave equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the project is to establish the foundation for Helmholtz networks,
which are deep, generative, physics-informed neural networks that reconstruct
ultrasonic wave propagation and locate ultrasonic sources. The Helmholtz
networks are based on the fact that each frequency of a wave can be represented
as the sum of a sparse number of spatial modes. The modes are constrained by the
Helmholtz equation and this physical constraint ensures that the machine
learning algorithm is trustworthy for system-critical engineered systems (e.g.,
health monitoring of an aircraft). Such physics-informed machine learning is an
important (albeit not widely studied) topic for integrating advanced computation
tools into real-time engineered systems. &lt;br/&gt;The research thrusts of this
proposal are to initiate and explore the foundations for three new types of
neural networks: (1) generative Helmholtz networks to learn modal
representations of waves and reconstruct wavefields, (2) localization networks
to locate ultrasonic sources under uncertainties, and (3) localization Helmholtz
networks to locate sources from learned modal representations. Thrust 1 explores
the creation of generative models (i.e., generative Helmholtz networks) that
learn the spatial modal characteristics of a medium from simulations. These
generative models then reconstruct wavefields from undersampled test data.
Thrust 2 studies localization networks to locate ultrasonic sources under
simulated uncertainties, such as velocity, delay, and/or amplitude uncertainty.
Thrust 3 investigates the use of transfer learning to combine Thrust 1 and
Thrust 2 and use the learned modes to locate sources in geometrically complex
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.