* 1839675
* EAGER:Real-Time:Automated Control-Assisted Data-Based Model Development for Real-Time Feedback Control
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Helen Durand, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 279,500.00

The future economic competitiveness of the US process industries requires the
successful implementation of next-generation controllers to optimize process
economic performance in real time and account for both safety considerations and
traditionally-neglected dynamics that can significantly impact control loop
performance. The proposed exploratory research aims to develop a novel,
automated, control-assisted methodology for building physics-based models from
on-line data and formulating next-generation controllers for real-time
applications. If successful, the proposed research can potentially have an
impact in a broad spectrum of chemical process
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Techniques for developing models from data are
currently limited by the state measurement information provided to a model
identification procedure and by the structure assumed to represent the system
dynamics. Therefore, the ability to derive physics-based models for control
design from process state/input measurements requires methods for obtaining
appropriate data from which the correct model structures can be deduced. The
proposed research will : a) develop a control-assisted framework for obtaining
on-line operating data from a process that is conducive to developing a physics-
based model; b) develop methods for relating mathematical function structure to
operating data trends; c) explore potential analogy or machine learning-based
computation time reduction techniques for partial differential equation models
in optimization-based control; d) develop controller update techniques which
facilitate automated development of functions or parameters used in the control
law design; and e) demonstrate the developed methods utilizing chemical process
simulations of high fidelity process models to investigate the potential of the
developed techniques to promote automated physics-based model development for
use in developing model-based controllers for real-time applications.
Interactions with industry are proposed to validate the proposed methodologies
and broad dissemination of results via the web is planned. In addition to
training graduate and undergraduate students in research, curriculum development
and outreach activities to middle- and high-school students as well as the
general public are proposed focused on engaging a broader audience and
encouraging underrepresented minorities to pursue careers in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.