* 1839775
* EAGER:  Coral Chimeras - A Novel Perspective on Coral Reef Ecology and Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Tamar Goulet, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 319,772.00

Corals constitute the core of coral reef ecosystems. The majority of corals are
colonies of creatures living in a cup, coral polyps, that are connected to each
other with tissue. An underlying assumption about coral colonies, similar to the
approach to cells in humans and other mammals, is that the polyps in a colony
arose from a single coral genotype. But, what if a single coral colony was
actually composed of multiple coral genotypes, which is referred to as a
biological chimera? This proposal challenges the assumption of the genetic
identity of coral colonies, and this could have important ecological and
evolutionary consequences. For example, chimerism may confer a competitive
advantage within and between coral species. In addition, if a coral colony is
composed of multiple coral genotypes, these genotypes may respond differently to
changing environmental conditions. Thus, chimerism may affect interpreting how
corals, and hence coral reefs, react to environmental change. Undergraduate and
graduate students at the University of Mississippi will contribute to the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to investigate coral
chimerism as an ecological and evolutionary phenomenon and its influence on
coral reef ecosystems. The ecology and physiology, including gene expression, of
chimeric and non-chimeric coral colonies will be examined. In addition, the
genetic identity of the obligatory intracellular mutualistic dinoflagellates,
Symbiodinium spp. will be taken into account as well as the spatial distribution
of the coral genotypes within a chimera. Understanding these aspects of coral
chimeras will enable investigators to predict the implications of coral
chimerism for a common Indo Pacific coral species, Stylophora pistillata. It
will also potentially transform our understanding of the ecology and evolution
of coral reef ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.