* 1839258
* TRIPODS+X:RES:Collaborative Research: Learning with Expert-In-The-Loop for Multimodal Weakly Labeled Data and an Application to Massive Scale Medical Imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Suvrit Sra, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The methods developed in this project address pressing problems at the interface
of machine learning and a life-sciences application. This work hopes to spur a
rich variety of followup research that not only builds on the mathematical tools
developed but also on the insights gained from the project's focus on
interpretable and interactive machine learning. As a key application,
implementation of the technology obtained from this research on medical images
will enable automatic report generation. This technology could reduce the
workload of radiologists significantly, and hence reduce human error and
optimize resource utilization. Ultimately, reduction in human error or missing
cases in radiology can greatly benefit patient well-being and care. More
broadly, the work will enhance the ongoing adoption of data-driven thinking in
healthcare and thereby help accelerate new discoveries. This project also
impacts education, and involves intellectual and professional development of
students at a variety of academic stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most
applications of machine learning to medical imaging (and other human-centric
tasks) focus on supervised learning, which demands a large amount of expensive
labeled-data. This limitation recurs throughout applications, while real-world
use of machine learning demands robustness as well as an ability to work with
limited supervision. This project focuses on developing new machine learning
tools for working with weak-supervision, while advancing state-of-the-art in
interpretable and interactive learning. Moreover, attention to large-scale data
and incorporation of domain knowledge is paid, whenever feasible. The project
shall also apply the theoretical advances that it will make to a real-world
medical imaging application. Theoretical advances of the proposed work will rely
on tools from geometry, especially metric learning (including over infinite
dimensional spaces), mathematical models motivated by optimal transport theory,
as well as nonlinear representations based on neural networks as well as kernel
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.