* 1839915
* RoL:  FELS:  RAISE:  A Phylogenomically-Based Bioinspired Robotic Model Approach to Addressing the Evolution of Terrestrial Locomotion
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Lawrence Page, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 12/31/2023
* USD 997,510.00

One clear example of a Rule of Life is evolutionary convergence, the occurrence
of the same or extremely similar adaptations in independent lineages of species
on the Tree of Life. The recent discovery of a blind cavefish that walks and
climbs waterfalls with a salamander-like gait and has evolved a robust pelvic
girdle (a kind of hip) offers an extraordinary opportunity to study, in living
fishes, a pivotal event in evolutionary history. That event, the vertebrate
invasion of land, hinged on the evolution of fins to limbs that enabled the
first vertebrates to walk on land. The fossil record of this transition is
scarce, and extant fishes were thought to lack the morphological features
necessary for studying the origin of quadrupedal walking. This research will
provide a unique opportunity to understand, through phylogenetic analysis and
mathematical and robotic modeling, the mechanism underlying a major event in the
history of life: how fishes were able to transition to a terrestrial lifestyle
and evolve into the tetrapods. The broader impacts of this project will promote
teaching, training, and learning for high school students in diverse and
underprivileged communities. The project will also provide opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate research training and make important contributions to
public science education. This project was co-funded by the Biology Directorate
and the Physics of Living Systems Program in the Physics Division.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will identify the genomic,
morphological, and mechanical qualities that enable a fish to walk on land.
Advancing previous work on the functional morphology and kinematics of
terrestrial walking in the blind cave fish Cryptotora thamicola, the proposed
research will examine the phylogenomic relationships, morphology, biomechanics,
and walking performance from an evolutionary perspective among balitorid
loaches. Genomic sequencing will determine convergent genetic markers known to
be involved in pelvic girdle formation in other walking vertebrates.
Morphological examinations will reveal how functional phenotypic adaptations can
be formed by major genomic changes. A biorobotic model organism, validated
through comparison with our experimental biomechanical data, will be used to
take a modular approach to examining convergence and answering questions on the
effect of pelvic morphology on walking performance in extinct fin-to-limb
transitional forms and modern forms. The work proposed will discriminate the
fundamental physical properties which are inherent to the transition to
terrestrial walking from an aquatic form. The evolution of the terrestrial
pelvic girdle was critical to the diversification of amphibians, reptiles, birds
and mammals; the proposed work uses a convergent fish model to study the
evolution of anatomical structures that support the vertebrate body against
gravity and show how modulation of muscular control can produce a tetrapodal
gait within a given range of skeletal morphologies. This research will inform
scientific understanding of the mechanisms underlying the convergent evolution
of morphological innovation, allowing development of a unifying principle for
mass support in tetrapods based on the genomics, basic physics, and mechanics
that define the pelvic girdle contribution to quadrupedal
walking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.