* 1839591
* EAGER: Real-D: Integrating Data-Driven Methods and Engineering Models in Manufacturing Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Kamran Paynabar, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,951.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will contribute to
national prosperity and economic welfare by studying new methods for combining
machine learning with engineering knowledge to improve performance of
manufacturing systems. Machine learning has attracted much attention as it
offers the potential for analysis of massive data in various application
domains, including engineering and manufacturing. However, the reliance on data-
driven methods alone, outside of the context of engineering knowledge and
physical principles, can led to misspecified models with low accuracy and/or
black-box models with poor interpretability. On the other hand, engineering
models generally rely on assumptions that may not hold in practice, leading to
bias and poor predictive capability. This award supports fundamental research
that bridges the gap between pure data-driven methods and those based purely on
engineering models by introducing a novel framework that integrates statistical
machine learning methods with physics, engineering and first principles to
create more accurate analytical models for manufacturing systems. This research
creates an analytical framework enabling a better understanding of manufacturing
system performance through the fusion of data with engineering principles. This
approaches is expected to improve product quality, increase machine availability
and reduce manufacturing costs by identifying and controlling critical process
factors. New methodologies developed in this research will be incorporated into
the STEM educations curriculum and teaching activities.

Going beyond existing machine learning techniques, this research will integrate
data analysis and engineering modeling to provide more accurate methods for data
analysis and prediction. These new methods are expected to outperform both data-
driven and first principles models when they are used separately. The project
will create a new sampling strategy for conducting experiments and collecting
data that, unlike current design of experiment and optimal design methods, uses
engineering models to guide the sampling direction and select the sampling
points that most improve accuracy. The project will also build a new real-time
dimension reduction and feature extraction method from streaming data that can
extract both low-dimensional spatial and temporal features embedded in data
streams leading to effective dimension reduction. A set of computationally
efficient estimation algorithms will be developed that enable the real-time
feature learning and analysis for high-velocity streams. From a quality
improvement viewpoint, the project will enable researchers in the quality
engineering community to reexamine quality monitoring and improvement methods
with a new perspective based on the fusion of data and engineering models.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.