* 1839128
* Halogen Budget of Subducted Eclogites: The In-situ Perspective
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Veronique Le Roux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 363,064.00

Halogen elements, such as fluorine and chlorine, play a fundamental role in a
variety of Earth systems. They influence global climate, volcanic eruptions,
biosphere properties, and the mechanical behavior of deep Earth materials.
Although earthquake and volcanic hazards are linked to the abundance and
distribution of these elements in fluid and mineral phases, critical gaps exist
regarding the budgets and fluxes of halogens in the Earth's interior. In
particular, large uncertainties remain on the quantities of halogens that are
recycled at depth during subduction of seawater-rich tectonic plates, a process
that currently occurs along 55,000 km of oceanic trenches worldwide. The best
rock samples to study the budget of subducted tectonic plates, and their
consequences on earthquake and volcanic hazards, are analogs of subducted
oceanic plates called eclogites. However, halogen analyses of subduction-derived
eclogites have been historically hampered by technical challenges, limiting our
ability to correctly define halogen fluxes on Earth. Here we propose a novel
combination of advanced analytical and imaging techniques to provide unique
constraints on the halogen budget of subducting plates. The goal is to answer
the following questions: how are halogens distributed in subducted plates, and
how does their distribution influence societal hazards linked to subduction
zones worldwide? The project will provide an opportunity for an internship for a
student from a STEM-underrepresented group to work at Woods Hole and outreach
efforts by the principal investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oceanic plates are
created at mid-ocean ridges and recycled at depth in subduction zones, carrying
back large amounts of halogens into the Earth?s mantle. Previous studies have
made significant advances in understanding the dehydration and melting reactions
that take place in subducting plates, but estimates of elemental fluxes remain
largely debated. In particular, although bulk measurements of halogens provide
valuable information into elemental cycling, the contributions from crystal
grains, grain boundaries, fluid inclusions and incipient alteration cannot be
distinguished through that technique and can lead to severely skewed estimates
of halogen fluxes on Earth. Here we propose to take advantage of recent
technical developments led by the PI at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
ion microprobe facility to provide, for the first time, an in-situ distribution
map of halogens in subducted eclogites. We will use a novel combination of
techniques - in-situ SIMS; micro-CT scanning; ion chromatography; pyrohydrolysis
- to quantify the contribution from crystal grains, grain boundaries, fluid
inclusions and incipient alteration in eclogite samples representative of
various subduction conditions worldwide. Using fresh and well-characterized
samples from these localities, we will determine how halogen distribution may
vary in subduction zones and calculate new halogen fluxes. This combination of
techniques has never been proposed before, is highly complementary to bulk
approaches that have been historically used, and will provide critical insight
into halogen fluxes in subduction zones. The PI will participate in a WHOI
program that provides internships for students who are from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.