* 1839270
* TRIPODS+X: EDU: Collaborative Research: Investigations of Student Difficulties in Data Science Instruction
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Katherine Kinnaird, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2022
* USD 36,863.00

Web-browsing histories, online newspapers, streaming music, and stock prices all
show that we live in an age of data. Extracting meaning from data is necessary
in many fields to comprehend the information flow. This need has fueled rapid
growth in data science education aiming to serve the next generation of policy
makers, data science researchers, and global citizens. Initially, teaching
practices have been drawn from data science's parent disciplines (e.g., computer
science and mathematics). This project begins the process of investigating data
science education as its own field of research. It aims to identify
preconceptions students may have when they first enter a data science classroom,
and what other courses from related programs are shaping their
preconceptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project conducts a mixed-method
educational investigation to collect data and documentation of conceptual
misunderstandings and difficulties in data science. This investigation will (1)
identify classes in a variety of disciplines currently teaching the critical
topics identified in the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
(NASEM) Report: Data Science for Undergraduates: Opportunities and Options; (2)
work with instructors of those courses to gather evidence of student thinking
(especially misconceptions) surrounding those topics; and (3) survey early
career data science practitioners to assess those misconceptions that persist to
employment. During this educational investigation, we will gather student work
as those students are first engaging with data science concepts as well as the
teaching materials used in those courses. Additional research methodologies
include student interviews and surveys. Item (3), working directly with data
science practitioners, will assist in identifying cutting-edge technical topics
and oversights by instructors that might be otherwise missed, based on current
workforce demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.