* 1839056
* RAISE-TAQS: Inverting the design paradigm:  Tunable qubits in hybrid photonic materials as a scalable platform for quantum photonic devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jelena Vuckovic, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,995.00

The advent of solid state electronics altered human society through the
emergence of small, portable, and powerful computers. Quantum technologies
promise an equally revolutionary change in information transmission, information
processing, and sensing. However, there is an enormous gap between the existing
demonstration of few-bit devices and the highly integrated multi-bit devices
required to realize these potential gains. New paradigms for the design of
scalable, robust quantum devices are the key to realizing the potential of this
field. One of the major challenges is that traditional electronic devices
contain many instances of a small number of fundamental components (e.g.
transistors). The tiny, but inevitable, variation between each component can be
overcome by using components such as amplifiers and discriminators. However,
components like amplifiers cannot be used in quantum devices. As a result, most
simple quantum devices to date have engineered the entire device around the
unique properties of the particular quantum bits that are available. This
approach is not scalable. We propose to develop a new design strategy that will
allow the individual quantum bits to be tuned after fabrication and during
device operation. We believe this approach will not only overcome the
scalability challenges, but will also enable a new form of quantum parallel
processing that will speed up device operation. We will develop the materials
and device architectures that allow the tuning while preserving the strong
interactions between the quantum bits that are crucial for quantum device
operation. We will also develop new algorithms that take advantage of this
parallel processing opportunity. We will train students for the emerging field
of quantum device engineering through a series of new courses and summer
research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;We propose to invert
the design paradigm for quantum devices, creating a platform in which each qubit
can be tuned into resonance with a device-level design wavelength. Our prototype
qubit will be the orientation of a single hole spin confined in an InAs Quantum
Dot Molecule (QDM): a closely spaced pair of QDs in which the emission /
absorption wavelength tunes strongly with applied electric field. Conceptually,
the proof-of-concept device we will develop is fairly simple: a photonic crystal
cavity containing multiple qubits that can be individually tuned into resonance
with the cavity mode in order to controllably implement quantum logic functions.
To realize this concept, we will develop metal / dielectric metamaterials that
can be grown within III-V epitaxial structures. We will develop and employ
inverse design methods to create photonic cavities that leverage these new
metamaterials to allow application of electric fields to individual qubits while
retaining high cavity quality (Q) and small cavity mode volume (V). In parallel,
we will design high fidelity gates that build toward single-shot three-qubit
gates that enable faster computation and lower circuit depth. We will train
students for the emerging field of quantum device engineering through: 1) A
cohort undergraduate researcher exchange program; 2) Development of a new
undergrad / grad course on photonic metamaterials; and 3) A two-week hands-on
summer program for high school underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.