* 1839301
* Separating Regional and Local Components of Uplift in the Western Transverse Ranges of California to Test Models of Mountain Belt Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Nathan Onderdonk, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 03/31/2023
* USD 216,559.00

The origin and development of mountain belts has long been of special interest
to people and a primary target of research in the Earth Sciences. This study
will advance our scientific understanding of the processes that control the
uplift of mountains by studying the patterns and rates of elevation change in an
actively-growing mountain belt. The western Transverse Ranges of California are
being uplifted by compression along the boundary between the North American and
Pacific tectonic plates. In addition to the uplift of individual mountain ranges
along specific faults, the lower valley areas are also rising, indicating a
deeper cause to the regional uplift of the mountains. Old floodplains that have
been lifted above their rivers by tectonic forces will be used as reference
markers to measure the amount and rate of tectonic uplift and investigate how
local vs. regional mechanisms contribute to mountain growth. The scientific
advances associated with this project are coupled with training and education of
both graduate and undergraduate students at a Hispanic Serving Institution that
emphasizes inclusion of underrepresented groups in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields. The project will also benefit the
local population of southern California through enhancing understanding of
regional seismic hazards posed by the faults that bound and underlie the western
Transverse Ranges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Regional uplift affects an entire
mountain belt, whereas local uplift results in the production of relief in the
form of individual ranges and valleys. The western Transverse Ranges (WTR) of
California are an active fold and thrust belt where high rates of shortening
have been interpreted from geodetic studies and from geologic reconstructions.
Uplift rates based on marine terraces and river terraces along the southern
coast of the WTR are as high as 7 millimeters per year but vary dramatically
along the coast across faults and folds that trend oblique to the coast. These
high uplift rates, as measured in the elevated hanging walls of reverse faults
or actively growing anticlines, are local uplift rates that are most likely not
characteristic of the entire mountain belt. This project will develop a more
complete picture of topographic development in the WTR by using previously
unstudied fluvial strath terraces present within the WTR, and marine terraces
along the western coast, as markers for vertical deformation across the mountain
belt. The terraces have been offset and lifted in the hangingwalls of reverse
faults, but their presence in the footwall valleys as well indicate an
additional component of regional uplift that must be occurring on deeper
structures. Thus, it is possible to measure both local and regional uplift and
separate the two components. Luminescence and radiocarbon dating will be used to
establish a Late Quaternary chronology of the terraces to calculate the timing
and rate of deformation and topographic development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.