* 1839558
* EAGER Germination: Faculty Springboard to Advance Breakthrough Science by Post-Tenure Faculty
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Valerie Ashby, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 204,544.00

This study will test the hypothesis that awarding of tenure represents an
opportunity to nurture innovation as well as non-incremental and novel research
pursuits. Development of faculty as highly successful researchers and educators
is a critical goal of all universities. Considerable time and effort are
invested into recruiting and mentoring exceptionally promising junior faculty.
Tenure recognizes the most promising faculty and provides long term security and
stability to develop their research ideas. However, less attention is focused
upon post-tenure faculty development and the formulaic tenure process in most
universities discourages risk associated with pursuing innovative research. This
project will test a program to effect a refocusing of research direction in
newly tenured faculty, with the goal of increasing their desire and ability to
engage with significant problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to
leverage achievement of tenure as a pivot point for inducing reflection, with
the goal of stimulating newly tenured faculty to engage with novel research
directions with increased potential for societal impact. The study will involve
development of a unique, interdisciplinary program, the Faculty Springboard,
targeting recently tenured associate professors drawn from the sciences and
engineering at Duke University to facilitate the exploration of new and
potentially groundbreaking research initiatives. The program will consist of: 1)
an annual innovation workshop, focusing on community building, networking and
brainstorming; 2) professional coaching and mentoring to further develop
faculty?s novel research ideas; 3) a follow-up workshop to cement project
development. Program delivery and effectiveness will be assessed through a
comprehensive evaluation plan. Best practices will be institutionalized to
ameliorate societal impact achieved through faculty
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated Broader Impact of this research
is the expansion of research programs focused on addressing societal challenges.
Through developing a faculty network and skillsets in support of creative risk-
taking for innovative research, this professional development model has the
potential to enhance researchers? abilities to address "wicked problems". By
establishing proof of principle at Duke through targeted iterative evaluation,
core essential components critical to success of this model program will be
identified and disseminated for adaptation by other
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.