* 1839733
* EAGER: Real-Time: Decision and Control of Complex Engineered Systems Enabled by Machine Learning and High-performance Computing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Mario Rotea, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 299,941.00

In recent years, there have been significant advances in machine learning -
statistical techniques that enable computers to "learn" using available data.
Machine learning methods have demonstrated great success in image recognition,
language translation, speech processing, and other consumer applications. This
has led to great interest globally in academia, industry, and government. The
drawback in purely machine learning methods is that it does not use the
knowledge of physical properties of specific system which could significantly
improve the performance of these methods. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will lead to fundamental results and
methods that combine the advantages of machine learning techniques and knowledge
of physical attributes of the system to enable decision making and control of
complex engineered systems. The research will be conducted in the context of
control of large wind energy plants. Maximizing power production despite
variable and uncertain operating conditions in large wind plants is an unsolved
problem that is ripe for transformative approaches and innovation. The research
from this project is likely to transition to industry by leveraging connections
with the NSF I-UCRC for Wind Energy Science, Research and Technology (WindSTAR)
as wind plant owners and operators constantly seek new ways to improve annual
energy production and reduce the cost of electricity from
wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main idea of this EAGER project is to leverage
advances in deep learning and high performance computing simulations for the
control of complex engineered systems. Our hypothesis is that techniques from
(semi-supervised) machine learning can be tailored to extract information from
high performance simulation data to deal with the joint problem of identifying
control system architectures and control algorithms for real-time decision
making in complex engineered systems. The research goals of this project have
great potential to contribute to the convergence of high performance computing
simulations and data, machine learning, and controls to advance the state-of-art
tools for controlling complex engineered systems. The testbed for the project is
a wind plant. As turbines become larger, and are placed closer to one another,
the aerodynamic coupling amongst turbines will increase resulting in a truly
large-scale complex engineered system that must perform despite environmental
uncertainty and variability of turbine components. Specific goals of this
project include: Advanced learning algorithms for extracting control system
architecture and training algorithms from large eddy simulation data of the wind
farms; Real-time decision algorithms to select architecture and algorithms from
site-specific libraries discovered in the first goal; and Real-time algorithms
for tuning key parameters of the control solutions for additional improvements
in the overall energy production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.