* 1839229
* TRIPODS+X:RES: Collaborative Research: The Future of the Road - A Data-Driven Redesign of the Urban Transit Ecosystem
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ramesh Johari, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2021
* USD 175,000.00

Providing efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable transportation solutions
has long been a challenge for urban planners. Traditionally, urban mobility has
been satisfied via either personal vehicle ownership or mass transit systems,
neither of which is an optimal outcome (the former causes congestion and
pollution, while the latter suffers from a lack of "last-mile" availability).
On-demand transit modes - bikesharing, ridesharing, and micro-transit - have the
potential to solve many of the challenges faced by cities. They scale naturally,
can alleviate last-mile problems by providing coverage in lower density areas,
and reduce incentives for car ownership. However, as they grow larger and
intermingle with "classical" urban transit modes, the urban planner is forced to
consider both their societal consequences and their effective integration. This
project focuses on the following central question: How can we design an
efficient and sustainable integrated transit ecosystem, that aligns the
incentives of the individual commuter, providers of both on-demand and mass
transit, and society as a whole?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the above
challenges, the investigators propose a combination of *operational* and
*market-design* approaches, built around a data-driven stochastic-network model
for transit system operations, and the view of a transit authority acting as a
meta-platform mediating between commuters and transit providers. The first
research thrust on *operations* focuses on the algorithmic challenges faced by
upcoming on-demand transit platforms (micro-transit, dockless bikesharing), and
also by platforms in integrating their services with the broader transit
infrastructure. The second thrust focuses on *market design*, i.e., the economic
challenges of an integrated ecosystem. In particular, the investigators propose
a number of contractual models for how urban planners can effectively integrate
on-demand transit. The investigators also plan to facilitate conversation
between academics and representatives of public and private transit platforms by
organizing a workshop in 2019 on the Future of Urban
Transit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.