* 1839356
* TRIPODS+X:EDU:  An MBI TGDA+Neuro Program for Undergraduates
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Janet Best, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2023
* USD 199,983.00

This project develops an educational program for undergraduate students,
introducing them to methods at the forefront of modern mathematical and
statistical data analysis through application to problems in neuroscience. The
program consists of a one-semester interactive online course followed by an in-
person research experience held at the Mathematical Bioscience Institute in
Columbus, OH. Faculty from Ohio State University (OSU) and Pennsylvania State
University (PSU) will lecture in the online course; participating student
cohorts will reside at OSU, PSU, and a diverse collection of six additional US
institutions - including two liberal arts colleges, two universities in Puerto
Rico, an historically black university (HBCU), and a regional university with a
primarily commuter student body. The project will introduce a modern area of
research -- topological and geometric data analysis, to undergraduate students
with different backgrounds and educational experiences, better preparing these
students for graduate education and/or entry into the workforce. A flexible and
accessible undergraduate curriculum in topological and geometric methods for the
analysis of neuroscience data will be developed and made broadly available. A
diverse community of educators will be trained to facilitate the delivery of the
curriculum at their home institution, and their own research opportunities will
be enhanced; an important outcome of the project is the engagement of
experimental and mathematical neuroscientists in the emerging field of
topological and geometric data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
researchers in topological and geometric data analysis at Ohio State University
(OSU) will collaborate with an experimental neuroscientist, director of the
Speech, Language, and Music Lab (SLAM Lab) at OSU to develop scientific methods,
curricular materials and educational projects. Research in the SLAM lab involves
the use of structural and functional MRI data to identify anatomical structures
and networks underlying varied abilities in speech processing, as well as the
nature of brain plasticity. A flexible and accessible undergraduate curriculum
in topological and geometric methods for the analysis of neuroscience data will
be developed and made broadly available. An interactive online course, using the
broadband facilities of the Mathematical Biosciences Institute (MBI) will be
given to undergraduates at eight institutions with participation by local
faculty. A following workshop at the MBI will bring together the OSU
researchers, the remote faculty and the undergraduates to work on research
projects. This project provides the opportunity for two cohorts of
undergraduates from eight colleges and universities to participate in a unique
education/research experience and for the development of a novel curriculum in
topological and geometric methods for neuroscience applications. In addition, it
will allow faculty from participating institutions to learn the principles of
topological and geometric data analysis, providing the opportunity to broaden
their research programs to include this modern area of data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.