* 1839567
* ATE 2.0: Preparing Technicians for the Future of Work
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Richard Gilbert, CORD
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 3,580,406.00

The workplace of today is undergoing a major transformation driven by machine
learning, artificial intelligence, the internet-of-things, robotics, and
systems-integrated process control. NSF's focus on the Future of Work at the
Human Technology Frontier recognizes that technology advances are changing
industries at an unprecedented pace. These technological advances promise
benefits to the nation by creating new enterprises, occupations, and
opportunities for innovation and global leadership while drastically altering
the workplace as we know it. As technology evolves, so will tasks and
occupations, creating a demand for an expanding array of knowledge, skills, and
services. The demand for positions involving tasks that can be automated will
decline and, in some cases, disappear, while entirely new occupations will
emerge. This transformation is already affecting America's technicians. This
project proposes strategies and collaborative regional activities with industry
that will enable the NSF-ATE community to prepare technicians for the changing
workplace by transforming technician education at the secondary and post-
secondary educational levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will convene
academic partners, industry leaders, and economic development professionals.
These individuals will serve as collaborative thought partners in framing,
testing, refining, and supporting strategies that transform technician education
to assure regional competitiveness in the evolving workplace. Technological
education today generally focuses on industry segments and single sectors. Yet,
soon technicians will need skill sets that cross industries and support both
core and advanced STEM skills. This project will identify key cross-disciplinary
and new disciplinary knowledge and skills needed by technicians in industries
that are responding to the changing workplace. Regional networks of academic
partners will actively collaborate with industry to strengthen ATE efforts to
improve technician education across the US. It is expected that bringing the
relevant stakeholders together will facilitate the needed paradigm shift in
technician education, and coalesce support around industry expectations for
technician education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.