* 1839483
* The Worst Journey in the World - Graphic Novel
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Sarah Airriess, Airriess, Sarah Johanna
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 01/31/2020
* USD 1.00

The artist is producing a serialized graphic novel adaptation of The Worst
Journey in the World, Apsley Cherry-Garrard's memoir of the Terra Nova
Expedition, in partnership with the Scott Polar Research Institute. This series
will introduce the story to a new generation, in an accessible and factually
fastidious retelling which foregrounds the expedition's scientific endeavors,
the prologue to the scientific work being done by the NSF in Antarctica today.
Having already thoroughly researched the historical record, the artist is going
to Antarctica to visit the important locations of the expedition, most notably
Cape Evans, Hut Point, and Cape Crozier, with visits to or flights over the
Beardmore Glacier and the environs of One Ton Depot if weather and operations
allow. The aim is to get as full a sense as possible of the environments in
which the history played out -- both topographically and experientially -- in
order to depict Antarctica as truthfully and evocatively as possible to a wide
audience. This research trip will be fully documented and shared (after
returning) on the artist's social media. The finished books will be full-color
comics with substantial annotations, including information on how the work done
in 1910-13 relates to the modern scientific program. The artist will be based at
McMurdo Station, and from there make day trips to Cape Evans, Cape Crozier, the
Ross Ice Shelf, and potentially fly over the Beardmore Glacier on a return
flight to the Pole. The historic huts at Cape Evans (ASPA 155), Hut Point (ASPA
158) and Cape Crozier (ASPA 124) and visits to Arrival Heights (ASPA 122) will
be thoroughly documented in photographs and sketches, as will the areas around
McMurdo Station and Scott Base. Flyovers will be documented in photos and video.
Travel to Cape Evans and the Ross Ice Shelf will be via snowmobile, and to Cape
Crozier via helicopter; flights to the Beardmore/Pole and near 79S (where One
Ton Depot was located) will be by helo or fixed-wing aircraft, as opportunity
arises. There will be four books in the series, which will average around 250
pages, being approximately 2/3 narrative comic and 1/3 factual endnotes. The
endnotes will cite sources and provide supplementary information. The research
and development of the project is already being shared online, and it is
expected that the finished work will get online distribution before transferring
to print. The first volume will be released in late 2020, with succeeding
volumes in following years. This is an Antarctic Artists and Writers project
supported by NSF's Office of Polar Programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.