* 1839900
* CICI: SSC: Integrity Introspection for Scientific Workflows (IRIS)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ewa Deelman, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,575.00

Scientists use computer systems to analyze and store their scientific data,
sometimes in a complex process across multiple machines in different
geographical locations. It has been observed that sometimes during this complex
process, scientific data is unintentionally modified or accidentally tampered
with, with errors going undetected and corrupt data becoming part of the
scientific record. The IRIS project tackles the problem of detecting and
diagnosing these unintentional data errors that might occur during the
scientific processing workflow. The approach is to collect data relevant to the
correctness and integrity of the scientific data from various parts of the
computing and network system involved in the processing, and to analyze the
collected data using machine learning techniques to uncover errors in the
scientific data processing. The solutions are integrated into Pegasus, a popular
"workflow management system" - a software used to describe the complex process
in a user-friendly way and that handles the details of processing for the
scientists. The research methods will be validated on national computing
resources with exemplar scientific applications from gravitational-wave physics,
earthquake science, and bioinformatics. These solutions will allow scientists,
and our society, to be more confident of scientific findings based on collected
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data-driven science workflows often suffer from
unintentional data integrity errors when executing on distributed national
cyberinfrastructure (CI). However, today, there is a lack of tools that can
collect and analyze integrity-relevant data from workflows and thus, many of
these errors go undetected jeopardizing the validity of scientific results. The
goal of the IRIS project is to automatically detect, diagnose, and pinpoint the
source of unintentional integrity anomalies in scientific workflows executing on
distributed CI. The approach is to develop an appropriate threat model and
incorporate it in an integrity analysis framework that collects workflow and
infrastructure data and uses machine learning (ML) algorithms to perform the
needed analysis. The framework is powered by novel ML-based methods developed
through experimentation in a controlled testbed and validated in and made
broadly available on NSF production CI. The solutions will be integrated into
the Pegasus workflow management system, which is used by a wide variety of
scientific domains. An important part of the project is the engagement with
science application partners in gravitational-wave physics, earthquake science,
and bioinformatics to deploy the analysis framework for their workflows, and to
iteratively fine tune the threat models, ML model training, and ML model
validation in a feedback loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.