* 1839720
* Collaborative Research: Conference on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory 2018 and 2019
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Frauke Bleher, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2022
* USD 11,836.00

The sixth and seventh conferences on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory
will be held at the University of Iowa on November 17-19, 2018, and at the
University of Missouri on November 23-25, 2019. Representation theory is a
branch of modern algebra studying symmetries in linear spaces. It interacts with
many other areas in mathematics, mathematical physics, and theoretical computer
science. Geometric methods have become more and more fundamental in all of these
areas. One of the main objectives of these conferences is to introduce beginning
researchers in representation theory to the power of geometric methods. Keynote
lectures for these conferences will be Milen Yakimov in 2018 and Lidia Angeleri
Hugel in 2019. Each keynote lecturer will give two one-hour lectures,
emphasizing geometric methods; these talks will be accessible to graduate
students and postdoctoral researchers. There will also be several expository
lectures given by other established researchers. The remainder of the lectures
will be research talks given by other participants. These will include talks by
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers related to their Ph.D. theses.
The conference will provide an inviting atmosphere in which new collaborations
can be formed and young researchers will have the opportunity to learn about
cutting-edge geometric methods in representation theory. Moreover, the
conference will enable early-career representation theorists to present their
work and interact with the broader research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the last 40 years, the representation theory of
finite dimensional algebras has enjoyed a great impact of methods from algebraic
geometry, in particular from geometric invariant theory and transformation
groups. At the same time, this influence has led to the feedback of ideas and
techniques from representation theory to geometry. One of the goals of the
conferences on Geometric Methods in Representation Theory is to help strengthen
and advance this interaction between geometry and representation theory. The
topics of these conferences will include: quantum nilpotent algebras and quantum
cluster algebras; Poisson geometry and quantizations of coordinate rings of
varieties; tilting and silting theory; semi-invariants for bound quivers;
geometric aspects of cluster algebras; degenerations of modules and the geometry
of orbit closures in module varieties; moduli problems for finite dimensional
algebras; and universal deformation rings and their connection to moduli spaces.
More information about these conferences on Geometric Methods in Representation
Theory at the University of Iowa and at the University of Missouri-Columbia can
be found at
http://homepage.math.uiowa.edu/~fbleher/CGMRT.html.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.