* 1839833
* EAGER: Real-Time: Effective Power System Operation during Hurricanes using Historical and Real-Time Data
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Ge Ou, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2021
* USD 348,244.00

Hurricanes often lead to large and long-lasting blackouts, with serious social
and economic consequences. This project aims at developing models and software
tools to provide guidance for the smart and preventive operation of power
systems, using available weather forecast data. It is anticipated that the
developed tools will better estimate the impacts of hurricanes on the electric
power grid and identify operation strategies that are resilient to the damages
induced by the hurricane. Ultimately, the outcomes of this project will help
reduce the size and duration of power blackouts during hurricanes. The avoided
blackout costs can save the U.S. economy hundreds of millions to several billion
dollars each year. This is an interdisciplinary research project, where
electrical engineering, civil engineering, and atmospheric science students will
closely collaborate and broaden their skill sets, thus advancing their education
and empowering the nation's trained workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
exploits the availability of weather forecast data to guide preventive power
system operation during hurricanes. Currently, weather forecast data is not
systematically integrated into the power system operation and, thus, preventive
operation is not possible. The current research approaches employ an integrated
framework, mainly based on physical and engineering models, which uses the
hurricane forecast information to predict the component damage scenarios for the
power system. The preventive operation decisions are, then, determined with
stochastic optimization, through explicit modeling of the damage scenarios. The
existing models have two main shortcomings: 1) they ignore the weather forecast
uncertainties; and 2) they are extremely computationally demanding. There are
substantial levels of inherent uncertainties in weather forecast data and
component damage models, which affect both the effectiveness of the final
preventive operation strategies as well as the model?s computational efficiency.
Moreover, the computational time in real-time power system operation is
extremely limited. The hypothesis governing this project is that a hybrid
approach, which exploits the availability of data, while also relying on
physical and engineering principles, can overcome the two challenges, mentioned
above. First, using historical and real-time data, this project reduces
uncertainties in order to improve both the solution quality and the
computational needs. Second, by applying machine learning techniques on
synthetic, historical, and real-time data, the project replaces computationally-
demanding stochastic optimization with effective proxy deterministic models, to
achieve computational tractability for real-time operation. Thus, this project
will enable, for the first time, appropriate integration of uncertain weather
forecast data within power system operation during hurricanes, to quickly
identify effective preventive operation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.