* 1839294
* Tripods+X:Res: Collaborative Research: Identification of Gene Regulatory Network Function from Data
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* huixia wang
* 09/30/2021
* USD 190,000.00

Molecular and cellular biology are at the forefront of our quest to understand
life and improve human health. However, the details of how genes and signals
interact in real time to produce cell behavior, are not well understood. The
problem is a lack of approaches that can integrate experimental data into models
that describe the important behavior of the system, yet do not describe
nonessential details, that would make it too cumbersome to compute in a
reasonable time. This project will develop a new set of tools, that can predict
the entire range of behaviors of a network of interdependent genes and do it so
efficiently that behavior under the effect of a few mutations or behavior of
alternative sets of genes can be readily explored. Furthermore, once such a
description of behavior of a set of genes is available, it will be shared and
used by other scientists. Continuous build-up of these results will rapidly
increase their value for data science, cellular biology, and broader science.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Molecular and cellular biology have witnessed a huge leap
forward since science has acquired the ability to sequence genomes. However,
while genomes are relatively static, the phenotypes result from the interaction
of many genes that are expressed dynamically in time. Furthermore, since
phenotypes arise from complex transcriptional networks, where the interactions
tend to be nonlinear, data-based models will play a key role in understanding
and ultimately controlling these phenotypes. Current modeling techniques,
motivated by physics, struggle to bridge a fundamental conflict between low
resolution of biological measurements informing model parameter values and the
fundamental fact that dynamical systems are sensitive to initial conditions and
parameters. This project develops a novel mathematical framework that provides a
quantitative description of global dynamics that are compatible with coarse,
noisy biological measurements. Combined with computationally efficient
algorithms for the construction of databases that capture biologically relevant
dynamics of a network, it can become the basis for shared science in the space
of gene networks. These tools will be used to construct and validate network
models from experimental data, interrogate dynamic behavior of a given network,
and compare dynamics summaries across networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.