* 1839213
* I-Corps: Nanoenabled Electronic Nose
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Nosang Myung, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is that the
project's technology, based on computing, engineering and materials
technologies, may provide a sense of safety and comfort to anosmics (those who
suffer from a loss of a sense of smell). People with a loss of their sense of
smell are typically concerned about being near potential hazards that are
difficult to detect without a sense of smell, such as fires, gas leaks, food
that is spoiling, and hazardous chemicals. As there are no methods or products
that can closely mimic the human nose, the detection performance and user-
friendliness of a substitute device will target a relatively untapped market --
approximately 5% of the general population or over 15 million people in the
United States alone. It is anticipated that this project's device will be a more
affordable, reliable and less invasive alternative to surgery or other
treatments. Furthermore, the technology can be used in a wide range of
applications, such as drug or explosives detection, food quality monitoring
(such as identifying diseases and/or ripeness of fruits and other produce), air
quality monitoring and control, harmful solvent detection for defense
application, and smart bandage for wound monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project involves the manufacture of a device with a high-density, high-
performance gas sensor array based on nanotechnology, chemistry, computer
science and engineering. The facile, fast fabrication methods of nanomaterials
as sensing materials introduces the possibility of mass manufacturing. Real-time
response to a range of gas analytes along with fast recovery of the sensing
medium provides a solid technical foundation for this project. Currently at a
pre-alpha prototyping stage, the device, with its full integration with a
custom-designed circuit board and precisely fabricated sensing nanomaterials,
not only eliminates the need for tedious and costly microfabrication, which is
typical for gas sensors, but may also be able to imitate the detection level of
a human nose, even exceeding the detection performance for some gas
analytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.