* 1839225
* Gemini Observatory in the Era of Multi-Messenger Astronomy: High Image Quality and Rapid Response to Cosmic Events
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jennifer Lotz, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Martin Still
* 09/30/2024
* USD 25,974,117.00

The Gemini Observatory operates two large telescopes, one in Hawai'i and one in
Chile. These two telescopes provide astronomers in the U.S., Canada, Argentina,
Brazil, and Chile with access to the whole sky. Using modern instruments on each
telescope, astronomers are able to study everything from asteroids, comets and
nearby planets, to huge super-bright stars and distant galaxies. Plans are now
under way at Gemini to prepare each telescope for a new decade of discovery.
Astrophysics in the 2020s will be revolutionized by "Multi-Messenger Astronomy",
an exciting new field that uses gravitational waves and high-energy particles,
as well as ordinary everyday light, to study some of the most exotic objects and
explosive events in the Universe. Facilities like NSF's Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO), the NSF/University of Wisconsin IceCube
South Pole Neutrino Observatory, and NSF's latest telescope, the Large Synoptic
Survey Telescope (LSST), will detect these "messengers", changing the way we
study the Universe. In support of these remarkable new observatories, Gemini
will develop new computer software and new optics hardware so that astronomers
can study each new discovery quickly and in high detail. In addition to making
remarkable discoveries and doing amazing science, Gemini is also a leader in
education, public information and outreach activities. Gemini staff bring
science to the communities in both Hawai'i and Chile through unique programs
such as Journey through the Universe, AstroDay, and Viaje al Universo. With this
new award they will extend their reach by developing a Planetarium show that
will help the public better understand Multi-Messenger Astronomy. Gemini will
also run workshops for educators and communicators so that they too can explain
the exciting new discoveries that will surely be made by LIGO, IceCube, LSST and
Gemini over the coming decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gemini has proposed a
challenging though very exciting program of cutting-edge development activities
that are in line with NSF's strategic goals and those of its international
partners in the Gemini Observatory. The enhancement of existing Adaptive Optics
(AO) capabilities at Gemini-S and particularly Gemini-N on Maunakea, one of the
best sites in the world for high-resolution imaging, will ensure that the
observatory remains competitive in the 2020s, in the run-up to the commissioning
of 30-to-40 meter class telescopes at the end of the coming decade. Wide-field
AO-corrected infrared imaging at Gemini will complement a similar capability on
the James Webb Space Telescope, which will hopefully be executing its prime
mission in the 2020s. At the same time, in collaboration with other national
facilities, Gemini staff will develop and mature software aimed specifically at
preparing Gemini for time domain and multi-messenger astronomy in a decade when
LIGO and LSST will drive many of the most exciting science discoveries. The
proposal's goal of ensuring that Gemini is the best positioned public 8-meter
class facility for follow-up activities is clearly consistent with the wishes of
the observing communities at home and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.