* 1839527
* EAGER: Real-Time: Learning-based Optimal Control of Stochastic Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2021
* David Graves, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2021
* USD 226,029.00

The two main challenges in optimal real-time control of complex engineering
systems arise from the computational complexity of high-fidelity fundamental
models of such systems and the inherent uncertainty stemming from lack of exact
understanding of the underlying physical, chemical, and biological phenomena
governing the system behavior. High-fidelity models are often prohibitive for
real-time decision making because they are too computationally demanding. On the
other hand, model uncertainty can compromise the reliability of decision making
thus can be detrimental to safe, reliable, and optimal operation of complex
systems. In this exploratory research project, a new paradigm for learning-based
optimal control that guarantees stability and robustness of uncertain nonlinear
systems will be developed by using approximate models of the system and its
uncertainty, while optimizing the system performance with respect to an updated
model of the system learned online. The prototypical example will focus on cold
atmospheric plasma jets that can have significant impact in materials processing
and in the emerging field of plasma medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research is motivated by the growing importance of using high-fidelity models
for optimal control of engineering systems as well as the theoretical challenges
associated with addressing systematic handling of uncertainties, non-
conservative control performance, and low computational complexity in a unified
optimal control formulation. The ultimate objective is to develop a learning-
based optimal control method that leverages high-fidelity knowledge of an
uncertain system, ensures safe and robust system operation in the presence of
uncertainties, mitigates conservative control performance, and is amenable to
real-time computations. High-fidelity models will be used to systematically
inform the design and verify the performance of learning-based optimal control
via closed-loop simulations under uncertainty. The specific aims of the project
are: (1) develop theory and formulations for learning-based optimal control, (2)
develop an uncertainty propagation method that is especially suited for
performance verification of learning-based optimal control using nonlinear high-
fidelity models with arbitrary probabilistic uncertainties, and (3) demonstrate
the potential benefits of learning-based optimal control on a complex
engineering system, i.e., a cold atmospheric plasma jet testbed. The proposed
methodology may find numerous applications beyond the ones involving low-
temperature atmospheric plasma jets. In addition to training a graduate student
in an emerging multi-disciplinary field, a new upper level
undergraduate/graduate course will be developed that integrates basic concepts
from data science, Bayesian inference, and robust optimization of complex
chemical and biomolecular systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.