* 1839603
* Creating Three-Dimensional Fundamental Flame Database Using Novel Diagnostics
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Lin Ma, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 318,904.00

Many open questions remain in the study of turbulent combustion, hindering the
design of next-generation energy systems. A key gap in our knowledge is the lack
of proper experimental data that can be used to validate and inspire predictive
models. Due to the inherent three-dimensional (3D) spatial structures of
practical turbulent flames, instantaneous 3D measurements of fundamental flame
properties have been long desired for use in model development. However,
existing experimental efforts are predominately limited to obtaining data at a
point, along a line, or across a 2D plane. This project is to develop novel
diagnostics that can enable 3D measurements in flames. These valuable
experimental data will be used for model validation and development. The
knowledge generated in this project will help with the design and optimization
of propulsion and energy systems utilizing combustion. Additional efforts in
this project include establishing collaborations across boundaries of
disciplines and institutions as well as engaging industry to accelerate
technology transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent combustion is governed by
the intricate interactions between chemical reactions and turbulence. Such
interactions inherently occur in 3D, and consequently measurements that can
resolve the variations of combustion properties in all three dimensions have
long been desired. This project will address this long-standing need with a two-
phase plan. In the first phase, the team will investigate and utilize three
novel 3D diagnostic techniques, including high resolution tomography, machine
learning assisted diagnostics, and hybrid 3D diagnostics. In the second phase,
the team will apply these new diagnostics to obtain 3D measurements of
fundamental combustion properties in canonical turbulent flames. The target
properties include 3D flame topography and 3D-3-component velocity. Both are
crucial for understanding turbulent flame dynamics and improving model accuracy.
This research is highly interdisciplinary and can contribute to fundamental
combustion science, optical diagnostics, and computational
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.