* 1839171
* Effects of climate change on prevalence and environmental niches of clinically important vibrios in the Chesapeake Bay
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Rita Colwell, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 820,248.00

Changes in the frequency, intensity, and duration of extreme weather events is
likely to affect the ecology of pathogenic Vibrio bacteria in the Chesapeake
Bay, the largest estuary in the U.S., which is already experiencing twice the
global average rate of sea-level rise. Human health risks associated with
vibrios are primarily related to the consumption of contaminated seafood or
exposure to pathogens during water-based recreational activities. Since vibrios
cannot be eradicated from the Chesapeake Bay, the development of predictive
models based on conditions favoring their survival in the marine environment
will inform decision makers to devise policies to protect public health. Through
the completion of this project the research team will produce a comprehensive
assessment of the impact of extreme events on the prevalence of pathogens in the
Chesapeake Bay associated water, plankton, and oysters, considering the
environmental and geophysical processes that modulate these relations. The
outcomes of this research, disseminated through various channels (websites, news
media and healthcare agencies), will assist in critical decision making to
minimize public health risk of interaction with vibrios in the Chesapeake Bay
area. The results may be useful to other locations in the United States and
other countries to help prevent an outbreak of disease as the vibrios are known
to occur naturally in the aquatic environment. The project is jointly supported
by NSF and by the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences
(NIEHS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prior studies clearly indicate that the frequency
of Vibrio spp. occurrences are influenced by environmental factors, and under
certain conditions, these bacteria enter into a viable but nonculturable (VBNC)
state. Detecting the presence of pathogenic vibrios, including VBNC cells, is
critical because loss of culturability does not guarantee loss of virulence.
This research will enhance knowledge on understanding of occurrence and
abundance of clinically important vibrios in the Bay using a fundamentally
transformational approach - a satellite remote sensing inspired simulation and
prediction risk model integrating ecological theory (culturable and VBNC) of
pathogens (V. cholerae, V. vulnificus and V. parahaemolyticus) through
exhaustive sampling (in water, plankton and oysters) in the region. Three
objectives of the study are to (i) characterize the prevalence of these
culturable and VBNC vibrios using recently developed detection method in the
Chesapeake Bay water, plankton and oysters; (ii) Investigate the impact of
extreme heat events, extreme precipitation events and other key environmental
and geophysical factors (e.g. plankton blooms, sea surface height, salinity) on
the prevalence of pathogenic Vibrio spp.in Chesapeake Bay and further
investigate how this association differs between culturable versus VBNC states
and (iii) develop satellite- based predictive risk models for vibriosis
outbreaks in the Chesapeake Bay area to inform public health preparedness. A
combination of observational data analysis and modeling will be used to
accomplish the goals, test hypotheses, and explore alternate
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.