* 1839041
* Increased Risk of Chronic Disease Due to Domoic Acid Exposure with Age
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* David Marcinek, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 978,365.00

Domoic acid (DA) is a toxin produced by a type of harmful algal bloom. Domoic
acid accumulates in seafood products and can harm marine mammals and humans who
consume contaminated shellfish. At high doses, DA is responsible for the
neurotoxic illness known as amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP), with clinical
symptoms that include seizures, memory loss, coma, and death. The effects of
chronic exposure to lower doses are less well understood. Recent seafood
consumption studies by this research team revealed that some recreational
harvesters exceeded the current regulated dose limit and/or were chronically
exposed to DA weekly for at least six consecutive months and that the majority
of this group is over 60 years of age. Aging is the single greatest risk factor
for multiple chronic diseases, including those affecting brain, heart, and
kidney function, all of which are also targets of DA toxicity. This study will
investigate how the effects of domoic acid exposure change with age. As ocean
conditions change, exposure to DA through seafood consumption is likely to
increase as a result of increased frequency and severity of toxin producing
blooms. Thus a better understanding of the effect of DA exposure on the risk of
developing chronic disease and the mechanisms underlying long term health
problems, especially in the elderly population, is critical for better
management of these risks by regulatory bodies and improved communication with
stakeholders. The research is jointly supported by NSF and by the National
Institute for Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study has three specific aims. First, in order to test the hypothesis that aging
increases susceptibility to acute DA toxicity the investigators will measure the
effects of acute symptomatic DA exposure on cognitive, cardiac and renal
function in young and old mice. Following an acute symptomatic exposure, they
will quantify tissue pathology and dysfunction in three systems with known DA
induced pathology - cognitive, cardiac, and kidney systems. Second, in order to
test the hypothesis that aging increases the susceptibility to chronic DA
toxicity they will measure the effects of chronic low-level DA exposure on
cognitive, cardiac and renal function in young and old mice. The investigators
have previously demonstrated that chronic low-level DA exposure caused
reversible cognitive deficits. However, whether aging affects the susceptibility
to and reversibility of chronic DA toxicity to cognitive, cardiac and renal
function has not been examined. Finally, in order to test the hypothesis that
mitochondrial oxidative stress underlies chronic DA toxicity in cognitive,
cardiac and renal systems they will use the chronic DA exposure paradigm (aim 2)
in a mouse model (mCAT) overexpressing catalase, a key antioxidant enzyme, in
the mitochondria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.