* 1839674
* Forum on Neuroscience and Nervous System Disorders
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2020,08/31/2023
* Sheena Posey Norris, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 150,000.00

The human nervous system is remarkably complex, and nervous system disorders
such as Alzheimer’s disease and depression pose a substantial public health and
economic challenge, affecting approximately half of Americans at some point in
life. Understanding how the nervous system develops, functions, and ages—in both
health and disease—is critical for developing safe and effective treatments.
Many federal agencies are involved in this endeavor—including the National
Science Foundation, National Institutes of Health, Department of Veterans
Affairs, Food and Drug Administration, and Department of Defense—as well as
academic researchers, private sector companies, disease-focused organizations,
and philanthropic foundations. To tackle fundamental questions about the brain,
it is also becoming increasingly important to extend beyond traditional
neuroscience and integrate expertise across a broad range of fields, including
social and behavioral sciences, mathematics, statistics, materials science,
physics, computer science, and engineering. Recognizing the need for
crosscutting efforts, in 2006 the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering,
and Medicine established the Forum on Neuroscience and Nervous System Disorders
to convene the wide range of leaders and stakeholders in this domain. Through
its meetings, workshops, and other activities, the Forum tackles emerging issues
and key challenges related to scientific needs and opportunities, priority
setting, and policies related to fundamental neuroscience research; the
development, regulation, and use of treatments; and related ethical, legal, and
social implications. With this award, NSF continues to join other participating
federal agencies and organizations in supporting this neutral venue for
exchanging information, differing perspectives, and opportunities for collective
action. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Neuroscience Forum brings together leaders
from government, industry, academia, disease advocacy organizations, and other
interested stakeholders. Neuroscience Forum members meets two or three times per
year and the Forum also sponsors two or three public workshops per year,
publishes workshop proceedings, and commissions papers as additional mechanisms
for engaging its membership, other experts and stakeholders, and the public. To
ensure that the Neuroscience Forum serves as a venue for on-going and timely
discussions, topics are selected by the members to address emerging needs and
advances in the field. In recent years, the Neuroscience Forum has addressed
topics such as disseminating tools and technologies that are being developed
through the BRAIN Initiative, legal implications of emerging neurotechnologies,
scientific opportunities afforded by new transgenic nonhuman primate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.