* 1839684
* EAGER: Real-Time: Intelligent Mitigation of Low-Frequency Oscillations in Smart Grid Using Real-time Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Lin Zhu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2022
* USD 275,762.00

As a critical underpinning of modern society, the electric power grid is one of
the most complex and man-made dynamic systems in the world. Numerous real-time
data of different types, different components, and various locations are
generated to monitor and control power grids. Currently, the control of large-
scale power grids is still mainly based on the physical system model, while the
hidden knowledge in the abovementioned large-volume data has not been fully
exploited. This project selects one typical control function in smart grids,
low-frequency oscillation control, to explore the potential to enhance smart
grid controls using the hidden knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;Low-frequency oscillation
is a common phenomenon in operation of large-scale power systems. If not
controlled properly, these oscillations may degrade power system security and
make a large number of customers lose their power. This project aims at
developing an intelligent controller to mitigate these low-frequency
oscillations using data and machine learning technologies. If successful, it
will advance the technology in smart grid, and remove obstacles for application
of machine learning technologies in smart grid control. The proposed approach
will contribute to more secure, reliable and economic operations of U.S. power
grids. For example, the risk of blackout can be significantly mitigated; and
thus outage cost could be saved, e.g., more than $1 billion for U.S. western
grid collapse in 1996. The proposed project is also coupled with a broad
dissemination of research findings and a strong educational component to engage
students from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research effort focuses on a completely new design methodology of intelligent
oscillation damping control using the data-driven models. These data-driven
models of power grids derive from synchronized measurement data using machine
learning technologies, in conjunction with power grid domain knowledge.
Specifically, this project will: (1) build a self-evolving dynamic knowledge
base based on historical measurement data under different oscillation scenarios;
(2) extract the critical features from historical and real-time data, and select
the optimal features to improve data-driven model prediction accuracy; (3)
develop machine learning algorithms to predict data-driven models for
oscillation damping control design; and (4) validate and demonstrate the
proposed methodology via computer simulations and hardware testbed experiments.
This advanced approach will contribute to the energy security and efficiency of
the U.S. electric power grids. This project will expose both undergraduate and
graduate students to the state-of-the-art machine learning education and
workforce training program. By coordinating with an established outreach program
in an existing NSF/DOE engineering research center, the research results will be
integrated into weekly seminars and short courses that are accessible to four
partner universities, nine affiliate universities and more than 35 industry
partners. Moreover, this project will encourage students to get involved with
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) courses early in their
pre-college years to prepare for STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.