* 1839104
* Enhancing the Value of MOSAiC through Coordination and Outreach
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Matthew Shupe, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,020,385.00

The Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate
(MOSAiC) is a large, international collaborative research expedition motivated
by changes in the Arctic system that have significant implications for the
global climate system. MOSAiC will use intensive scientific observations from a
year-long drifting station in the central Arctic to improve understanding of
atmosphere-ice-ocean processes and enable significantly better models of the
Arctic system and its sea ice. MOSAiC participants from the US and more than 15
nations will work collaboratively to achieve a collection of related science
objectives. Such a large-scale scientific endeavor requires a MOSAiC
Coordination Office (MCO) that coordinates the significant US contribution to
MOSAiC from the National Science Foundation and other US agencies (collectively
the second largest national contribution) and works jointly with German partners
to provide international leadership for the overall effort. This office builds
on, and formalizes, a co-leadership team between the Alfred Wegener Institute
and University of Colorado that over the past nine years has jointly worked to
conceive MOSAiC, develop international support and participation, secure
substantial resources, and oversee the writing of MOSAiC Science and
Implementation plans. Due to the overall size, scope, and complexity of MOSAiC,
this dedicated coordination is essential to achieve two specific goals: to
maximize the 1) scientific and 2) societal impacts of MOSAiC. The MCO provides a
framework for effective scientific coordination, leadership, and communication
across all MOSAiC activities using web-based tools, scientific workshops, modern
multimedia content, and dedicated outreach and education
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MOSAiC is a high profile international
expedition developed in collaboration with the modeling community to directly
target many Arctic system processes that are still uncertain, and in most need
of improvement, in coupled models. This once-in-a-generation project provides
coupled-system observations, over a continuous annual cycle and over a model
grid-box scale, that are uniquely positioned to build a foundation of process-
level understanding for developing models that represent and predict the
changing Arctic system. The MCO plays a vital role in coordinating and
leveraging distinctly funded and narrowly focused science contributions towards
achieving the complex, interdisciplinary, coupled system science objectives of
MOSAiC. Coordination ensures the most effective use of resources and helps
maximize the amount of research that is possible given limited resources.
Towards advancing science, the MCO oversees the joint documentation of MOSAiC
data and facilitates the development of coupled and synthesis data products that
will have a lasting impact on the research community and other national and
international stakeholders. The MCO also provides a framework and products to
ensure significant societal impact through outreach and education efforts, and
regular, effective media communication, beyond what is possible from
individually funded science projects. Modern multimedia content is produced to
support the development and dissemination of engaging educational products such
as curriculum materials, immersive multimedia experiences, a planetarium show,
and an engaging web interface. Graduate students are involved in obtaining and
producing outreach content and communications products. The MCO also facilitates
outreach activities across the broader MOSAiC community by engaging the
participation of many MOSAiC scientists and hosting and disseminating outreach
products and content. Products, such as the planetarium show along with its
supporting educational curriculum materials, are intended to be distributed for
use in local communities by numerous partners across the US and internationally.
All activities of the MCO are subject to a rigorous evaluation to assess and
maximize their overall impact. Lastly, the MCO's role in overall project co-
leadership for MOSAiC science, outreach, and communications maintains a
prominent role for the US in this international endeavor and ensures that US
objectives are prioritized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.