* 1839196
* RAISE-TAQS: Integrated Room Temperature Single-Photon based Quantum-Secure LiFi Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Farhan Rana, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Gallium Nitride based LEDs have revolutionized solid-state lighting. Because
unlike incandescent bulbs, LEDs can be switched and modulated at GHz
frequencies, they are enabling light fidelity (LiFi) as a means of point to
point communications using visible light in free space. LiFi is similar to WiFi,
but its penetration is expected to rival, or exceed WiFi as GaN LEDs replace
residential, industrial, street, and automotive lighting. Making free- space
LiFi communication secure in the quantum sense in the future is both a timely
opportunity, and of paramount technological importance. Secure communication
systems are possible using the quantum properties of single-photons that prevent
eavesdropping, and guarantee security. &lt;br/&gt;A successful demonstration of
the devices and systems proposed in this research would not just enhance
security in the rapidly emerging LiFi networks but also make quantum
technologies come out from the research labs and &lt;br/&gt;reach people's
houses. The proposed research is therefore highly transformative. In addition,
the strong &lt;br/&gt;emphasis on material and device physics, optical and
quantum sciences, and communication networks will &lt;br/&gt;all provide a rich
set of areas for exploration and graduate student research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: The PIs of this proposal have discovered single
photon sources in wide-bandgap nitrides that are 20x brighter than the NV
centers in diamond, and importantly, operate at room temperature.
&lt;br/&gt;They have developed a fundamentally new structure for nitride LEDs
using buried tunnel junctions, with &lt;br/&gt;which it becomes possible to
electrically pump the single photon emitter. The engineering-led goals of the
&lt;br/&gt;proposed project are threefold: (a) To build the first room-
temperature electrically pumped on-demand &lt;br/&gt;single photon source
completely integrated on the GaN material system, (b) To design and characterize
the &lt;br/&gt;spectral properties, bandwidth, efficiency, packing density, and
potential entanglement properties of the &lt;br/&gt;nitride single photon
sources, and (c) To theoretically and experimentally identify and test the
fundamental &lt;br/&gt;requirements, and limits of quantum-secure LiFi
communication systems. &lt;br/&gt;This project explores and exploits the physics
of single photon emitters, advances in quantum materials, and secure LiFi
systems design and engineering, leading to the implementation quantum Lifi in a
practical way. Every step in this quest will accelerate the development and
deployment of quantum technologies. The team will systematically explore the
basic physics of h-BN quantum emitters and III-nitride quantum dots, their
emission rates and wavelengths, and how we can create these emitters
deterministically. The Pis seek to discover how to integrate bright III-nitride
LED structures with quantum emitters and efficiently gather the quantum and
classical light in separate channels. Finally, they will engineer these devices
in a real-world context and deploy them to ensure private communications
guaranteed by the laws of quantum physics. New nitride quantum crystalline
materials are key to this proposal. A meaningful international collaboration is
proposed with a leading nitride materials group in the world will offer some of
the highest quality gallium nitride crystals in the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.