* 1839590
* US-EU 2D Workshop to be held in San Sebastian, Spain, September 10-14, 2018
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Alan Seabaugh, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2020
* USD 20,000.00

The proposed project on US-EU Two-Dimensional (2D) Layered Materials and Devices
Workshop seeks financial support to support researcher participation in a
workshop to be held September 10-14, 2018 in San Sebastian, Spain. It will run
in association with Graphene Week, which is an event organized by the European
Graphene Flagship and will be attended by many Researchers involved in the NSF
sponsored 2-DARE (Two-Dimensional Atomic-layer Research and Engineering)
program. The Workshop will address research areas of a wide range of non-
graphene 2D atomic layers such as phosphorene, transition metal di-
chalcogenides, hexagonal boron nitride, tertiary compounds of carbo-nitrides,
and complex oxides. The Workshop will bring together leading scientists working
on graphene and beyond graphene 2D materials and devices from Europe and the
United States to help promote future collaborations and address common
challenges. It should positively impact learning in the science and engineering
disciplines through personnel exchange programs that are likely to catalyze from
this workshop, including bi-lateral exchange of faculty, graduate students and
post-doctoral fellows. There is support planned to be provided to US doctoral
students participating in the meeting to advance their understanding and to
build collaborations with their counterparts in Europe.

Students participating in the Graphene Week Exhibition will have the opportunity
to present the US research to the greater science and technology graphene
community from all over the world. It will prompt collaborations with the EU
Graphene Flagship program administrators and NSF that will lead to international
activities that can facilitate joint collaborative programs in the future. The
Workshop is expected to play a key role in addressing in detail currently faced
bottlenecks in 2D material and device research and identifying new directions
for research. 2D layered materials has a high potential for spawning
technological breakthroughs and disruptive technologies impacting society in the
areas of microelectronics, optoelectronics, health and medical diagnostics,
energy harvesting, and environmental monitoring. It will have significant
broader impact by catalyzing potential international partnerships between
leading researchers in the US and Europe to discuss broad directions for future
research in this highly dynamic and interdisciplinary area. A final report
detailing the discussion topics and conclusions/recommendations will also be
posted.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.