* 1839341
* EAGER:  Unraveling riverine sulfate using minor oxygen isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* David Johnston, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Bennett
* 02/29/2020
* USD 100,413.00

Over geological timescales, weathering reactions involving minerals on the land
surface have regulated the amounts of important gases such as oxygen and carbon
dioxide in Earth's atmosphere. This award funds research that will explore the
potential for a new method to provide constraints on one such reaction in Earth
history: the oxidation of the mineral pyrite. Over the geological past, global
variation in the amount of pyrite that has been oxidized provides a critical
link between Earth's carbon and sulfur cycles, while a record of this history
may be preserved by sulfate minerals in marine sediments. The researchers will
generate a proof-of-concept data set that takes advantage of information that
can be gathered from a rare and difficult-to-measure stable isotope in dissolved
and mineral sulfate: 17-oxygen. This novel method will be applied to previously
collected and well-characterized water samples from a major river system
draining the Himalaya Range. This pilot data set will provide important
information about the mechanisms that control the isotopic composition of
dissolved sulfate and will help to unravel the record that is preserved in
marine sediments. The award will also provide mentoring for a postdoctoral
fellow who has contributed to the design and planning of this project and will
provide the individual with opportunities for leadership roles within the
research group.

This award funds the exploration of the potential for a new proxy to quantify
geological rates of pyrite oxidation, based on the minor oxygen stable isotope
(17-O) preserved in sulfate produced by pyrite oxidation. Because pyrite
oxidation both consumes oxygen and generates acidity that dissolves carbonate
rocks and produces CO2, it has been suggested that changes in pyrite oxidation
rates may have acted to stabilize fluctuations in atmospheric CO2. Although
pyrite oxidation is a critical link between Earth's carbon and sulfur cycles,
the application of a 17-O proxy in marine sulfate is limited by our
understanding of sulfate generation and translation through fluvial systems.
This work would begin to narrow this gap by generating a proof-of-concept data
set from well-characterized river samples from a major river system draining the
Himalaya Range that has already been measured for 34-S and 18-O composition of
dissolved sulfate. The researchers will add measurements of the 17O composition
of dissolved sulfate from these samples to investigate the potential sources and
subsequent recycling of sulfate in downstream floodplains. The riverine
17-O-sulfate data set will provide a rigid framework with which to interpret
17-O records in the marine sulfate record.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.