* 1839148
* NSF-BSF: Quantifying climate-dependent subcritical cracking and mechanical weathering over geologic time
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Russell Keanini, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 12/31/2023
* USD 299,940.00

Mechanical weathering - the physical breakdown of Earth's surface rocks by
cracking - is a vital cog in the wheel of Earth's biologic, hydrologic,
atmospheric and geologic systems, influencing everything from carbon cycling, to
the soils in which life thrives, to aquifer formation. Yet the environmental and
rock mechanical features that control mechanical weathering remain poorly
characterized, and the long-term evolution of cracking itself has not been
observed. This work brings together a multidisciplinary team from the United
States, Israel, Japan and the United Kingdom to collect some of the first ever
geologic time scale (10^3-10^5 years) data sets for both mechanical weathering
as well as for a suite of special rock mechanical properties - those related to
climate-dependent subcritical cracking. The project will develop a Science-Art
collaboration with the UNC Charlotte College of Arts + Architecture to
communicate the project results to diverse public audiences. The investigators
will conduct a workshop at the Geological Society of America on the basic
subcritical cracking concepts explored in this work and will mentor students
with a focus on broadening participation of women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will test hypotheses
including: a) mechanical weathering rates over geologic time are primarily
controlled by rock subcritical cracking rates; b) similar to chemical
weathering, mechanical weathering rates decrease through geologic time; and c)
under different environmental conditions, mechanical weathering rates are higher
in climates where conditions favor faster subcritical cracking - separate, and
in addition to, the previously recognized influence of climate on stress loading
mechanisms. The following will be measured: 1) Mechanical weathering (cracking)
rates and characteristics for boulders (granite and limestone) found on
different aged late Quaternary deposits, in the Sierra Nevada, CA, and the Negev
Desert of Israel. 2) Subcritical cracking parameters - measured under different
environmental conditions - for samples from the same locations. Laboratory data
will then be incorporated into numerical models that will calculate long-term
subcritical cracking-driven cracking rates under different environmental
conditions. Model results will be validated and refined using field data. The
project will shed new light on mechanical weathering, and the factors
controlling it, over geologic time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.