* 1839308
* TRIPODS+X:RES: Investigations at the Interface of Data Science and Neuroscience
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* John Lafferty, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2021
* USD 599,992.00

This project will build a transformative bridge between data science and
neuroscience. These two young fields are driving cutting-edge progress in the
technology, education, and healthcare sectors, but their shared foundations and
deep synergies have yet to be exploited in an integrated way - a new discipline
of "data neuroscience." This integration will benefit both fields: Neuroscience
is producing massive amounts of data at all levels, from synapses and cells to
networks and behavior. Data science is needed to make sense of these data, both
in terms of developing sophisticated analysis techniques and devising formal,
mathematically rigorous theories. At the same time, models in data science
involving AI and machine learning can draw insights from neuroscience, as the
brain is a prodigious learner and the ultimate benchmark for intelligent
behavior. Beyond fundamental scientific gains in both fields, the project will
produce additional outcomes, including: new collaborations between universities,
accessible workshops, graduate training, integration of undergraduate curricula
in data science and neuroscience, research opportunities for undergraduates that
help prepare them for the STEM workforce, academic-industry partnerships, and
enhanced high-performance computing infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching theme of this project is to develop a two-way channel between data
science and neuroscience. In one direction, the project will investigate how
computational principles from data science can be leveraged to advance theory
and make sense of empirical findings at different levels of neuroscience, from
cellular measurements in fruit flies to whole-brain functional imaging in
humans. In the reverse direction, the project will view the processes and
mechanisms of vision and cognition underlying these findings as a source for new
statistical and mathematical frameworks for data analysis. Research will focus
on four related objectives: (1) Distributed processing: reconciling work on
communication constraints and parallelization in machine learning with the
cellular neuroscience of motion perception to develop models of distributed
estimation; (2) Data representation: examining how our understanding of the
different ways that the brain stores information can inform statistically and
computationally efficient learning algorithms in the framework of exponential
family embeddings and variational inference; (3) Attentional filtering:
incorporating the cognitive concept of selective attention into machine learning
as a low-dimensional trace through a high-dimensional input space, with the
resulting models used to reconstruct human subjective experience from brain
imaging data; (4) Memory capacity: leveraging cognitive studies and natural
memory architectures to inform approaches for reducing/sharing memory in
artificial learning algorithms. The inherently cross-disciplinary nature of the
project will provide novel theoretical and methodological perspectives on both
data science and neuroscience, with the goal of enabling rapid, foundational
discoveries that will accelerate future research in these
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.