* 1839681
* Workshop: RoL:FELS: Invasion Biology Rules of Life; March 25-28, 2019, West Greenwich, Rhode Island
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Julie Lockwood, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2021
* USD 63,174.00

A principal product of globalization is the introduction and spread of non-
native species, with many of these species reducing biodiversity or imposing
substantial harm to our economy, agriculture, and human health. This workshop
will bring together scientists from data science and diverse areas of biology to
build an integrated understanding of the "rules" by which organismal biology
combines with local ecological conditions to allow invasive species to expand
their range and impact ecosystem function. Participants have expertise across a
wide variety of organisms and ecosystems, including plants, animals, and
microbes living in terrestrial, freshwater, and marine environments. The goal of
the workshop is to develop novel interdisciplinary approaches and perspectives
that strengthen our understanding of invasive species impacts and how these
impacts vary across locations. Such insights will fill critical knowledge gaps
related to preventing and managing invasive species at the local, state, and
national levels. The results will be shared through scientific publications,
news media, and direct interactions with the National Invasive Species Council.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop on the invasion biology rules of life will
integrate largely distinct research approaches to enhance scientific
understanding of invasion spread and impacts. Key objectives are to improve (1)
prediction of both establishment of a non-native species and invasion impacts on
native species and ecological processes, at more highly resolved spatial and
temporal scales and (2) methods of integrating invasion observations from
citizens and scientists into more highly detailed databases that, in turn, can
depict not only occurrences of non-native species but also impacts. Both
objectives will lead to more effective prediction and management of invasion
impacts and better policies to support these goals. Participants will link
mechanistic models of invasion spread, based on physiological and other traits,
to species distribution models based on various statistical treatments of
geographically structured environmental data. They will then assess whether the
linked models produce better predictions of invasion impacts at scales relevant
to management and direct researchers toward better understanding of why impacts
of particular invaders vary greatly across space and time. In addition, the
workshop will evaluate how best to assemble and use invasive species data
gathered from a wide range of sources into integrated databases that aid
research on invasion processes and impacts and assist managers and policymakers
in efficiently responding to potential and actual
invasions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.