* 1839230
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Role of Titanomagnetite in Vesiculation of Silicic Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Thomas Shea, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 03/31/2024
* USD 373,112.00

The formation of bubbles (or volatile exsolution) from silicate melt is the most
important phase transformation occurring in magmas en route to the surface
during an explosive eruption. As dissolved magmatic species H2O and CO2 exsolve
and produce a separate vapor phase, magma buoyancy and magma ascent rate
increase. Bubble expansion driven by decompression accelerates vesiculation,
further increasing magma ascent rate, and thereby the potential for increasing
conduit overpressure. Thus, the processes governing volatile exsolution and
outgassing, and particularly the timing of initial vapor phase nucleation with
respect to depth in the conduit, control a magma's explosive potential. A key
unresolved aspect of eruption of crystal-poor silicic magmas is whether bubble
nucleation occurs homogeneously (in the bulk fluid) or heterogeneously (aided by
a substrate). The distinction is important because homogeneous bubble nucleation
requires substantively larger pressure overstepping, or supersaturation than
heterogeneous bubble nucleation. Magnetite crystals are known to enhance the
rate of bubble nucleation by providing energetically-favorable substrates, and
yet failure to detect a sufficiently high abundance of these crystals in natural
pumice has supported the inference that bubble nucleation occurs homogenously.
However when numerical ascent models are supplied with measured bubble number
densities and executed specifying homogeneous bubble nucleation, the predicted
decompression and ascent rates are not only inconsistent with independent
assessments but also present physical paradoxes. This study explores the
possibility that nanometer sized magnetite particles are present in magmas prior
to eruption, and that these crystals trigger bubble nucleation at much lower
supersaturation values (i.e., at greater depth in the plumbing system) than
would occur in their absence. This proposal provides educational opportunities
for undergraduate and graduate students, and highlights participation of under-
represented minorities at the University of Hawaii and Montclair State
University (NJ). Professional development for Natural Science educators will be
provided through a series of workshops focusing on local geology, volcanology,
and Earth processes operating over short and long time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the question: do bubbles
nucleate homogeneously or heterogeneously in explosively erupting rhyolite
magma? The objectives of the work to be undertaken are to ascertain whether
plinian rhyolite pumices contain nano-scale titanomagnetite crystals in
numerical abundances that rival those of bubbles and to quantify the potential
influence of titanomagnetite crystals in bubble nucleation. Addressing these
issues is critical for understanding eruptive processes at a fundamental level
and is of practical significance in the numerical modeling of conduit flow
dynamics and thus assessment of volcanic hazard. The work plan centers around
two tasks: (a) applying techniques of rock magnetism to characterize the number
density and size distribution of titanomagnetite crystals in nominally aphyric
pumice clasts spanning a range in bubble interconnectivity; and (b) performing
novel laboratory crystallization experiments utilizing fO2 modulation to isolate
the influence of titanomagnetite from other variables. Magnetic characterization
(resolving the magnetic domain states, particle number densities, and size
distributions of submicron titanomagnetite crystals) is promising because it
lowers the detection limit of sparse Fe-Ti oxides by several orders of magnitude
relative to traditional electron microprobe imaging. Pairwise measurement of
clast permeability, to be obtained for a suite of natural rhyolites spanning a
range in eruption parameters and textural attributes, will facilitate
determination of magnetite-bubble nucleation chronology. In an experimental
task, magnetite stability will be manipulated using ambient fO2 in order to
generate rhyolite magma containing populations of magnetite crystals that span
large ranges in number density and volume fraction. A subsequent vesiculation
step will evaluate the quantitative control of magnetite nanoparticle number
density on the bubble-formation process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.