* 1839843
* EAGER: Real-Time: Intelligent Intersections
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2020
* Pravin Varaiya, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 12/31/2020
* USD 299,896.00

Intersections are dangerous. Threats arise from interactions among pedestrians,
bicycles and vehicles; traffic signal operation that does not reveal who has the
right of way; blind spots from vehicle obstructions; and illegal movements.
These threats cannot be avoided by autonomous vehicles, human drivers, cyclists
and pedestrians who do not have the information they need to avoid wrong
decisions, leading to crashes. This missing information can be calculated and
communicated by an intelligent intersection. The information gives the full
signal phase, an estimate of when the phase will change, blind spot occupancy,
and detection of red-light violators. The proposed research will develop the
real-time learning and decision algorithms of the intelligent intersection.

The euphoria over the rise of the autonomous vehicle industry has concealed the
fact that the safety record of autonomous vehicles today is much worse than that
of human drivers. Nor is it acknowledged that the safety of autonomous vehicles
and others (drivers, cyclists and pedestrians) can be improved by information
generated from the infrastructure. The proposed research aims to counter these
misconceptions by showing how intersection safety can be enhanced by
infrastructure assistance. The research is motivated by current concerns and
grounded on assumptions that are valid today. The U.S. registered 40,327 traffic
deaths in 2016, an increase of 13.5% since 2010. Our aim is to make a dent in
this national health emergency by helping to avoid errors that can be prevented
with better intelligence.

California's DMV has begun to issue permits to test vehicles without a safety
driver. DMV regulations give local cities some latitude in determining the
conditions under which such tests are permitted. The safety of their citizens
will be of foremost concern to local authorities. This research will help them
in their decisions and suggest the kind of information that they may require
from tests conducted in their cities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.