* 1839339
* TRIPODS+X:EDU: Collaborative Education: Data-driven Discovery and Alliance
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Chuang Peng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2023
* USD 99,976.00

The overall goal of this project is to devise targeted exposure to data science
in the context of science and engineering fields through the establishment of a
multi-institutional cooperative alliance. The complexity of challenges
surrounding data science necessitates collaboration, as no one organization can
identify and resolve all relevant issues. The current massive demand for data
scientists urgently requires training in analyzing real-world datasets and a
solid understanding of the mathematics and statistics behind the methods and
computational tools used in data science. Both curricula and co-curricular
activities are needed to prepare undergraduates and graduate students to enter
the data-driven workforce. As an initial step in this educational program, the
proposed project aims to set forth coordinated initiatives that intentionally
develop and administer communal data science curricula for application in the
sciences and engineering. These curricula and co-curricular initiatives also
broaden the participation of women and underrepresented minorities (who have
been traditionally underrepresented across all STEM disciplines) in data
science. Any research findings will be disseminated to scholarly
venues.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed activity devises communal
curricula units comprising two parts: concept overview and context application.
The concept overview provides standardized material and contributes to data
science pedagogy and practice. The context application builds upon the concept
overview to bring situational awareness and domain expertise to faculty and
student learners. These communal curricula units identify synergies of data
science to (specific) science and engineering disciplines. Additionally, these
units could be the impetus for a data science pedagogical platform available to
science and engineering faculty within the alliance. Specifically, the proposed
project seeks to engage in curriculum development, fill gaps in student and
faculty knowledge in data science and enact a sustainability model by embedding
partnerships. We will additionally develop and host one week-long data science
boot camp each year for students at the participating institutions, and one
half-day data science workshop each year for students and faculty. The shared
technologies, tools and resources developed through this grant can be adapted
for other research-intensive, women's and HBCU institutions. The overall project
will provide courses and sessions to enhance domain-specific data analytical
skills to both faculty and students across at least four
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.