* 1839077
* RAISE-TAQS: The Hidden Structure of the Disorder in Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* James Speck, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This is an interdisciplinary program at the interface of mathematics, quantum
semiconductor physics, and the material science of GaN semiconductors, devoted
to the rigorous understanding and control of the disordered systems with the aim
to grant the power to design, beyond just observing, new quantum objects hidden
in disordered semiconductor materials. A program of theoretical and experimental
research will be launched which pioneers the use of localized states in
disordered semiconductor alloys as quantum dots and offers breakthrough
achievements across several related areas which range from mathematics of the
disordered systems, to quantum physics, to nanoscale materials design and
characterization. The grand goal of this project is to predict and manipulate
localization properties of electron matter waves in disordered media in precise,
quantifiable, mathematical terms, with the applications to novel well-behaved
quantum objects in the localization regions of semiconductor
alloys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, in mathematics, the project aims at
the first deterministic theory revealing the precise geometric structure of
waves and more general solutions to PDEs in the presence of disorder. The first
treatment of localization in Poisson-Schrodinger and similar self-consistent
systems, and the first treatment of localization by geometry, and a complete
resolution of the problem of absolute continuity of elliptic measure. In
experimental material science, the project aims at the inauguration of the field
of localization engineering, including designing self-occurring nanostructures,
based on the InGaN materials system of LEDs, with desired properties based on
the control of electron localization at the microscopic scale, optimization of
their exciton properties, control of the transport between the localized states,
their relaxation and coherence times. In physics, the goal is a new approach to
quantum effects in disordered systems, with the emphasis on the outstanding open
problems of decoherence in quantized semiconductor structures. At stake is the
demonstration that disorder can greatly improve quantum parameters such as the
coherence time, which is the first mandatory step for building stable entangled
state generators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.