* 1839216
* RAISE-TAQS: Quantum Advantage of Broadband Entangled Photon Pairs in Spectroscopy and Metrology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Michael Raymer, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,137,119.00

This award in the Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering
(RAISE) on Transformational Advances in Quantum Systems (TAQS) program supports
collaborative work by Professors Michael Raymer, Andrew Marcus and Brian Smith
at the University of Oregon to demonstrate experimentally improved performance
in the sensing of remote objects and the spectroscopy of electronically coupled
molecules using quantum mechanical states of light. Advancements in nonlinear
optical spectroscopy and metrology that rely on intrinsically quantum mechanical
effects are of broad scientific interest to the chemistry, physics and
engineering communities. The methods and research so developed will create new
opportunities that may be utilized in the expanding interdisciplinary field of
quantum information science. The supported research will facilitate the
dissemination of results at international meetings and workshops, and the tools
developed will be made readily available to the scientific community. The three
PIs will collaborate on all aspects of the proposed work, and will co-advise the
PhD students working on the projects. The students involved will thus enjoy a
unique and broad exposure to research training that spans quantum optics,
ultrafast molecular spectroscopy, and biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
interdisciplinary team spanning chemistry, physics, and engineering in the
Oregon Center for Optical, Molecular, and Quantum Science, will carry out
experiments to demonstrate that Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen (EPR)-like entanglement
of photons in the time-frequency domain can provide a significant quantum
advantage in spectroscopy and metrology. Time-frequency entangled photon pairs
(EPP) are tightly correlated in time while being anti-correlated in frequency,
such that the sum of the energies of the photon pair is sharply defined. Such
quantum states of light offer the ability to circumvent classical Fourier time-
bandwidth limits when employing photon coincidence events, either in detection,
as in standard quantum optics, or in two-photon excitation of molecular
complexes, as in nonlinear spectroscopy. The research will investigate potential
quantum advantages in the context of four related optical schemes in metrology
and nonlinear spectroscopy: 1) Quantum illumination (sensing of an object's
presence or absence); 2) Multi-parameter estimation of complementary parameters
(e.g., estimating the distance and velocity of a reflecting object); 3) Two-
photon interferometric nonlinear spectroscopy; and 4) Entangled photon-pair 2D
fluorescence spectroscopy. The commonality that unifies the four schemes is the
use of broad-band (multi-spectral-mode), time-frequency EPP produced by
spontaneous parametric down-conversion (SPDC), coupled with interferometer
configurations that exploit quantum interference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.