* 1839205
* Collaborative Research:Revolutionizing Systematics - Revitalizing Monographs
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Marymegan Daly, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 84,437.00

Taxonomic monographs are comprehensive treatments of organismal groups that
include descriptions of the appearance of species, estimates of their
geographical range, rationale for their delimitation, and details of their
genealogical relationships and patterns of diversification. The critical
baseline data on biodiversity included in taxonomic monographs can be used by
biologists and non-experts alike. While other aspects of systematic biology
research have embraced cutting-edge methodologies and analysis pipelines, many
monographs are produced and published the same as they have been for decades.
This project will support a series of workshops to engage the systematic biology
community and identify strategies to reinvigorate and modernize taxonomic
monographs. Four workshops will identify and incorporate innovations in
computing, data visualization, and workflows to provide solutions to systemic
and scientific challenges facing monographic research. The workshops will
catalyze conversations and build collaborations that will strengthen and broaden
the practice of monography. Invitations to participate in the workshops will be
posted on the websites of professional societies with systematic biologist
members, and participants will be selected with the goal of achieving breadth in
expertise, career stage, gender and ethnic diversity. Products resulting from
the workshops will be broadly and freely disseminated via scientific
publications and websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These workshops aim to realize
the potential for taxonomic monographs to become central hubs that link and
synthesize biodiversity information, with improved access to detailed phenotypic
and geographic data, more dynamic, nuanced, and integrated taxonomies, and fully
explicit, accessible, and testable hypotheses about organisms, their attributes,
and their diversification. In addition to stimulating interactions among
systematists who conduct monographic studies in diverse taxonomic groups and
among systematists who work on questions that are or could be integrated into
monographs, these workshops will engage the community of database scientists,
computational biologist, software developers, and others to find novel solutions
to the challenges of data access and integration. The workshops will culminate
in a synthesis and consolidation of the ideas developed in the preceding
workshops, aimed at building prototypes of tools, workflows, and structures that
can be tested and improved by the broader community of systematic biologists.
The technological and conceptual developments that will be integrated into
monography will make the data of monographs more accessible and impactful across
fields, and the interdisciplinarity that will be fostered by engaging database
scientists, computational scientists, and software developers will support long-
term and innovative solutions that capitalize on the integrative and
comprehensive perspectives of taxonomic monographs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.