* 1839161
* I-Corps: A Quantitative Approach to Detecting Meltdowns in Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Gloria Kim, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 07/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be the
improvement of the quality of lives of both the individuals with Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD) and their caregivers. The prevalence of autism has increased by
15% in 2014. Now, 1 in 59 children born in the US has ASD. This translates to
roughly 5.5 million individuals in the US who are less likely to go to college
or find a job after high school. Our user-friendly, discreet device can help
affected individuals gain independence and create a supportive learning or
working environment for them. Pre-emptive meltdown detection and care devices
are virtually non-existent in the current marketplace. As the first to enter the
market at an affordable price point, we expect to lead and spawn derivative
products. Beyond autism, our platform technology can be utilized to push data to
a healthcare professional, catalyzing informed and personalized preventive care.
Other conceivable application is monitoring compliance and measuring the
effectiveness of rehabilitation exercises for muscle engagement of stroke
patients. Our innovation also has the potential to reach and assist those
affected by other types of anxiety disorders. It can help people become more
informed about their own mental health, intervene, and lead healthier lives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project involves wearable technology for
predicting, detecting, tracking, and mitigating meltdowns for individuals with
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD). We have developed a biometric sensing suite
comprising two components: The hardware portion consists of a detachable, water-
resistant core unit for biosignal filtering, processing, and transmission as
well as machine washable sensors that can be embedded into apparel; The software
portion consists of our proprietary machine learning models for determination of
when a meltdown is to occur, alerting the parent or caregiver of a high risk of
a meltdown, and an assessment of mitigation techniques afterwards. Our
innovation will advance autism research, as the technology has the potential to
open the doors to a better understanding of behavioral phenotypes. Being able to
tell what a non-verbal child is feeling can pave the way for more efficient and
productive lessons for social/education development as well as broader
phenotypical research. The assessment feature of our product will lead to the
improvement of mitigation techniques for meltdowns. gaia's competitive advantage
is in its pre-emptive nature of care. Proof-of-concept was demonstrated, and a
beta prototype will be complete by the end of Summer
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.