* 1839535
* EAGER: GOALI: REAL-D Path-Sampling Algorithms to Understand Rare Safety Events and Improve Alarm Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Warren Seider, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

Chemical manufacturing processes can pose serious hazards, so safety
considerations play an important role in their design. To minimize the risk of
catastrophic accidents, which can result in loss of human life or major
environmental impacts, extensive instrumentation such as control systems,
alarms, and safety interlocks, are routinely employed in chemical processes.
While such efforts are successful in mitigating the most likely adverse events,
it is challenging to anticipate and mitigate the effects of infrequent adverse
events in real-time. Importantly, such rare safety events, which have not been
considered in plant design, can lead to the most severe consequences. The
proposed exploratory research project is a collaboration between a research team
from the University of Pennsylvania and an industrial partner, Air Liquide, and
aims to understand the pathways leading to rare safety events in chemical
manufacturing processes through a combination of process modeling, chemical
plant data, and path-sampling algorithms, and to use this understanding to
design novel multi-variable alarm systems for the real-time monitoring and
prevention of such incidents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To combine process models
with path-sampling algorithms, such as Forward Flux Sampling, a simple
exothermic continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR) model will be employed first.
Then, a state-of-the-art model for Air Liquide's realistically complex steam-
methane reforming (SMR) process will be studied to obtain an ensemble of rare
accident trajectories. By analyzing these trajectories, accident frequencies and
durations will be determined, along with secondary process variables, which are
likely to play an important role in precipitating accidents. In the vicinity of
the most likely rare-event trajectories, actual plant data will be sought with
projections obtained using near-miss data in Air Liquide historian databases.
The proposed research could lead to the adoption of path-sampling methods to
predict rare events in other fields, which are both data-rich and have reliable
models available, e.g., in forecasting extreme weather events. The research will
be integrated with educational and outreach efforts. The Principal Investigator
will incorporate the results of the research in subsequent editions of his
widely adopted textbook, "Product and Process Design Principles", which has been
used by over 40,000 students worldwide. Finally, there is a plan to develop a
hands-on outreach program to mentor underrepresented minority students from
local colleges to encourage participation in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.