* 1839455
* Portraits of Place: Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Shaun O'Boyle, O'Boyle                 Shaun
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2020
* USD 1.00

Portraits of Place at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station is a comprehensive
photographic study of the station buildings, infrastructure and landscapes of
the South Pole. The goal of this detailed photographic study is to advance
knowledge about this remote location and the scientific research taking place
there. The project's emphasis is on the scientific hardware at the Pole, which
is providing new understanding of our planet and universe. By giving an overall
picture of the station, and then capturing details of the station, this project
will provide a window for the public to understand the physical aspects of being
and working at the South Pole: not only the weather, the extreme cold, and the
infrastructure required to live there, but the major instruments deployed for
the various major science projects and the researchers who operate and maintain
them. Seeing the physical objects that make the science possible makes the
science more tangible and illustrates the depth of the science and engineering
required to accomplish the research that is unique to the Pole.

Photographic subjects at the South Pole will include the telescopes and other
observational instruments, the buildings that house them, and the landscapes
that surround them. This will include visually describing the specialized
instruments used in astronomy, physics, cosmology and climate studies, and
capturing their unique physical qualities as objects. Working with project
scientists and researchers, scheduled visits will be made to photograph
individual sites in the Dark Sector, Clean Air Sector, and Quiet Sector. An
effort will be made to visually describe and emphasize the remote harsh nature
of the environment of the station and the infrastructure and redundant systems
required to work and survive there. Photographs will be available for public
viewing through a number of media, including a takeover of the Smithsonian
Magazine's Instagram feed for a week while in Antarctica, blog posts to
popantarctica.wordpress.com, photographs posted to two websites,
shaunoboylephoto.com and oboylephoto.com, and an exhibition of prints at the
Peary-MacMillan Arctic Museum in the fall of 2020 including presentations to
students. In addition, a book is planned of the photographer's work from visits
to all three U.S. Antarctic Program (USAP) stations. Exhibitions and
presentations will include the photographs paired with images or data from the
science instruments photographed along with the words of the scientists. This
convergence between art and science has the potential to strengthen the artwork
and presents the science in a new context, underlining the synergy between the
objects and tools of science, the scientific results, and the unique place where
the science takes place. Portraits of Place at Amundsen-Scott South Pole Station
is an Antarctic Artists and Writers project supported by NSF's Office of Polar
Programs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.