* 1839570
* The Many-Particle Physics of Lasing in Two-Dimensional Transition-Metal Dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Rudolf Binder, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2023
* USD 357,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education on the physics of novel laser systems made of two-dimensional
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;Lasers and light-emitting diodes are ubiquitous in
everyday life, from communication networks powering the internet to traffic
lights. The light emitted from lasers is very different compared to that from
light-emitting diodes. The light from a laser is coherent, meaning that the
waves of light propagate through space in lock step, similar to musicians in a
marching band, all walking in unison. Coherence is an important characteristic
of lasers; its origin is often a complex physical process. It occurs
spontaneously so, there is nothing that plays the role of the band leader
directing the march.&lt;br/&gt;Recent efforts to miniaturize lasers, to make
them useful in more applications related to electro-optical information
processing, involve the use of two-dimensional materials. These materials are
effectively only one or two atomic layers thick. These materials are very
different from those used in conventional lasers, and their physical properties
are only now being uncovered. The PI and his team will focus on electronic and
optical processes. A detailed understanding of these processes should ultimately
help make lasers based on two dimensional materials technologically more mature
by controlling and optimizing light emission characteristics, including
coherence and laser action. The PI and his team also aim to elucidate
similarities and differences between lasing in two-dimensional materials and
other systems where coherence forms spontaneously, for example superconductors
where coherence is not related to light emission but to a collective quantum
mechanical state of electrons.&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's
efforts to engage in undergraduate student mentoring as well as outreach to
Native American students at the college and high school level. The project also
supports writing a graduate-student-level text book, an introduction to
nonlinear semiconductor optics with an emphasis on advanced theoretical
techniques of condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and education on the
physics of novel laser systems made of two-dimensional
semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;Coherent light emission from semiconductors can be
viewed as a result of a non-equilibrium phase transition to a state with broken
phase symmetry which leads to a non-zero expectation value of the
semiconductor's polarization. There are various concepts for such systems to
emit coherent light, ranging from conventional lasers, to exciton lasers, to
emission related to Fermi-edge singularities, and to Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer
states and Bose-Einstein condensates (BEC) of excitons and exciton-polaritons.
The degree to which these stationary non-equilibrium states are analogous to
their equilibrium counterparts varies: an exciton BEC, for example, is often
assumed to be very similar to an equilibrium BEC, while a conventional laser has
no direct equilibrium analogue. This interesting variety of non-equilibrium
many-particle states in a semiconductor arise through strong Coulomb
interactions between the electrons and holes, which are created, for example,
through electrical or optical pumping.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional
materials such as monolayer transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have
attracted much attention. These materials are semiconductors with very strong
Coulomb interaction effects. The Coulomb effects determine the coherent emission
from TMD systems, such as nanolasers and high-quality microcavities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to answer
fundamental physics questions in these systems, to study the possibility of
unconventional lasing processes such as exciton lasing, bosonic and fermionic
polariton lasing as well as BCS-like polariton lasing, and to develop
theoretical understanding that incorporates microscopic effects that are
relevant in two-dimensional TMD materials. The project objectives also include
testable predictions for experimentally accessible emission/laser
characteristics. The theoretical approach to be used is based on the method of
non-equilibrium Green's functions, combined with numerical solutions of the
relevant time-dependent equations of motion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
also supports the PI's efforts to engage in undergraduate student mentoring as
well as outreach to Native American students at the college and high school
level. The project also supports writing a graduate-student-level text book, an
introduction to nonlinear semiconductor optics with an emphasis on non-
equilibrium Green's functions and Feynman diagrams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.