* 1839656
* Integrating Computational Science with Environmental Sciences Associated with Habitat Restoration and Education in New York Harbor
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Christelle Scharff, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Michael Ford
* 02/29/2024
* USD 2,591,198.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project is supported by the STEM+C program and advances its mission by
integrating computational thinking, data literacy, and statistical concepts with
a field-based STEM curriculum model for middle school students that focuses on
science fields associated with habitat monitoring and restoration. This
integration will be accomplished through: (1) Expansion and further development
of Restoration Hubs in and near the water of New York Harbor that support field
science experiences; (2) Professional learning opportunities for teachers that
feature integration of computational thinking with other STEM disciplines; (3)
Development of curriculum units that promote learning of computer science and
data science concepts and skills, and raise awareness of education pathways to
careers in computing, data sciences, and habitat restoration sciences; and (4) A
summer STEM Institute for computer science and
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will augment a large-scale design
and development project that is testing a model of community-based science
education in an urban environment. The existing curriculum model focuses on key
concepts in the geological, environmental, and biological sciences that are
associated with monitoring environmental conditions and habitat restoration.
This project will enhance the existing model by integrating data literacy,
computational thinking and relevant statistical concepts and skills into the
existing curriculum, enabling students to gain new skills and competencies
associated with gathering and analyzing large amounts of field data associated
with environmental monitoring and habitat restoration. Data to be analyzed range
from basic water chemistry data to data associated with bacterial monitoring and
environmental DNA sampling and analyses. The research associated with this
project is guided by three hypotheses: (1) Teacher professional learning in data
literacy, computer science, and STEM practices will positively influence student
outcomes within their classrooms; (2) Teaching informed by teacher professional
learning in data literacy, computer science, and science research practices,
coupled with teacher and student engagement with scientists will positively
influence student knowledge of computational thinking and perceptions of STEM
fields and careers; and (3) The project's model of engagement, including
problem-based learning, will enhance student awareness of and intent to pursue
education pathways to STEM careers. A variety of measures will be used with
teachers and students in treatment and comparison groups to test these
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.