* 1839505
* Dense and Dynamic Zwitterionic Polyether Cloaks for Next Generation Stealth Nanomaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Hao Cheng, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 03/31/2023
* USD 359,035.00

Nanomaterials-based therapeutics and imaging agents are promising for disease
treatment and diagnosis. Several nanomedicines have been approved by the U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, and more are under rigorous clinical studies.
However, nearly all synthetic nanomaterials are quickly cleared in the
bloodstream of patients after systemic administration, limiting their biomedical
applications. In the blood, plasma proteins immediately adsorb onto nanomaterial
surfaces. Some of the adsorbed proteins mark nanomaterials as foreign invaders,
like bacteria, and this results in their clearance by the host cells. The
rational design of long circulating nanomaterials depends on a thorough
understanding of the interactions among nanomaterials, proteins, and cells.
Currently, there is a dearth of systematic study of these interactions. The
research team will establish a comprehensive understanding of nanomaterial-
protein-cell interactions for developing a new generation of polymers. When
grafted onto nanomaterials, these polymers are expected to dramatically extend
the blood circulation of nanomaterials by minimizing protein adsorption and
controlling the kinetics of nanomaterial-cell interactions in the blood flow.
Ultra-long circulating nanomaterials may have tremendous societal benefits by
improving the delivery of therapeutics. The polymer may also be used as an
antifouling coating for insulin pump catheters, dialysis membranes, neural
electrodes, and materials in direct contact with microbial environments. The
knowledge gained through this research will be integrated with educational and
outreach activities to inspire students to pursue high-level education in
science, technology, engineering and math. Furthermore, the research team will
engage kindergarten children in the use of materials science as an investigative
tool and thereby explore the impact of early scientific education on students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cloaking nanomaterials with a grafted polymer layer is the
most widely used approach to extend nanomaterials blood circulation. However,
the circulation half-lives of nearly all synthetic nanomaterials are less than a
few hours, restricting their applications. A new generation of stealth cloaks
that enable ultra-long circulation of nanomaterials will open the door for new
applications. The objectives of this proposal are to (i) achieve an in-depth
understanding of nanomaterial-protein-cell interactions and (ii) develop an
innovative zwitterionic polyether cloak with controlled dynamic surface
morphology to efficiently reduce protein adsorption and complement activation on
nanomaterials, and interfere with nanomaterial-cell interactions for generating
ultra-long circulating nanomaterials. These objectives cannot be fully achieved
using existing zwitterionic polymers. The rationale of this proposal is based on
the novel findings that liver sinusoidal endothelial cells can be as important
as Kupffer cells in clearing some types of nanomaterials, and that the
fluctuation of grafted chains kinetically affect nanomaterial-protein
interactions, decreasing nanomaterial clearance by cells in the liver,
especially liver sinusoidal endothelial cells. To demonstrate the broad
application of the dynamic cloak, representative organic and inorganic
nanomaterials grafted with hierarchical flexible zwitterionic polymers will be
investigated. The proposed study will advance the understanding of interactions
between nanomaterials and biological systems at a molecular level, which is
critical for applying nanomaterials in healthcare and environmental
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.