* 1839155
* RAISE-TAQS: Room-Temperature Quantum Sensing and Computation using DNA-based Excitonic Circuits
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Dirk Englund, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Moore's Law, the well-known observation that the number of transistors in
silicon-based integrated circuits and personal computing devices doubles
approximately every year, has ended. A major challenge for the next decade is to
identify viable alternatives to traditional, silicon-based computing. Such
alternatives are needed to meet the ever-increasing worldwide computational
demands in almost all areas of life. Quantum information processors may be one
viable alternative to meet this demand. By taking advantage of quantum
mechanical phenomena, the computational power of quantum computers may exceed by
orders of magnitude that of conventional, silicon-based integrated circuits.
However, to date quantum information processing is required to operate at ultra-
cold temperatures in highly isolated and protected environments. No viable
quantum information processing platform exists that functions at room
temperature or in wet condition. If they did exist, such quantum systems could
be used for tasks such as quantum-enhanced sensing. In this project, structured
DNA circuits are used to construct quantum-based processing and sensing devices
that operate at room temperature and in the liquid state. Foundational
principles of DNA-based quantum sensing and signal processing devices are being
established and applied to practical quantum information processing challenges
to demonstrate viability of this revolutionary approach to address diverse
societal computing needs. An interdisciplinary team of investigators from
chemistry, biological engineering and materials science, and electrical
engineering will pursue this transformative approach towards room-temperature
information processors, and train the next-generation of interdisciplinary
quantum computer scientists and engineers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Classical silicon-based computing has reached its limit for solving
increasingly complex, resource-intensive computational challenges in diverse
application areas. In contrast, quantum-based systems enable a myriad of
possibilities for transformative technological advances in simulation, sensing,
computation, and metrology by harnessing quantum mechanical phenomena. Through
the unique physics of quantum mechanics, quantum systems process or exchange
information that can surpass classical computing architectures and measure
environmental variables with unprecedented sensitivity. However, deployment of
quantum systems to diverse application arenas has been encumbered by the
fragility of quantum states to the ever-present noisy thermal bath, thereby
limiting the operation of current quantum devices to cryogenic temperatures. For
this reason, fundamental investigations into new quantum information processing
and sensing architectures are needed, particularly for the deployment of devices
for room-temperature and biomedical applications. Here, novel quantum circuits
are developed based on controlled excitonic states of biomolecular materials.
The structural control and single-molecule addressability of highly programmable
DNA nanostructures are leveraged together with synthetic dyes as an engineering
platform for quantum-coherent excitonic systems. Controlling the positions and
energies of distinct excitonic states using DNA-based scaffolds enables the
integration of qubits into higher-order circuits to create multi-qubit systems
and devices. Closely coupled theory and experiment are used to design and
evaluate emergent qubit function. Novel, high-impact room-temperature quantum
sensing and information processing devices are fabricated and characterized,
with potential for integration into prototypical next-generation quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.