* 1839506
* Carbonyl sulfide measurements in the GISP2D ice core from Summit, Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Eric Saltzman, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 02/29/2024
* USD 718,890.00

Polar ice cores contain an archive of ancient air that can be used to
reconstruct history of atmospheric gas composition. This project involves
analysis of samples from the GISP2D ice core drilled at Summit, Greenland, and
will develop an atmospheric history of carbonyl sulfide (COS). Variations in
atmospheric COS can be linked to growth of plants on land because they take up
COS from the atmosphere during photosynthesis. The Greenland ice core record of
COS from this project will be used to document possible changes in terrestrial
plant growth over the last 1000 years and to constrain the natural controls on
stratospheric sulfate aerosol layer. This project will support training of a
doctoral student at UC Irvine and provide hands-on research experience for
several undergraduate students in a state-of-the-art analytical chemistry
laboratory. It will also support K-12 outreach activities by the UC Irvine ice
core laboratory in local middle and high schools through the CLEAN Education
initiative, a non-profit founded and operated by graduate students at UC
Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators previously measured COS in ice
cores from several different Antarctic sites, recovering COS records of the
southern hemisphere atmosphere over periods that range from centuries to multi-
millennia. As part of this project, they will measure 140 samples from the
GISP2D ice core and create the first ice core COS record of the northern
hemisphere atmosphere spanning the last 3000 years. Ice core air will be dry-
extracted and analyzed with an existing gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
(GC-MS) system. COS lifetime in the atmosphere is only 2 years and its
atmospheric budget is poorly understood. Estimates of COS removal from the
atmosphere via photosynthesis by land plants far exceed the known emissions,
possibly pointing to an unidentified natural source. Modeling work suggests
knowing the pole-to-pole COS difference in the preindustrial atmosphere would
provide a robust constraint on the nature and magnitude of the unidentified
source(s). The GISP2D measurements for the last 1000 years before present will
be conducted at high-resolution. This includes the Little Ice Age period, during
which Antarctic ice core records display a decline in atmospheric COS. The new
Greenland measurements will constitute a northern hemisphere analogue to
existing Antarctic records. Results will be used to study climate driven
variability in atmospheric COS and implications for changes in plant growth and
variability in background stratospheric sulfate in the preindustrial atmosphere.
The project includes plans for a comprehensive modelling effort with a 6-box
model of the atmosphere, which will be coupled to ocean and terrestrial
vegetation models. Measurements from 3000 to 1000 years before present will be
conducted at lower resolution and the primary goal will be to gain further
insight into the slow in-situ hydrolysis loss of COS in ice cores that has been
previously observed in Antarctic ice cores over multi-millennial time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.