* 1839616
* EAGER: Real-Time: Precision Reserves from Flexible Loads: An Online Reinforcement Learning Approach
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Le Xie, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 09/30/2021
* USD 248,799.00

This proposal explores an online reinforcement learning framework that can
provide high capacity rating and scheduling of many end user-level flexible
resources such as swimming pools. In sharp contrast with conventional approaches
of statically and uniformly treating end user loads with small capacity rating
and scheduling them via heuristics based algorithms, the proposed framework will
provide a theoretically rigorous and practically scalable approach for learning
the unknown parameters of end user loads and adaptively controlling them with
provable guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; (i) This proposal will illustrate the possibility
of substantial increasing of capacity credit from end user demand response in
provision of spinning reserves via scalable real-time estimation and control as
opposed to the conventional heuristic based scheduling algorithms. (ii) This
proposal will introduce a learning and adaptive control algorithm using the
framework of online reinforcement learning to address the operational problems
when the consumer specific parameters are unknown. (iii) This proposal will
introduce an index-based learning and scheduling algorithm that scales only
linearly with the number of end users. (iv) This proposal will test a data-
driven optimal scheduling that jointly maximize the profit for the aggregator
and track the required reserve provision trajectory from the collection of even
a small number of flexible users. The proposed research is generalizable towards
many resource scheduling problems with uncertainty that arise in the context of
transportation, communication, and other engineering dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Once
successful, this project will provide a systematic approach for obtaining
spinning reserve at much&lt;br/&gt;less cost from flexible end user resources in
a provably reliable and environmentally sustainable way.&lt;br/&gt;This team
will introduce new course modules on the topic of data-driven online learning in
dynamical systems, which closely integrates reinforcement learning, dynamical
control, and optimization for more than 200 undergraduate and graduate students
currently enrolled in related areas courses at Texas A&amp;M. &lt;br/&gt;This
team will continue the strong track record of engaging undergraduate students
for research, in particular the under-representative
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.