* 1839513
* EAGER:  Development of a Genetic System Directing Multicellular Development of Myxococcales
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Emina Stojkovic, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Clouse
* 06/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

Myxobacteria are distinguished among bacteria by a multicellular stage in their
life cycle known as fruiting bodies. Preliminary evidence suggests that this
transition from single cell to multicellular fruiting body is regulated by
light. The primary goal of this project is to establish a set of novel,
previously untested yet potentially transformative genetic tools that can be
applied broadly in bacterial studies but are used here to examine the light
induced transition to multicellularity in Myxobacteria. Determining the
mechanisms underlying this multicellular process in Myxobacteria could have
important implications for understanding the evolution of more complex pathways
seen in multicellular eukaryotes, which include most higher organisms.
Undergraduate and graduate students will receive training in multidisciplinary
state-of-the-art research methods and techniques including bacterial genetics
and structural biochemistry and biophysics. In addition, over 75 students will
be exposed to research experiences during completion of undergraduate courses in
biochemistry and molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genetic
mechanisms underlying fruiting body formation are not conserved in Myxococcales
resulting in variations in the fruiting morphology and the role of visible light
as an essential environmental signal. The reasons for this relative lack of
conservation are unknown. Development of a novel genetic system for examining
and testing the plasticity of this unique multicellular program is vital to
answering how a complex developmental pathway responds to various genetic
changes. The proposed genetic system will be used to support exploratory work on
how light controls fruiting body formation in non-photosynthetic Myxobacteria.
Genes that code for a) the bacterial photoreceptors that perceive and respond to
light and b) the circadian clock KaiC homolog of cyanobacteria are found across
all three suborders of Myxococcales, yet their role in non-photosynthetic
bacteria remain largely unknown. Genetically, the best characterized M. xanthus
doesn't contain either of these genes, but closely related M. fulvus does. How
have the two pathways adapted to these differences? By using a comparative
analysis of closely related, yet distinctly different species, M. xanthus and M.
fulvus, the investigators will be able to approach this question without the
complexity inherent with more diverse Myxobacteria. Insertion mutations via
plasmid integration mutagenesis and in-frame deletions using insertion-excision
mutagenesis, based on tools available for M. xanthus, will be developed in M.
fulvus. This genetic system will allow characterization of the biochemical
function of the red-light photoreceptor known as bacteriophytochrome and the
circadian clock KaiC homolog, to define the role of these proteins in
Myxococcales development. In addition, the developmental transcriptome of M.
fulvus in the light and dark will be compared along with a comparison of the M.
fulvus developmental transcriptome to that of M. xanthus to determine
similarities and differences in developmental gene expression between these two
close relatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.