* 1839786
* RoL:FELS: Workshop: Reciprocal illumination between ecology and biomechanics: evolution, integration, and constraint, March 2019, Portland, Oregon
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Lara Ferry, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 03/31/2022
* USD 43,318.00

To survive, animals must perform tasks within the context of their environmental
conditions, and these conditions are rapidly changing across earth. Animal
function is, in turn, a product of constraint, plasticity, adaptation, and other
processes. Constraints can be ecological, evolutionary, developmental, or
biomechanical. Thus, understanding complex phenotypes related to animal function
requires an integrative approach. To accomplish this, the workshop will bring
together a number of fields, from biologists focused on genomics and
evolutionary ecology, to biomechanists. This workshop falls under the Rules of
Life as it explores how complex phenotypes respond to ecological shifts,
resulting in plastic and evolutionary responses. How this occurs is critical for
determining if/how animals and plants will survive over the coming years. The
results of this workshop will be shared with a broad audience (including the
general public). The topic of the workshop will be highlighted as a main
discussion topic for upper grades (8-12). In general, the theme of "How Things
Work and Why" is interesting to young people. The workshop seeks to stimulate
curiosity so that future STEM scholars and professionals emerge. The focus on a
diverse panel of participants will ensure that the scientific community is
empowering the future of the field, selecting current and future leaders that
will serve as role models for students from underrepresented groups in the
sciences. In light of this, the participants are diverse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The quest to understand the origin and ramifications of
complex phenotypes has been a goal of evolutionary biologists for a considerable
amount of time. However, a major gap in this quest is the incorporation of
biomechanically relevant information to understand complex traits. This is
despite the fact that functionally-mediated traits are likely critical for
survival. Morphological traits have been used as proxies for biomechanical
traits, but this has frequently been shown to be inadequate. In addition,
ecological variables are key for understanding how organisms function in their
environment. This, in turn, is key for understanding evolutionary processes.
What is needed to fully understand complex traits is the integration of ecology,
biomechanics, and evolution. In terms of animal function, integration is
persistent and important for the successful execution of tasks. How this relates
to ecology is currently unknown. This workshop will bring together
biomechanists, functional morphologists, evolutionary biologists, and ecologists
to generate a paradigm for ecomechanics that will be the foundation for future
research that will uncover key information regarding complex
phenotypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.