* 1839762
* RUI: Crystallization of Biologically-Relevant Poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(epsilon-caprolactone) Copolymers During Film Preparation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Ryan VanHorn, Lafayette College
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2020
* USD 75,549.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Materials used in the biomedical industry find utility based on the relationship
between their structure and the properties needed. Among polymer materials
(plastics) the relevant properties often include strength, flexibility, the
ability to break down in the body, etc. Two such polymer materials, PEO and PCL,
already find a variety of uses in the biomedical field, e.g. in implant coatings
and medication-delivery systems. The range of applications increases when these
two materials are combined. To engineer a specific product, one must know how to
develop specific structures in this combined material (PEO-PCL). This research
aims to understand how these structures develop and how to control the
variability of the resultant properties. By varying the temperature and
characteristics of the solution from which these materials are processed, one is
able to obtain desired properties including, but not limited to, strength,
flexibility, and breakdown rate. Polymers are uniquely suited for a variety of
applications because their properties may span a large range depending on their
chemistry and structure. For example, plastics can be rigid and brittle or
flexible and soft depending on their structure. Understanding the development of
PEO-PCL structures should lead to an increase in possible uses for this
inexpensive, widely prevalent, and robust material. Moreover, the results of
this study could be applied to the study of the structures and properties of
other biomedical, commodity, or sustainable plastics. A second, but no less
important, goal of this work is to train students in the broad disciplines of
polymer and materials sciences and prepare them for careers in technology-
related areas.

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT

Structural characterization is a critical component in predicting or tailoring
the macroscopic properties of a material. In diblock copolymers, the structure
involves phase separation between the two components and possible
crystallization of one or both of the components. Poly(ethylene oxide)-block-
poly(caprolactone) (PEO-b-PCL) copolymers are unique in several ways. First,
they are both crystallizable with similar transition temperatures. Second, they
are both prevalent in the biomedical field since they are biocompatible and
since PCL is biodegradable. Lastly, by combining hydrophilic PEO and hydrophobic
PCL into a block copolymer, the material is amphiphilic allowing for transport
of hydrophobic drugs into the body. It is all of these traits that make these
materials attractive for use in implant coatings and drug delivery systems. For
these applications, the ability to manipulate the strength, elasticity, and
degradation rate, amongst other properties, is important. These properties
depend on how the material phase-separates and crystallizes from solution. Since
phase separation is driven by crystallization, the focus of this research is to
understand the crystallization mechanism and then control the crystallinity of
the material by changing processing conditions such as temperature, casting
solvent, and molecular weight. Using FTIR and DSC analyses, the crystallization
of PEO and PCL blocks in samples with similar weight fractions or largely
different weight fractions, cast from different solvents and/or annealed at
different isothermal temperatures, will be monitored. Because the transition
temperatures are similar, thermodynamic and kinetic considerations can be
manipulated more easily by changes in these parameters. The goal is to pinpoint
how each condition influences the crystallization mechanism, the overall
crystallinity, and subsequent properties of interest in the biomedical field.