* 1839095
* RAPID: Increasing Capacity for Data Collection during the 2018 East Rift Eruption, Hawaii Island
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Ryan Perroy, University of Hawaii at Hilo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2019
* USD 51,621.00

Volcanic eruptions pose major threats to communities living nearby and can also
impact aviation transportation and other critical networks. This RAPID award
will support the enhancement of infrastructure available to capture spatial data
for monitoring the ongoing volcanic activity within the Kilauea Volcano East
Rift Zone. It will support acquisition of equipment to continue collection of
high resolution thermal and visible imagery and derived three-dimensional
datasets from small unmanned aerial system (sUAS) platforms, as well as to
expand the temporal and spatial coverage of ongoing efforts. The ability to
collect and process sUAS-derived imagery to quickly provide updated measures of
lava flow fronts, hazardous gas concentrations, and eruption activity for first
responders and emergency operations center managers has improved our ability to
protect and inform the affected population in Hawai'i. Lessons learned during
this disaster response will also have application for other similarly affected
communities in the future. Beyond the immediate societal benefits this requested
equipment will provide, broader impacts will result from what we can learn from
these rapidly acquired datasets as they are applied towards developing improved
eruption prediction and modeling capability in the future, and the invaluable
experiences participating students are acquiring as a result of participating in
the data collection campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current 2018 Kilauea
eruption, which has included the opening of volatile vents within the Leilani
Estates subdivision and a transition from 'a'a to pahoehoe lava flows, provides
a unique opportunity to document the evolution of these vents over time and
measure eruption rates and flow rheology characteristics and evolution. The
accessibility of these erupting fissures allows for repeated and consistent
measurements from sUAS platforms and field collection campaigns, and together
these datasets can greatly advance our understanding of East Rift Zone
volcanology. The high resolution sUAS-derived spatial time-series datasets being
generated by this group will be the first to capture all phases of the eruption
process during a significant episode in Kilauea's eruption history. It is
expected that these data will help volcano scientists understand and predict
Kilauea's ongoing and future eruptions. Specific objectives include (1)
capturing the evolution of fissures, from precursor cracks to mature vents, (2)
accurately measuring the eruption rate, a unique opportunity as the entire flow
volume is presently contained within the ~25 km2 (at present) study area, (3)
capturing the topographic and thermal evolution of the lava flow. The methods to
be used to achieve these objectives include repeat mapping with thermal and
visible sensors via sUAS platforms, establishing ground control through
differential GPS occupations, and remote sensing post-processing and spatial
data analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.