* 1839966
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF: Augmented Cognition for Teaching: Transforming Teacher Work with Intelligent Cognitive Assistants
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,499,985.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;K-12 STEM teachers are critical
to the US economy. With investments in teaching quality representing enormous
economic value, the quality of education has been identified as a significant
determinant of gross domestic product economic growth. However, the US teacher
workforce is experiencing a crisis: teacher demand exceeds supply at every
level, and attrition is extraordinarily high for new teachers. Further, while
STEM teaching represents one of the areas of highest need, STEM teachers leave
the profession at high rates. These developments call for innovative workforce
augmentation technologies to improve K-12 STEM teachers' performance and quality
of work-life. To address this critical national need, the project will
investigate how intelligent cognitive assistants for teachers can transform
teacher work to significantly increase teacher performance and teacher quality
of work-life. The project centers on the design, development, and evaluation of
the Intelligent Augmented Cognition for Teaching (I-ACT) framework for
intelligent cognitive assistants for teachers. With a focus on assisting K-12
STEM teachers in technology-rich inquiry teaching that supports collaborative,
problem-based STEM learning, I-ACT cognitive assistants provide teachers with
(1) prospective pedagogical guidance (preparation support preceding classroom
teaching), (2) concurrent pedagogical guidance (real-time support during
classroom teaching), and (3) retrospective pedagogical guidance (reflection
support within a community of practice following classroom teaching). The
project will culminate with an experiment conducted with a fully implemented
version of I-ACT in public middle schools in North Carolina and
Indiana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project realizes its objective through two
primary thrusts. First, the research team will design and develop I-ACT
cognitive assistants for K-12 STEM teachers and test them in public school
classrooms. Utilizing AI-based multimodal learning analytics and a social
constructivist theory of pedagogy, I-ACT cognitive assistants use machine-
learned models of teacher orchestration to provide guidance throughout the full
teaching workflow. I-ACT cognitive assistants operate in a tight feedback loop
in which collected data will drive successive iterations of machine learning to
train refined teacher support models for improved I-ACT cognitive assistant
functionalities. Second, the research team will investigate how I-ACT cognitive
assistants improve K-12 STEM teacher performance and teacher quality of work-
life. The team will conduct focus groups, case studies, semi-structured
interviews, and observations of teachers using I-ACT cognitive assistants in
school implementations with middle school science teachers at the project's
partner schools. The team will also conduct quasi-experimental studies to
determine I-ACT impact on teacher performance and quality of work-
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.