* 1839868
* CICI: RDP: Open Badge Researcher Credentials for Secure Access to Restricted and Sensitive Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Andrea Thomer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 881,342.00

This project reduces the complexity in protecting research data by developing
and piloting an open badge research credential system (OBRCS). Open badges are
visual tokens that signal achievement, affiliation, authorization, or another
trust relationship and are shareable across the web. The challenges of managing
and protecting restricted data mean that data providers are often wary of
sharing sensitive data or that data ends up in the wrong hands, and potential
gains to society and science from using those data go unrealized. OBRCS allows
researchers to present their evolving credentials openly and to record their
achievements and credentials publicly and enables more collaboration,
facilitates data re-use, and supports replication efforts. OBRCS benefits the
scientific community by ensuring the integrity, resilience, and reliability of
research data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combining and analyzing collections of data
enable scientific breakthroughs. Efficient, secure data sharing and reuse
facilitates collaboration and replication, leading to better science. However,
managing different access policies, authenticating, and authorizing access to
sensitive data is a challenge faced by all data management organizations.
Unauthorized access threatens the integrity of data and the privacy of study
participants and these threats can impact the conclusions researchers draw. The
project achieves these goals through three main activities: (a) develops an open
badge system for managing researcher credentials, (b) articulates levels of data
sensitivity and risk that indicate criteria for access, and (c) identifies the
right balance between openness and privacy for data users in a restricted data
access system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.