* 1839929
* NSF BSF: The Effect of Spanwise Landscape Heterogeneities on the Hydrological Cycle in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* GEO,EAR
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* William Anderson, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2023
* USD 194,617.00

Wind flow over changes in the landscape often introduce circulations that can
impact temperature and evaporation on small scales. Most of the prior work on
this subject has been for winds that flow from one type of surface to another,
such as from a wooded area to an open field. This study will instead look at the
circulations that form when the wind is blowing in the same direction as the
boundary between land surface types. This work has important implications for
sustaining agriculture in very dry areas, such as the southwestern United
States. In addition to water resources, understanding these flows may also have
impacts on pollen, dust, and pesticide transport and the movement of aphids. The
award also represents an international collaboration with scientists from
Israel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is an international
collaboration among researchers funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation
and the U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation. The research team plans to
study the role of landscape heterogeneities on small-scale atmospheric flows. A
significant amount of research has taken place on landscape changes that are
perpendicular to the flow, but not as much on the circulations that set up when
the landscape changes are along the flow vector. The overall intent of the
project is to advance fundamental understanding of atmospheric boundary layer
turbulence when responding to the presence of abrupt landscape heterogeneities.
The research team will systematically explore how spanwise heterogeneity of the
aerodynamics characteristics of vegetative canopies induces secondary rolls,
which have major implications for evapotranspiration and heat fluxes. The work
will make use of large-eddy simulation modeling (US component) and laboratory
studies using a 12m environmental wind tunnel with particle image velocimetry
and constant temperature anemometry measurements (Israel
component).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.