* 1839013
* EAGER: Enhanced Robust Persistent Identification of Data (E-RPID)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Laurence Lannom, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Martin Halbert
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,989.00

An increasing challenge in modern research is the rapid growth in ability to
collect and store research data; this growth is much more rapid than the ability
to catalog, make accessible, and reuse these data. Major challenges facing the
scientific research enterprise include making data discoverable, accessible, and
re-usable at Internet scales; and making it possible to use data to replicate
analyses done in published research. The importance of this issue is at the
center of many recent initiatives in Open Science and Open Data. The objective
of this project is to address these deficiencies and to enable more options for
data interoperability and reusability in the current research data landscape.
One aim is to demonstrate how technical solutions for data accessibility and
management should be designed, implemented, operated, and usable by a broad
range of researchers. Another aim is to ultimately increase the publication,
discovery, and reuse of data, thus contributing to the greater integrity of the
scientific enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create a full
implementation of the Digital Object Architecture (DOA) concept to improve data
interoperability and reusability and potentially transform the way research in
many disciplines is conducted. The approach is to integrate existing and new
software components into the Robust Persistent Identification of Data (RPID)
testbed which itself is a 2-year pilot project supported by NSF (Project ID
1659310). Components to be added include a Digital Object Interface Protocol
(DOIP) which defines common operations performed on digital objects; and a
Repository Mapping Service which would allow mapping the contents of existing
repositories to the Digital Object Architecture (DOA) environment. With the new
components, the ensemble "Enhanced-RPID" (E-RPID) testbed will allow managing of
data objects by assigning individual identifiers toward making data FAIR
(findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable). This technical effort along
with planned educational material are designed to lower the barrier for adoption
of Persistent Identification (PID)-centric data management throughout the data
lifecycle, from initial data collection to long-term use and reuse. The E-RPID
testbed will be housed on the NSF-funded Jetstream computational resource, will
be applied to a number of important scientific use cases, and will contribute to
activities fostered by the Research Data Alliance (RDA). The outcomes of this
project are aimed to broadly benefit disciplinary and multi-disciplinary
research and to facilitate better access to and utilization of existing data
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the National
Science Foundation's Public Access Initiative which is managed by the NSF Office
of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure on behalf of the
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.