* 1839306
* Collaborative Research: Enabling a strong DKIST start - The Magnetic Structure of Solar Filaments
* MPS,AST
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* R. T. James McAteer, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 08/31/2023
* USD 368,015.00

On the Sun, magnetic fields are found in both active and quiet large structures
forming and erupting from the Sun's surface called solar filaments. The
investigators propose to make and study a large data set that measures the
magnetic field inside these filaments, including both erupting and non-erupting
configurations, of both active and quiet solar filaments. These studies will
cover all steps in a solar filament's lifetime, from formation to stability to
eruption. Obtaining the complete magnetic field data set required to study solar
filaments is only now possible using a medium-sized telescope equipped with
special instrumentation, now available to the investigators. The investigators
will be ready to study observations of the solar filaments made at greater
resolutions by the new Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope when it begins
operation. This project supports the mission of the NSF by promoting our
understanding of magnetic field structure and activity at the Sun. The
investigators will include a graduate student and a post-doctoral associate to
support the research and learn data analysis
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetism exists as linear, sheared structures
that allows for filament formation; the lack of cross-field drift in the
structure stabilizes the filament plasma from thermalization and collapse; and
only magnetism can rapidly rearrange structure and result in eruption. Three
specific science questions will be addressed: What is the magnetic field
configuration of forming solar filaments? What is the magnetic field
configuration of stable solar filaments? What is the magnetic field
configuration of a filament prior to eruption? To address these, the
investigators set three specific objectives: Define and obtain ten
spectropolarimetric sequences in the He I absorption line at 10830A, in order to
study filament formation. Classify solar filament structure by producing a
pipeline to reduce, analyze, and interpret these spectropolarimetric data.
Identify those magnetic configurations prior to a loss of filament stability.
Data analysis requires the training of personnel in running and expanding the
HAZEL inversion code into pipeline in order to study the magnetic
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.