* 1839157
* Windows on the Universe Center for Astronomy Outreach (WUCAO)
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Patrick McCarthy, Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chris J. Davis
* 09/30/2024
* USD 4,499,578.00

With this project, Kitt Peak National Observatory (KPNO) will transform the
recently retired McMath-Pierce Solar Telescope into an astronomy visualization
and presentation center. The newly renovated McMath-Pierce facility will be
fully integrated with the existing Kitt Peak Visitor Center (KPVC) and the
combined operation will be called the Windows on the Universe Center for
Astronomy Outreach. Two astronomy data visualization systems -- Science On A
Sphere (SOS) and GeoDome Digital Planetarium -- along with interactive exhibits
and an astronomy classroom will be installed. Both GeoDome and SOS are equipped
to take astronomical imagery and modify it for spherical or hemispherical
projection. The images and animations developed at KPNO can be shared with other
facilities employing both SOS and the GeoDome (currently over 225 such
facilities worldwide). The goals of this project are to develop the
International Astronomy Outreach Center (IAOC), run by KPVC, as a functioning,
self-sustaining astronomy outreach center, and expand the focus of the programs
to include all NSF-supported astronomy. The benefits of such a program include:
1) significantly improved capability of the KPVC to present more engaging
astronomy-based experiences to onsite guests, and 2) extended reach beyond those
who travel to Kitt Peak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides a new, cost-
effective model for conversion of an outdated science facility to a self-
supporting educational facility that communicates the process and results of
modern astronomical research. The long history of major investment in the
facility will continue to generate returns as the facility is preserved and
transformed into a new 21st-century astronomy outreach center using research-
based best practices in science visualization and communication. Using the
Science On A Sphere (SOS) and GeoDome Digital Planetarium platforms, Kitt Peak
gains a highly capable facility to serve its visitors in new ways, while all
NSF-funded astronomy facilities gain new global exposure through astronomy
visualizations to public audiences without major investments. The Center will
acquire imagery from NSF-funded astronomy and astrophysics facilities from
around the globe, and then transform those files into data sets for presentation
on both SOS and the GeoDome, and for distribution to all so-equipped sites for
immediate display. This enables a major expansion and enhancement of existing
programs and the creation of new programs. Guests to KPNO will have a wider
window on modern astronomy, and regional and Tribal schools will benefit from
new STEM education experiences. Visitors to museums and parks elsewhere in the
US and other countries will see astronomy results created in this new, far-
reaching facility displayed in their SOS theaters and GeoDome planetaria.
Finally, this project preserves a venerable and iconic solar telescope, which,
although eclipsed by the new capabilities of the Daniel K. Inouye Solar
Telescope, is useful for public education activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.