* 1839805
* EAGER: Quantum-Safe Cryptosystems Based on Isogenies
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jean-Francois Biasse, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2021
* USD 232,269.00

This award supports research into the security of a new family of cryptosystems
based on a mathematical structure called isogenies of elliptic curves. The
research will also include the development of new isogeny-based protocols. These
protocols are among the front runners in the process of replacement of the
current public key primitives by alternatives that will be secure against
attacks by quantum computers. The transition towards a quantum-safe cyberspace
is an immediate priority for the cryptography community. Indeed, quantum-safe
primitives will need to be ready and deployed long before the construction of
large scale quantum computers to account for the shelf life of encrypted data.
This research has broader impacts to industry which will need to follow
recommendations for a secure use of isogeny cryptosystems. It also impacts
education through the development of new cybersecurity curriculum at the
university and high school level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
involve the analysis of the hardness of the task of finding an isogeny between
two given elliptic curves over a finite field. In particular, new quantum
algorithms will be developed for computing isogenies. The careful analysis of
the performances of these algorithms is the indicator of the security of
isogeny-based schemes. It will permit the identification of an appropriate size
for keys that keep users out of the reach of quantum attacks. The project will
also explore new applications of cryptographic primitives based on isogenies.
Efficient solutions for static-static key exchange protocols will be
investigated. These primitives also have potential for ring signatures that can
have many practical applications including anonymous transactions on the
blockchain, and quantum-safe anonymous
cryptocurrencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.