* 1839274
* TRIPODS+X:RES:CollaborativeResearch: Multi-Level Graph Representation for Exploring Big Data
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Stephen Kobourov, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,999.00

Working with social, topical, financial, transportation, biological, and other
networks requires a better understanding of their structure and properties.
Standard network visualizations of such large real-world networks often resemble
hairballs that provide little actionable insight. This project aims to design,
implement, and deploy efficient algorithms for multi-level network
representations that support interactive exploration by general audiences. Using
the familiar Google map metaphor, these algorithms will make it easy to identify
important nodes, major pathways, and clusters across multiple levels. Unlike
existing methods for visualizing multi-level networks based on meta-nodes and
meta-edges, the new visualizations will provide real nodes (prototypes) and real
paths (backbones) for each level, similar to geographic maps that show real
cities and real roads at every level of detail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work contributes to graph algorithms by designing and implementing
novel and efficient algorithms for interactive analysis and visualization of
large, multi-level networks, information visualization with new methods for
multi-level network visualization based on the familiar map metaphor, and
science mapping standards by providing effective means to explore and use large-
scale, multi-level science maps of our collective scholarly knowledge as well as
workforce needs. The first goal is to design efficient algorithms for computing
Multi-Level Graph Spanners (MLGS) in support of visual analytics tasks for large
network exploration, navigation, and communication. The second goal is to
utilize the MLGS representation in the context of network analysis and
visualization by building a novel online visualization service for interacting
with large networks, which combines the MLGS approach with clustering, layout
and map-like visualization. The third goal is to develop a new approach for
science and workforce classification, lookup, and topical mapping service by
applying the MLGS approach to the Web of Science publication data (64 million
publications and 1 billion citations) to compute a multi-level map of scientific
development. The fourth goal is to validate the new algorithms and
visualizations by evaluating both the algorithms and the system using
quantitative and qualitative metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.