* 1839425
* A Unified Manifold-Based Approach to Modeling Turbulent Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Michael Mueller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

One of the major impediments to the development of new high-efficiency low-
emissions combustion systems is the lack of reliable, affordable, predictive
computational models for describing turbulent combustion. The primary challenge
in developing such models is describing the relationship between combustion
processes and turbulence. While a broad range of models have been developed for
describing the effects of turbulence on combustion processes, no general models
exist for describing the effects of combustion processes on turbulence. Current
turbulence models implicitly assume that combustion heat release has no effect
on turbulence, a fact contrary to observation. This project will develop a new
modeling approach capable of capturing the two-way coupling between combustion
processes and turbulence. In the new approach, information about the combustion
processes is directly embedded into the turbulence model. The new model will be
evaluated against a set of computational databases and experimental databases of
laboratory-scale turbulent combustion. With the two-way coupling between
combustion processes and turbulence fully captured, the new modeling approach
will enable truly predictive simulations of turbulent combustion, facilitating
the development of new clean combustion systems. The software implementation of
the new modeling approach will also be made publicly available for use by other
researchers and in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the known influences
of combustion heat release on turbulence, notably the phenomenon of counter-
gradient-transport, turbulence models in reacting flows are usually adapted from
the non-reacting flow community, implicitly assuming no effect of combustion
heat release on turbulence. This project will develop a fundamentally new
approach for Large Eddy Simulation (LES) of turbulent combustion that accounts
for fully coupled interactions between turbulence and combustion. The approach
relies on the conditional filtering of not only the thermochemical scalar
equations but also the momentum equation with respect to one or more flame
structure variables. With this approach, the modeling of turbulence is divorced
from the flame dynamics, which are embedded into the conditional filtering, and
simplifies closure modeling. After deriving the conditionally filtered governing
equations and analyzing their budgets using data from Direct Numerical
Simulation (DNS), closure models will be developed using a combination of
physics-based approaches and data-based approaches. Ultimately, the unified
manifold-based approach will be implemented into a computational tool,
benchmarked against current modeling approaches, and validated against
experimental measurements of turbulent premixed and stratified
flames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.