* 1839555
* EAGER:  Investigating a Trojan Horse strategy to disrupt Saccharomyces biofilms
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Helen Murphy, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2022
* USD 149,999.00

Microbes are single-celled organisms found nearly everywhere on earth and are
intricately involved in the functioning of biological systems. Most microbes
live in complex communities and engage in social interactions ranging from
cooperation to lethal warfare. One type of cooperation occurs when individual
microbes aggregate into a community, known as a biofilm, and produce goods to be
used by all, and in return, receive protection from external environmental
stresses. Biofilms are susceptible to "cheaters" who do not contribute but
benefit from the community structure. Biofilms are ubiquitous and are found both
in natural environments and in industrial and medical settings, where they can
endanger human health and welfare. The goal of this research is to determine
whether it is possible for cheater microbes to disrupt and destroy undesirable
biofilm communities. Using computer simulations, the research will test whether,
and under what conditions, introducing a "Trojan Horse" microbe that produces a
lethal toxin could destabilize a biofilm community. The results of the
simulations will then be tested using natural and engineered yeast strains. One
outcome of this research is that it will provide a proof-of-concept that
demonstrates how social evolution theory could be used in important medical and
industrial applications where biofilms cause problems. This project will also
provide the opportunity for undergraduate and graduate researchers to be trained
in an interdisciplinary approach to problem solving? from theory, to
simulations, to experiments with living organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Like all
cooperative communities, biofilms are susceptible to invasion by selfish
individuals who benefit from cooperation, but do not contribute. Therefore, the
study of microbial social interactions and their long-term consequences could
lead to a better understanding of processes that can destabilize these
communities. One such strategy, which would use an engineered "Trojan Horse"
strain to infiltrate a biofilm, has been proposed, but not tested with a
spatially explicit model or experimental work. In this project researchers will
first employ individual-based, spatially explicit, stochastic simulations to
model cells interacting a biofilm community. The model will be used to determine
how different social strategies influence the growth and distribution of
multiple cell types and to investigate how modeled parameters affect the
effectiveness of a Trojan Horse strategy to prevent biofilm growth and disrupt
an already established community. The second step of the project is to test
whether living organisms with the simulated strategies can disrupt biofilms.
Natural and engineered strains of the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
will be utilized. As part of this research, the fitness effects of social
phenotypes (biofilm formation and toxin production) will be assessed in a panel
of natural yeast strains. The successful completion of this research will
contribute to developing a major model organism for social evolutionary studies,
as well as explore the possibility of applying social evolution theory to
medical and industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.