* 1839441
* EAGER: Real-Time: Search for dynamical dependencies and natural time-scales of physical processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Tryphon Georgiou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,981.00

A fundamental problem in physical sciences and engineering is to identify
dependencies and dynamical relations between interacting processes for
understanding causal relationships and advancing predictive modeling. Indeed,
historically, such dependences often formed the basis of physical laws. The
abundance of large data-sets about complex natural or engineered systems in our
modern technological world, has brought a sense of urgency to the need for
reliable and versatile machine learning tools to detect relations between
processes. The starting point of the project is the realization that often the
observational time scale at which data is collected may not be the native time
scale at which interactions occur and thus sampling might obfuscate the nature
of such relations. Indeed, linear dynamical relations between continuous-time
processes may not be readily detectable from data collected at any finite
sampling rate. This project will develop methodologies that will allow to fully
recover sought relations between processes at the natural time-scale from data
at a (typically coarser) observational time-scale. Theory and statistical
learning tools that will be developed for that purpose will be applied to
geophysical processes, such as identifying relationships between climate
variables using a suite of observations from ground and multi-satellite sensors
at different spatio-temporal scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When relations
between variables are dynamic (i.e., the interaction relies on memory in the
system), sampling hides the nature of dynamical dependencies. Specifically, in
linear stochastic processes, dynamical dependencies between vector-valued
processes are reflected in the nullity of the power spectral density matrix when
this is estimated at the natural time-scale of the process. At the observational
sampling rate, the corresponding nullity no longer relates to the structure of
the dynamical relations. Yet, with proper analysis the dynamical relations can
be recovered by projecting sample-models to the natural time-scale of the
processes involved. In fact, for linear stochastic processes there is a fastest
process time-scale that is consistent with the coarser scale observational data,
and it is at that fine scale that models can be projected via solving suitable
algebraic equations. At any coarser scale, dynamical dependencies cannot be
readily detected. The project will focus on how to learn and recover the natural
time-space scale at which dynamical dependencies must be sought. Statistical
learning tools will be developed and applied to geophysical data as proof of
concept.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.