* 1839159
* RAISE TAQS: Very Large Scale Integrated Electronics and Phontonics Platform for Scaleable Quantum Information Processing
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Isaac Chuang, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,000.00

The world of quantum mechanics holds enormous potential to address unsolved
problems in communications, computation, and precision measurements. Efforts are
underway across the globe to develop such technologies in various types of
quantum memories, such as photons or atoms. One of the most challenging problems
in building quantum computers and the envisioned "quantum internet" concerns the
question of how to efficiently connect large numbers of quantum memories. While
proof-of-concept experiments are possible with today's technology, scaling
quantum systems to tens, hundreds, or thousands of individually controllable
quantum memories requires a new generation of electronic and photonic
components, systems, and algorithms. The goal of this NSF project is to develop
the underlying photonic and electronic chips, as well as control and algorithms,
that will make it possible to translate today?s proof-of-concept demonstrations
out of the laboratory and into viable quantum technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF project addresses the core architectural
challenges -- in hardware and algorithms -- needed for scaling atomic quantum
processing platforms. At the core of the envisioned quantum architecture is the
development of a chip architecture that combines complementary metal-oxide
semiconductor electronics with a photonic integrated circuit layer. This chip
will serve as a scalable chip-based platform to control large numbers of quantum
memories. The program will also develop error correction thresholds as well as a
new class of heralded two-qubit gates to approach fault-tolerant thresholds
despite lossy and decohering channels connecting our logical qubits. The
envisioned architecture will be developed for trapped ions and atom-like
emitters in diamond, though the core quantum computing architecture will also
inform other modular quantum computing or quantum repeater architectures based
on atomic or atom-like quantum memories. The program will also include a strong
outreach effort to inform the general public about the underlying concepts and
the promise of quantum information processing, quantum computing algorithms, and
large-scale opto-electronic circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.