* 1839730
* Collaborative Research: FW-HTF: Integrating Cognitive Science and Intelligent Systems to Enhance Geoscience Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra Medina-Borja
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,992.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make a
significant contribution toward the support of future workers in geology.
Understanding how geologists reason, plan to collect new data, consider three-
dimensional spatial relations, and evaluate uncertainty are critically important
for supporting scientists working on applied problems, such as natural resource
exploration. This project will enhance existing efforts in geology to collect
data using robot drones. Drones allow access to important areas of the world too
dangerous to access in person and not visible from satellite or plane. The
project will use machine learning to incorporate expert knowledge into drone
flights to support effective autonomous data collection. The data will yield
improved geological understanding of an important fault system. Findings from
the project will improve understanding of uncertainty in volumes and thus
improve our understanding of earthquakes and the analyses of petroleum workers.
Understanding how expert geologists reason will support new exploration and
mapping strategies for human-robot teams working in natural environments. The
collaborative efforts of the interdisciplinary team will advance the fields of
cognitive science, geology, and machine learning. The integration of cognitive
science, robotics, and geology will develop new approaches to field work with
human-autonomous systems teams that are faster and more effective than any
either human or autonomous system would be acting alone.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will characterize expert spatial reasoning
about 3D relations and uncertainty as geologists collect data to develop a 3D
understanding of a new field area, make predictions about future observations,
and construct geological models. Errors in reasoning about 3D structures will be
used to develop quantitative models of expert uncertainty. These models will be
used to help explicitly visualize uncertainty for the experts and to construct
cost functions for the robot navigation. The cost functions will include metrics
that capture scientific value. The project will develop new approaches to drone
exploration and mapping, including machine learning of features of interest to
geologists. Drones will autonomously explore and map natural rock formations in
canyon environments to support and speed up the data collection and
interpretation efforts of field geologists. The project will study the
structural geology of the Mecca Hills area of California, a well exposed portion
of the San Andreas fault system. Robot drones will collect data about surface
features to develop maps of subsurface structures. The cognitive science-infused
robot design will employ successful expert strategies and focus on areas where
experts are likely to make errors to prioritize exploration of those areas in
navigation plans. The proposed strategies will enable 3D surface reconstruction
of canyon surfaces. They will also enable better understanding of how to enhance
planning and on-the-fly decision making of experts for collecting scientifically
important data. The project's foundational work aims to develop an
interdisciplinary understanding of how geologists build a scientific
understanding of a region over time. It also aims to design autonomous
exploration strategies for human-robot teams, and test new ways to support the
sequential decisions about where to collect data to maximize scientific
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.