* 1839177
* RAISE-TAQS: Enhancing Classical and Quantum Information Capacities with Imperfect Resources:  Experimental Implementations and Theoretical Bounds
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Paul Kwiat, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 999,999.00

Quantum channels are the means by which quantum data is transmitted between
different locations; they provide the backbone for any quantum communication
setup. Quantum channels have many counterintuitive properties with no classical
analog. To address problems in quantum communication over realistic channels, we
propose an interdisciplinary project that combines the expertise of five
researchers in quantum resource theory, advanced photonic quantum information
protocols, photonic nonlinear systems, and photonic quantum state
characterization and precision optical measurements. Fundamental questions
involving quantum entanglement, nonlocality, and causality, are being explored,
while translating the theoretical aspects to actual experimental demonstrations.
The project investigates the problem of realistic quantum and quantum-enhanced
classical information transmission and how their enhanced properties may be
applied to near-term computational devices, particularly relevant for
engineering, concerned with realistic gains in practical systems. Student
development is a primary educational goal of this project. Since the work is
largely interdisciplinary, it will provide an opportunity for students from
different programs to collaborate in a unique environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The highly non-classical effects of
superadditivity/superactivation and quantum-enhanced two-way communication are
two main topical focuses of this project. In the first, two noisy quantum
channels become vastly more powerful for communication when used in parallel,
and in the second, two-way communication is achieved through the single use of a
quantum channel. Experimental validations of these effects will be attained
through a team effort involving theorists in math and physics working together
with experimentalists from physics and engineering. The theoretical limitations
of channel capacities and their behavior in low-dimensional systems will be
analyzed, aiming to construct protocols suitable for deployment in tabletop and
integrated photonic experiments. Complementing this effort, new experimental
techniques are developed using hyper- and hybrid-entangled photons and cavity-
enhanced nonlinear effects. Such experimental advances have the potential for
powerful application in next-generation photonic quantum information
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.