* 1839859
* Aaniiih Nakoda Nic'-Mni' (Water) Center
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Scott Friskics, Aaniiih Nakoda College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,159,726.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
intellectual leadership of TCUP institutions so that they can address scientific
or engineering needs or interests, specifically for their tribes or communities,
or broadly for the Nation. The TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers)
strand allows TCUP institutions to capitalize on their investments in STEM
instructional and research capacity. The Aaniiih Nakoda Nic'-Mni' (Water) Center
("the Center"), housed at Aaniiih Nakoda College (ANC), aligns with this TCUP
goal in its research, education, and outreach work focusing on water quality and
management issues relevant to the Fort Belknap Indian Community (FBIC). The
Center builds on and expands a partnership between the college and the FBIC that
has been focused on water quality monitoring and management for many years. The
Center's research and outreach activities build the scientific knowledge base,
increase public literacy, and inform the tribe's water management
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Aaniiih Nakoda Nic'-Mni' (Water) Center will
conduct and integrate findings from four related water research studies on
issues of critical concern to the FBIC; offer training and education programs
that will provide community members with the knowledge, skills, experiences and
credentials needed to address local water issues effectively; and gather and
share information that can be used by the community to make informed decisions
regarding the proper care and use of the reservation's water resources. The
research will include comparative bioassessments of surface water flowing onto
the Fort Belknap reservation, principally through standardized biomonitoring
methods that include protocols for benthic macroinvertebrates and periphyton;
studies of local impacts on groundwater resources; and potential benefits of
subsurface irrigation systems. Training and education programs will target ANC
students and FBIC employees, as well as other local stakeholders. ANC students
will have opportunities for internships through the Center, and other
individuals will have opportunities to participate in workshops and short
courses. The Center will also serve as a local clearinghouse for the community
on water resource information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.