* 1839353
* TRIPODS+X:VIS: The DISC Institute Workshop Series on Machine Learning + X.
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Hector Munoz-Avila, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2023
* USD 199,353.00

This project encompasses the planning and organization of several specialized
workshops that will bring together top experts in multiple areas to shape new
and emerging multidisciplinary fields, tapping the tremendous recent surge in
the adoption of machine learning tools in various areas of science and
engineering. The premise of this project is the need for sophisticated
computational tools to analyze data and improve our ability to understand and
harness phenomena associated with complex domains such as chemical processes,
autonomous robots operating in open and dynamic environments, supply chain
optimization involving large organizations with multiple and competing
objectives, and cognitive neuroscience bridging electrical brain impulses and
high-level functions such as problem solving. Towards this end it is necessary
to foster interdisciplinary collaborations and to promote convergent research
and develop fertile space for collaborations among industrial, academic, and
governmental partners to attack some of the most pressing problems in technology
and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the umbrella of the new Institute for
Data, Intelligent Systems, and Computation (I-DISC) at Lehigh University, which
builds upon the foundation of Lehigh research expertise in areas such as machine
learning, optimization, and data-driven decision making, four workshops will be
organized that will bring together leading researchers from different research
communities that otherwise may not interact. All of these workshops are on newly
emerging topics which are expected to gain significant traction in the near
future. These topics are as follows: (1) Chemistry, chemical engineering,
materials science, and related disciplines where machine learning is used to
elucidate and design complex processes (chemical/biological, engineered/natural)
or material systems with wide ranging applications addressing grand challenges
in energy, health, environment, and water. (2) Robotics, where applications of
machine learning, also known as robot learning, has been rapidly growing in
recent years, where the main focus has been to develop algorithms to assist
robots to acquire novel skill or adapt to their environment through sensing. (3)
Supply chain management with the specific focus on applying machine learning
models for prescriptive analytics, such as optimization, in contrast to already
popular use of machine learning (deep learning) models for predictive and
descriptive analytics, such as predicting customer demands. (4) Cognitive
Neuroscience with the focus on understanding the brain-cognition-behavior
interface, which requires expertise in neuroscience as well as computational
modeling, machine learning and big data science in order (a) to enable
sophisticated analyses of complex patterns in brain data and (b) to provide
insight into how hypothesized brain-level implementations could in fact produce
observed behavioral outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.