* 1839993
* Collaborative Research: A Novel Control for Invasive Species -- Modeling, Analysis, and Experiments
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Rana Parshad, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2020
* USD 197,049.00

The effect of invasive species is thought to be second only to habitat
destruction as a threat to biodiversity. The spread of invasive species is a
major problem in spatial ecology, and there is a large body of literature on
understanding this spread. However, there is far less work on the actual
eradication and control of invasive species once invasion has occurred.
Currently, there are only a few conclusive eradication measures for aquatic
invasive species. The Trojan Y-Chromosome (TYC) strategy is an eradication
strategy with the advantage of targeting only the invasive species in question,
while protecting native species. The PIs will develop an experimentally tested
mathematical model of the TYC strategy. The computational and theoretical
analysis of the mathematical model will inform experimental biologists about the
viability of the TYC strategy and provide crucial insight into the spatial-
temporal population dynamics associated with the TYC strategy and other
phenomena associated with such control efforts. Ultimately results of the
project will guide experimental research at the USGS Wetland and Aquatic
Research Center in Gainesville, Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TYC strategy
is a biological control that introduces a sub-population of genetically modified
males with YY chromosomes in order that their offspring are guaranteed to be
male. The object of the introduction is to skew the sex ratio in the invasive
population to be strongly male biased, driving down the female population
density, and ultimately leading to extinction. In developing Peocilia reticulata
(guppy fish) YY-males in the laboratory, mesocosm experiments can be conducted
that examine the interaction, dynamics, fecundity, and viability of the TYC
strategy. The experimental data will then be used to develop the relevant
parameter space and refine, verify, and validate reaction diffusion models of
the TYC strategy. In addition, numerical designs and implementation procedures
will be developed to provide a reliable platform to efficiently simulate the
system of partial differential equations that incorporate features such as cross
and self-diffusion, non-smooth initial datum, temperature effects and life
history traits such as cannibalism. This research and its results will advance
our understanding of the use of flexible and reversible passive efforts to
eradicate and control invasive species, as modeled via both weakly coupled and
strongly coupled reaction diffusion systems.