* 1839169
* I-Corps: Neuromorphic device derived from resistive switching system
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Min Hwan Lee, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in
facilitating innovations in a wide range of industries working on advanced
computing-based applications as the result of a reliable neuromorphic chip
(where neural networks are etched into silicon). This technology may accelerate
the advance of machine learning and ultimately realize a breakthrough in
computing architecture by overcoming the Von Neumann bottleneck -- where the
intrinsic latency originated from the separation of processor and memory.
Empowered by neuromorphic features of this project's technology, machine
learning may be carried out with unprecedented speed and efficiency in design
and energy consumption. Hence, intensive machine learning based technologies
such as face recognition, autonomous driving and other areas of artificial
intelligence will be advanced by a significant margin. A successful execution of
the project will also facilitate widespread commercialization of emerging
applications utilizing artificial intelligence and/or neuromorphic computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project leverages the recent innovative
research related to highly controllable neuromorphic devices. The technology is
based on the oxide-based resistive random access memory (ReRAM), a non-volatile
memory based upon electrical stimuli-induced resistance changes, mostly by the
formation and rupture of so-called nanoscale conducting filaments in each cell.
The intrinsic resemblance of ReRAM cells to neuromorphic systems triggered a
recent boom in related research. However, there are still considerable technical
issues including wide cell-to-cell variations in operation voltage, cell current
and operation speed. Unclear understanding of physical switching mechanisms
precludes a rationale design of reliable cells for a commercial device. The
proposed novel scheme, in which the uncontrollability is significantly
minimized, is expected to achieve a breakthrough in realizing commercializable
neuromorphic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.