* 1839544
* Biotechnology in American High Schools: Continuing Research
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* David Micklos, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,045.00

The Cold Spring Harbor DNA Learning Center (DNALC) conducted a nationwide survey
of high school biology teachers in 1998 to collect data on the penetration of
biotechnology/molecular genetics in American High Schools. The DNALC possesses
other related unique datasets that represent biology teachers who have since
retired. The proposed survey provides an opportunity to compare two generations
of biology teachers with respect to laboratory instruction and students exposure
to four major techniques: bacterial transformation, DNA restriction analysis,
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and DNA sequencing. The 1998 study showed that
the early adoption of biotechnology lab instruction was concentrated in schools
located in high wealth, suburban zip codes. It is important to see if, today,
hands-on biotechnology instruction has broadened to include economically
challenged and more diverse urban populations. It may also be possible to
correlate changes in teacher attitudes and behavior with funding and educational
trends over this period of time, including NSF's and HHMI's shift away from
teacher professional development institutes and the increased standardized
testing under No Child Left Behind. In this way, the study results may provide
insights for educational policy and future efforts in teacher professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first quarter of 2018 an email survey
was conducted with the goal of reproducing the sample size, number of
respondents, and response rate from the 1998 study. Although the sample size was
comparable (approximately 12,000 teachers), the email-based method yielded a
much lower response rate (10% in 2018 versus 30% in 1998). To ensure that the
study will capture a representative snapshot of U.S. biology teachers, this
project will re-administer the survey via the U.S. Postal Service, with the
objective of improving the response rate, and increasing the sample size to
confirm the initial findings from the email survey. Initial findings include:
laboratory teaching in biotechnology has been brought "to scale" in a number of
U.S. schools over the last 20 years, the two cohorts of biology teachers have
different perceptions of constraints that limit their ability to incorporate new
concepts and techniques into their classes, relatively few schools that
currently offer molecular biology electives seem to be involved in the school-
to-work movement advocated by the ATE program, the current cohort appears to be
less professional and less involved than the 1998 cohort, and summer institutes
and workshops remain the most important contributors to teacher expertise;
however, formal education is much more significant for the current cohort. The
project will re-administer the survey using letters and reminders sent by U.S.
Postal Service to increase number of respondents and collect retrospective data
on the numbers of teachers trained in intensive workshops from 1988 to 2018 to
analyze the impact of the reduced numbers of teacher professional development
workshops supported by the NSF and HHMI since 2012.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.