* 1839176
* RAISE-TAQS: Integrated Photonics for Quantum Interfaces of Atoms, Molecules, and Light
* MPS,PHY
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Mark Saffman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

New technologies that exploit quantum mechanical phenomena promise
transformative advances in communication, storage, and processing of information
compared to what is possible with currently available, classical systems. While
many proof of principle advances have been demonstrated in research
laboratories, quantum phenomena are inherently fragile, and developing reliable
systems for real world applications is one of the major challenges in the field.
This research program will integrate state-of-the-art optical fabrication
technologies with laser cooled atoms to develop compact and robust devices that
couple atomic quantum memories to optical photons for secure quantum
communication. Similar technologies will be used to couple populations of
molecules. The research program will thereby advance the progress of quantum
science, while enabling new technologies for secure communication systems and
quantum chemistry of benefit to government and industrial sectors. Research and
education activities supported by this NSF award will contribute to workforce
training for quantum technologies and development of course material that will
enhance the participation of under-represented groups in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the state of the art
of photonic technologies used for quantum science by targeting two specific
applications. The group will design, fabricate, and test an integrated photonic
device containing planar metaoptics, optical gratings, and high finesse fiber
optic resonators in order to implement a functional, and pre-aligned module for
atomic memory enhanced quantum key distribution. The research will advance the
state of the art in integrated photonics for atomic experiments and demonstrate
new capabilities for quantum cryptography and communication. In addition the
group will use the fiber resonators for studies of condensed phase molecular
spectroscopy and reactivity in the regime of strong
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.