* 1839074
* Conference: 2018 Enzymes, Coenzymes and Metabolic Pathways GRS: How Enzymes Work: From Mechanism and Function to Therapeutic Applications; July 21-22, 2018; Waterville Valley, NH
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Tatiana Mishanina, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2018
* USD 5,000.00

This project will organize a Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) on Enzymes,
Coenzymes, and Metabolic Pathways. This seminar will precede the regular Gordon
Research Conference on Enzymes, Coenzymes, and Metabolic Pathways. The "Enzymes"
GRS is the pivotal conference for early-career researchers focused on dissecting
the molecular mechanisms of biochemical reactions and provides a central meeting
place for sharing ideas and networking in an informal setting. The long-term
goals of this seminar are to foster interactions and collaborations within the
graduate-student and postdoc community focused on studying the roles of enzymes
in the biological processes that are fundamental for life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GRS has created a program of 13 Speakers (12 chosen
from abstracts submitted by graduate students and postdocs, and 1 established
investigator as a Keynote Speaker. These talks will describe current advances in
understanding enzyme mechanisms, interdisciplinary methods to study them.
Additionally, the GRS will hold a Career Mentorship Panel (6 leaders from
diverse backgrounds), to expose the students and postdocs to different career
options as scientists in the field of enzyme research, to help them decide
between different paths if they have not done so yet, or to network with the
panelists in the specific career they have already chosen. Members of
underrepresented groups and female students and postdocs will specifically be
invited to participate. This seminar is partially funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster of the Molecular and cellular Biosciences
Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.