* 1839666
* FW-HTF: Collaborative Research: The Next Mobile Office: Safe and Productive Work in Automated Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Linda Boyle, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2023
* USD 450,573.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim, by examining whether and how a new technology can
safely improve worker productivity, and well-being.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Current trends in the automobile industry make cars increasingly
automated, allowing them to take on a growing number of driving tasks, while
freeing the driver to engage in other activities. Millions of people spend
nearly an hour of each work day commuting by car. Automated vehicles could allow
part of the time currently spent driving to be used for work-related efforts.
The goal of this project is to understand how current and future technologies
might enable work to be done in automated vehicles. Reclaiming productive time
from time currently taken up by driving could increase economic productivity,
worker wellbeing, and firm profitability. The project focuses on understanding
how technology can allow commuters to safely combine or switch between work and
driving tasks. A new multi-interface in-vehicle environment for the support of
work-related tasks, as well as safe driving, in automated vehicles will be
developed and tested in driving simulators and real vehicles. The innovative
contributions to the in-vehicle use of speech and spoken interactions, augmented
reality, and tangible user interfaces will have applicability to a broad range
of settings, including for non-drivers and in mobile environments beyond the
car. The project also includes activities to promote the participation of women
in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Creating the systems that will allow drivers to safely engage in
work-related activities in automated vehicles requires an interdisciplinary
effort. This project will explore what types of work in automated vehicles can
improve workers' job satisfaction and productivity, and the productivity and
profitability of firms. Based on these findings, the team will create in-vehicle
user interfaces that support work tasks, as well as safe transitions between
engaging in work tasks and in driving. Three types of user interfaces will be
integrated: voice interfaces, augmented reality interfaces, and tangible
interfaces. The team will also develop a probabilistic model to examine the
ability of the in-vehicle interfaces to communicate to the driver the mode and
limitations of the vehicle automation. The model will incorporate cases when the
user transitions between the work task and the driving task. This will allow
designing the interfaces such that they provide adequate support for the safe
transition from the work task to the driving task, as well as an efficient
transition back to the work task. The team will close the loop with design
guidelines, by providing researchers, practitioners, and policy makers a broad
set of guidelines, along with careful reasoning for their application in the
design of human-machine interaction to support the work-related tasks of workers
in automated vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.