* 1839358
* TRIPODS+X:RES: Collaborative Research: Thermodynamic Phases and Configuration Space Topology
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Matthew Kahle, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The purpose of this project is to use techniques developed within pure and
applied topology to study unanswered questions relating to phase transitions.
Phase transitions are unusual phenomena in the physical sciences; they are at
once part of our everyday experience (e.g., the freezing of water) and yet
continue to resist entirely satisfactory explanation. A phase is traditionally
defined as a system throughout which all physical properties are effectively
uniform. Certainly then, the transformation of water into steam should always
involve a phase transition. Curiously, this is not the case; by constructing a
path around the critical point in the pressure-temperature diagram of water, the
liquid can be converted into the vapor without any discontinuous change in the
density. How then can the definition of a phase be made more precise, and the
presence or absence of a phase transition be understood? This project approaches
the above question by considering a simplified system where molecules are
spheres that interact by a hard sphere potential (i.e., do not overlap). Since
this is often regarded as a prototype for simple fluids, this research could
offer valuable insight into the factors governing solid-liquid phase transitions
and glass transitions in other materials. Possible applications include
prediction of the metallic alloy compositions most likely to form bulk metallic
glasses, or a better understanding of the conditions leading to soil
liquefaction during earthquakes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the
project will study the statistical topology of the configuration space of the
hard disk system. What is unique about this project is the emphasis on the use
of topology for data exploration: functions on the configuration space govern
the thermodynamic behavior, but the space itself is fantastically complicated
and likely can only be adequately characterized with the help of computational
and theoretical techniques that did not exist even a few years ago. First, the
Reeb graph of the tautological function on the configuration space will be
approximated using the mapper algorithm. The Reeb graph provides more
information about the configuration space topology than the disconnectivity
graphs common in the literature. Second, while configuration spaces of points
have been studied for decades, giving the points positive radius presents new
and interesting challenges for algebraic topologists. These challenges are
expected to stimulate new developments in Morse theory.. Third, if the
conjecture holds that a phase transition occurs where there is a non-analyticity
in the diameter of the configuration space as measured by the diffusion
distance, that would provide a dramatically different and more fundamental view
of the nature of phase transitions in general. Any results pertaining
specifically to the hard disk system will be tested for hard spheres in other
domains to evaluate the generality of the conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.