* 1839238
* Developing the Next Generation of STEM Leaders: 2019 TCUP Leaders' Forum and Professional Development for NSF-TCUP Eligible Institutions
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Scott Morgan, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 06/30/2024
* USD 184,565.00

The mission of the NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to
support the strengthening of STEM education and research capacity at Native-
serving institutions. The project titled "Developing the Next Generation of STEM
Leaders: 2019 TCUP Leaders' Forum and Professional Development for NSF-TCUP
Eligible Institutions" aligns well with this mission. Administered by Sisseton
Wahpeton Community College, project personnel organize, design and deliver two
types of professional development events for TCU personnel interested in
developing their leadership, grant-related skills, and STEM programs. The first
event, the Tribal Leaders' Forum (TLF), provides a venue for TCU personnel to
participate in formal sessions in which they explore best practices and
innovative approaches to STEM research, instruction and evaluation. The second
event is a three-day technical assistance workshop offered to TCU personnel that
addresses proposal preparation and project management. Follow up technical
assistance is offered as well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the TLF are to
strengthen STEM leadership skills in TCUP personnel, to promote STEM education
and research at TCUs, to strengthen and expand partnerships between TCUs and
mainstream institutions, and to develop strategies for enhancing workforce
potential in tribal communities. The goals of the TA workshops are to provide
targeted support to TCUs in preparing proposals to secure NSF funding and to
develop skills in administering grant projects. A book reporting on the project
events will disseminate findings from the work to TCU personnel and other
interested stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.