* 1839199
* RAISE: TAQS: Materials spectroscopy for next generation superconducting qubits
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Cava, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Nontechnical description: Quantum computers can perform calculations that are
beyond the capabilities of current classical computers and, if successfully
developed, would revolutionize many aspects of science, technology, and
commerce. The performance of present-day, small quantum computers is limited by
interference from background noise that prevents useful computations from being
done. This noise can arise from imperfections in the materials used in the
prototypes - materials selected for other favorable properties - and the goal of
this project is to discover which materials cause the noise, and how to improve
or replace them. In doing so, this research could not only impact quantum
computers; the development of low noise materials could also be useful in
creating better sensors and more sensitive signal amplifiers. This project also
serves to train a new generation of scientists who are conversant across several
fields, including quantum information science, experimental condensed matter
physics, materials growth, and device engineering. This project includes a
program to help students perform research at both academic and industry labs,
specifically at the IBM Quantum Computing group in Yorktown Heights, NY. This
training is necessary for the development of a workforce that can spearhead
future quantum information science and quantum
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This collaborative,
interdisciplinary research effort between academia and industry brings together
advanced methods in materials science, physics and electrical engineering to
solve long-standing, fundamental problems in superconducting (SC) qubit devices.
Although SC qubits are one of the leading candidates for quantum computing,
their coherence times are currently insufficient for most applications. Despite
significant progress in extending qubit coherence over the last 20 years, the
microscopic sources of loss and noise remain generally unknown. This project
utilizes direct material and surface spectroscopy tools to determine the
chemical and physical nature of defects in state-of-the-art SC qubit devices,
and correlates that characterization with qubit performance to discover the
defects that are the sources of the decoherence. Using this information, the
research team devises new surface treatments and fabrication techniques aimed at
removing those defects, and those techniques are employed to fabricate and
measure new prototype qubits. Building on this knowledge, the research team also
explores alternative materials systems that are chemically inert, display low
microwave loss, and can be grown with ultrahigh purity as substrates for qubits.
This research effort is structured as a virtuous cycle in which knowledge gained
from fundamental materials spectroscopy is rapidly translated into advances in
qubit device fabrication, providing feedback to identify entirely new materials
systems and new qubit designs, using theoretical support to develop new methods
for benchmarking qubit performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.