* 1839746
* CICI: SSC: Development of a Secure and Privacy-Preserving Workflow Architecture for Dynamic Data Sharing in Scientific Infrastructures
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Xukai Zou, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 599,998.00

Scientific cyberinfrastructures embrace collaborative workflows where users can
access and share heterogeneous data and computing resources to perform research
and education tasks, which catalyze scientific discovery. One such
cyberinfrastructure, JetStream, is the first production cloud funded by the NSF
for general-purpose science and engineering research and education. Although
Jetstream provides basic data storage security and web authentication, its
security features do not satisfy the strict requirements involving sensitive
data, such as healthcare data with protected health information (PHI). This
project builds a secure, holistic and resilient cybersecurity architecture on
JetStream so that collaborative research and education projects can share PHI
securely between its users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The secured infrastructure
provides comprehensive multi-level protection for the PHI and its workflows
through user authentication, fine-tuned data access control, confidentiality,
integrity, and traceability. The project implements role-wise passwordless
authentication and authorization, cryptography-based hierarchical access
control, dual-level key management, and secure digital provenance integrity
protection. By employing these, JetStream VMs can guarantee the security,
privacy, and integrity of scientific workflows and associated data, thus
protecting data and computing resources from internal and external attacks. When
applied to healthcare and life-science cyberinfrastructures, it enables
sensitive health data to be shared securely, which is an essential requirement
for accelerating life science research. The project promotes the use of real
clinical data in training to produce enormous educational impacts. The developed
secure architecture is generic and applicable to other data and resource sharing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.