* 1839510
* Characterization of the Physics and Chemistry of the Blue Whirl for Clean Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Elaine Oran, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2020
* USD 260,000.00

This project is inspired by the blue whirl, a small, spinning blue flame that
was first observed when it evolved naturally from a fire burning a liquid fuel
puddle poured onto the top of a flat pan filled with water. Once the blue whirl
forms, it remains in the steady, stable, completely blue state, in which no soot
is formed. Once it forms, all of the turbulence in the original fire disappeared
and the spinning top burned silently until there was no fuel remaining on the
water. Since its discovery, there has been considerable theoretical conjecture
about what this flame actually is, how it evolves, and how, if at all, it could
be useful. Experiments have provided many clues. For example, almost any liquid
hydrocarbon including crude oil, can create the blue whirl, it can be made on a
smooth metal pan with no water, and the temperature in the purple haze at the
top of the flame is very hot at 2000K. What is needed, however, is an
understanding of the fluid dynamics and chemistry leading to and controlling the
blue whirl. What is needed to further this understanding is a simulation that
will show how the flame evolves and provide some guidance to experiments and
theoretical analyses. This blue flame could potentially inspire an ideal burner
that consumes any liquid fuel with no soot and minimal
pollution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is to create a
numerical model capable of simulating the blue whirl, from its inception as a
small fire, through to the evolution into a fire whirl, then through the complex
transition to the blue whirl. This is a complex physical and chemical problem
involving evaporation of liquid fuel, formation of a fire whirl, and then the
dynamic vortex breakdown of the fire whirl that leads to the blue whirl. The
most stringent requirement of this model is that it must be optimized so that it
can perform enough simulations to explore the physicochemical parameter space of
the liquid-burning fire whirl and blue whirl. To accomplish this, it will be
necessary to have a model that solves the governing reactive-flow conservation
equations and adequately resolves the fluid dynamics, chemical reactions and
energy release, heat and mass diffusion, and perhaps the multiphase problem of
hydrocarbon liquid evaporation. The numerical model must be capable of
simulating hydrocarbon flames through a range of stoichiometric from lean to
rich. To accomplish this objective, a three-dimensional unsteady fluid model
that allows transitions from flow regimes of incompressible to fully
compressible flows, based on the barely implicit correct to flux-corrected
transport, will be developed and tested. In addition, a chemical-diffusive model
will be developed for liquid fuels and tested for diffusion flames. Intermediate
steps in the project include simulations of fire whirls for benchmarks and
three-dimensional vortex breakdown in compressible
gases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.