* 1839251
* WORKSHOP: The 2018 RESNA Student Design Competition
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Michael Brogioli, Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Tech Society of NA
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2019
* USD 19,997.00

This is funding to partially support the undergraduate Student Design
Competition (SDC), which will be part of the 2018 annual RESNA conference to be
held July 11-15 at the Hyatt Regency Crystal City in Arlington, VA. Today, over
70 million people in the United States report some degree of disability, a
number which will likely grow in coming years as the so-called "baby boomer"
generation ages. RESNA, the Rehabilitation Engineering and Assistive Technology
Society of North America, is the one organization with an international focus
that is devoted solely to technology for individuals with disabilities. RESNA's
membership consists of individuals and institutions covering a range of
disciplines (including researchers, clinicians, suppliers, manufacturers,
consumers and educators who work in both non-profit and for-profit settings),
all of whom are dedicated to promoting the exchange of ideas and information for
the advancement of assistive technology. The annual RESNA Conference and the
Student Design Competition combine to create a forum for interaction between
experienced rehabilitation engineers and students who are about to enter the
field. Unique in its primary focus on undergraduates, the event provides
participants with experience and skills that help them succeed in their
engineering and design careers. It encourages and mentors students in various
disciplines to become involved in the assistive technology and rehabilitation
engineering fields, and provides an opportunity for the students to network with
their peers as well as participants in previous SDCs, many of whom are now
leaders in service, research, and education related to technology for persons
with disabilities. Furthermore, continuing a practice started a few years ago,
all participants (not just the finalists) will create blog posts that capture
and archive their submissions, and these will remain accessible indefinitely
through the RESNA website and the AT Wiki. Thus, educators will be able to share
this information with their students as examples of projects that others have
done, while service providers and persons with disabilities will be able to
search for unique solutions to barriers they may face. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
RESNA Student Design Competition fosters innovation and creativity with the
ultimate goal of producing technology that can contribute to the independence of
individuals with disabilities. The first SDC was held in 1980 as part of the
inaugural RESNA conference; since then over 265 designs have been identified as
winning entries from among over 850 submitted by students from over 125
different universities and institutes of higher learning. Both undergraduate and
master's level graduate candidates are eligible to submit entries, which must
represent the work of students only; no faculty or professionals may be included
as co-authors, although faculty may be mentioned as advisors and/or mentors.
This year's funding will enable the SDC to be further expanded and enhanced, so
as to include more entries and support for more design teams, especially from
minorities, women, and individuals with disabilities. A call for participation
has been posted on the conference website, and also distributed electronically
to a large number of colleges and universities with engineering and design
schools. A team of 5 judges will pre-select at least 6 semi-finalist teams, from
each of which two members will be invited to attend the conference fully
supported with travel and hotel funds as well as complimentary registration. At
the beginning of the conference these teams will make presentations and show off
their working prototypes to the judges before an international audience and
their peers during a platform session where 5 finalist teams will be selected.
Judges will have an opportunity to ask questions and make suggestions and
recommendations to the design teams. In addition, finalists will have an
opportunity to present their projects during the Annual Developers' Forum, which
highlights new products under development (some past SDC student team designs
have been patented and are now available
commercially).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.