* 1839437
* Student Travel Support to Advance US Soil Science
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Aida Sztein, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 06/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Soil is essential for human survival. Soil provides food, fiber, and ecosystem
services. Understanding how soil functions therefore helps human society. In
recognition of the importance of soils to all of humanity, the year 2015 was
named the International Year of Soils. To further advance the understanding of
soil and the services it provides, soil scientists have organized a meeting to
discuss recent advances in knowledge. Students and early career researchers
would benefit from attending this meeting. Additionally, scientists at this
early career stage often have new ideas to contribute. Intensive training and
mentoring in an early career stage will strengthen the U.S.
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide support for ten graduate
students and early career scientists from the United States to present their
research results at the 21st World Congress of Soil Science. This international
meeting has the theme "Soil Science: Beyond Food and Fuel." It is expected to
attract more than 5,000 scientists from all over the world. This project builds
on a long tradition of supporting students and early career scientists in the
field of soil science. This award will provide U.S. students and early career
scientists a unique opportunity to showcase their research at the international
level. The students and early career researchers will also receive high quality
training. They will interact with leading soil scientists, hear about the latest
scientific developments, and make valuable research
connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.