* 1839203
* RoL:FELS: Symposium:  Mitonuclear compatibility as a rule for complex life; January 5, 2019; Tampa, FL
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Geoffrey Hill, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 09/30/2019
* USD 16,233.00

Evolutionary biology has led to breakthroughs in agriculture and medicine and
provides a framework for understanding the Earth's biodiversity. The foundations
of modern evolutionary biology were established before the discovery that there
are important genes outside of the nucleus of the cell in mitochondria. This
workshop is included under Rules of Life as it explores the significance of
having genes carried in two distinct sets; this idea reframes key theories in
evolutionary biology. New ideas on the role of mitochondrial genes in the
evolution of organisms need to be discussed and further developed. To address
these developing interests in the community, a symposium on has been organized
for the 2019 meeting of the Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology
(SICB). The symposium is titled "Beyond the powerhouse: integrating mitonuclear
evolution, physiology, and theory in comparative biology" and will bring
together scientists who are working in diverse organismal systems to address
emerging topics in mitonuclear ecology. The speakers will make formal
presentation of the work being conducted in laboratories in the United States
and around the world. The ideas that emerge from this meeting may advance
medicine and agriculture. This symposium will include a diverse range of
researchers that span career stages from graduate student to full professor, and
all speakers will disseminate these findings in a special issue of Integrative
and Comparative Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Eukaryotes are the outcome of an
ancient symbiosis and as such, eukaryotic cells possess both a nuclear and
mitochondrial (mt) genome. Interactions between the mitochondrial and nuclear
genomes, mitonuclear interactions, are an inherent feature of eukaryotic
biology. Not surprisingly, mitonuclear interactions have been suggested to
underlie the evolution of organismal complexity, environmental adaptation, the
evolution of life history traits, and the process of speciation. Collectively,
rethinking such classic eco-evolutionary processes in the light of mitonuclear
interactions has recently been dubbed "mitonuclear ecology". To address these
developing interests in the community, a symposium on mitonuclear ecology has
been organized for the 2019 meeting of the Society of Integrative and
Comparative Biology (SICB). The speakers include experts in molecular evolution,
the theory of mitonuclear coadaptation and conflict, and mitochondrial
physiology. By presenting this combination of expertise, the goal is to inform
the community of the importance of mitonuclear interactions, encourage others to
consider these types of interactions in their own work, and develop new fields
(e.g., mitonuclear ecophysiology).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.