* 1839217
* TRIPODS+X:RES: Collaborative Research: Creating Inference from Machine Learned and Science Based Generative Models
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Uros Seljak, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2022
* USD 399,431.00

In many scientific disciplines computational simulations are used to enhance our
understanding of physical processes of complex systems. In all such simulations
simplifications are required to make the problem tractable, limiting the scope
of the questions that can be addressed. Generally, computational simulations of
large systems with many interacting components, based on the governing physics,
requires complex and time consuming computations. This project will apply deep
learning neural networks (NN) with geometric transformations based on the
physics of the system to accurately approximate traditional physics-based
computational simulations in a highly efficient manner. The increased efficiency
imparted by the NN model will facilitate the asking of scientific questions
which are currently computationally intractable. While the proposed work will
focus on using this method to discover new strain-induced polar phases and phase
competition, and to understand the large-scale structure in the universe, the
concepts developed in this work can be applied to computational simulations in
other scientific disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will focus
on the development of foundational data science methods and the application of
these methods to augment computationally-expensive science-based generative
models in a way that is principled and efficient, thereby enabling improved
data-driven scientific inference. The work will place specific emphasis on the
design of neural network models, which through physically-significant domain
architectures can approximate N-body and highly-correlated phenomena with
minimal loss of information. The work will develop tools to guide the discovery
and experimental synthesis of new strain-induced polar phases and phase
competition, which exhibit enhanced electromechanical responses; and it will
expand our simulation capabilities and understanding of the large-scale
structure in the universe. Ultimately, this work will provide both domain
specific advances, as well as a framework for other domain areas to augment
computationally intensive, highly-correlated, N-body problems with data-driven
models, which respect the physics of the problem and lead to increased
computational efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.