* 1839098
* RAISE-TAQS: Topologically-Engineered Graphene Nanoribbon-based Quantum Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Bokor, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Miriam Deutsch
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,000,000.00

Non-technical description: The goal of this project is to make operational
quantum bits (qubits) from graphene nanoribbons (GNRs). Qubits are the building
blocks of devices that manipulate quantum information for purposes such as
cryptography, simulations, and a variety of other computational tasks. Due to
the extraordinary properties of quantum mechanics, quantum information devices
(such as quantum computers) are expected to perform calculations significantly
beyond what conventional classical computers can ever hope to do. GNRs (which
are very narrow strips of graphene) are an exciting new platform for creating
qubits because they have excellent electronic, thermal, and mechanical
properties, and they can be efficiently fabricated from 'the bottom-up' (i.e.,
molecule-by-molecule) with atomic precision. The main idea of this project is to
incorporate qubits into GNRs by causing individual electrons to be trapped at
predetermined locations along the backbone of chemically-engineered GNRs.
Because GNRs are molecule-scale structures, qubits arranged in this way could
potentially yield quantum devices having reduced size, increased density, and
structural flexibility that is unmatched by any other qubit platform. A major
focus of this project is to synthesize such GNR-based qubits and to characterize
them at the atomic-scale using techniques that include scanning tunneling
microscopy and atomic force microscopy. Based on the results of these
measurements, suitable GNR qubit candidates are chosen for incorporation into
devices designed to measure their quantum properties. The viability of GNR-based
qubits as a new quantum information platform is evaluated through this
procedure. The broader impacts of this project lie in its strong education and
outreach components and the fact that it provides high-level scientific training
to graduate students, undergraduates, and high school students, preparing them
for careers in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields. Quantum
scientists are trained in how to combine chemistry, material science, and
engineering in new interdisciplinary ways. The California community college
system has additionally been targeted by this project as a useful conduit for
recruiting new STEM majors who better represent the demographics of our nation.
This project incorporates a realistic plan to partner with a Bay Area community
college in order to develop a new quantum information curriculum that is
accessible to community college students, that allow them to transfer their
credits to the University of California system, and create new opportunities for
them to become involved in cutting-edge research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The main goal of this project is to
evaluate a new type of graphene nanoribbon (GNR) system for suitability as a
quantum information device platform. Qubit functionality in GNRs arises from a
recent discovery made by the investigators of this research team that GNRs can
host topologically-protected interface states that each contain a single
electron spin. These topological interfaces can be engineered at the molecular
level and provide a new method for controlling electronic and spin behavior in
GNR-based nanostructures. A double-interface GNR geometry has been chosen for
this project that places two topological interface states in close proximity,
thus allowing the resulting singlet/triplet spin configurations to provide qubit
functionality (analogous to the singlet/triplet qubit subspace of Si and GaAs
double-quantum-dots). Due to graphene's highly desirable electronic, thermal,
and mechanical properties, GNR qubits are expected to have long decoherence
times, to function at very high packing density, and to be very device-
compatible. Established bottom-up synthesis methods additionally allow
atomically-precise GNR structures to be fabricated via highly efficient self-
assembly processes. This project is performed by an interdisciplinary research
team comprised of three investigators with strengths in chemistry, material
science, and electrical engineering. F. Fisher heads the project's chemistry-
based efforts to design precursor molecules that self-assemble into topological
GNR qubits. M. F. Crommie heads material science-based efforts to characterize
the local electronic and spin properties of resulting qubit structures using
scanned probe microscopy. J. Bokor heads efforts to incorporate suitable GNR
qubit systems into quantum devices for functional evaluation. Fundamental
questions addressed by this project include whether topological GNR interface
states can be coupled into multi-spin qubit centers, initialized into well-
defined quantum states, and efficiently read out. The competition between
interface state hybridization effects and on-site Coulomb repulsion is explored
through atomically-precise manipulation of the GNR chemical structure, thus
presenting new physical regimes for quantum spin engineering that are relevant
for quantum information applications. New methods of coupling GNR qubits are
planned, including ideas for inducing entanglement between qubits and for
addressing individual GNR qubits via electronic nanodevices, assessing the
viability of GNRs as a quantum information platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.