* 1839191
* RAISE:TAQS: High Dimensional Frequency Bin Entanglement -- Photonic Integration and Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Sabre Kais, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,039,499.00

Entanglement, a fundamentally quantum mechanical phenomenon in which the wave
functions of particles are correlated such that their inseparable states must be
written as coherent superpositions, is a&lt;br/&gt;key resource for quantum
information processing (QIP). Typical QIP systems are based on two-
level&lt;br/&gt;quantum states, also called qubits. However, high-dimensional
systems based on qudits (high&lt;br/&gt;dimensional units of quantum
information) have several potential advantages over the conventional two-
dimensional qubit systems most commonly explored, including higher information
capacity per particle&lt;br/&gt;and stronger immunity to noise. &lt;br/&gt;This
proposal focuses on high dimensional photon entanglement in the frequency degree
of freedom, also referred to as biphoton frequency combs (BFCs). &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project seeks to advance the science and technology of frequency-
encoded photons for quantum information processing. &lt;br/&gt;This project
should provide excellent opportunities for training of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This highly interdisciplinary project
will advance knowledge in many fronts. (1) Rigorous certification of coherence
and entanglement in high dimensional BFC photons is fundamental to the future
application of frequency-bin encoded photons. (2) The proposed photonic
integration effort could lead to a new class of quantum chips architected for
generation, preparation, measurement, and processing of high dimensional BFC
states. Compared to prior work with discrete components, implementation in
integrated photonics can lead to much lower losses, which is critical to scaling
to more complex or cascaded operations and to demonstrating entanglement in even
higher dimensions. (3) Algorithms for quantum computation using qudits have been
underexplored compared to their qubit counterparts. This project will produce
new quantum simulation methodologies that seek to exploit high dimensional
(qudit) encoding for efficient representation of complex many-body systems with
high dimensional degrees of freedom, such as the Holstein Hamiltonian describing
polaron/polariton quasiparticles resulting from the coupling between
electronic/excitonic modes and vibrational modes. (4) The team will design and
perform proof-of-concept experiments using photonic hardware to realize selected
aspects of the developed quantum algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.