* 1839174
* RAISE-TAQS: Quantum-based chemical sensing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Susan Coppersmith, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

The goal of this project is to explore novel approaches to chemical sensing and
analysis. This approach based on a quantum-mechanical property of electrons
known as spin. Diamond samples containing a special defect, the nitrogen vacancy
(NV) center. One of the carbon atoms in the diamond is replaced by a nitrogen
atom adjacent to a vacancy. Such samples emit light in a way that is altered by
the presence of spins on nearby molecules. In this project, chemists,
physicists, and electrical engineers are collaborating to make diamond samples
with arrays of NV centers placed at very specific locations beneath diamond
surfaces. They then investigate how the light emitted by the NV centers depends
on the location and distance of molecules located immediately outside of the
diamond sample. Because spin-based chemical sensors do not currently exist, this
work has the potential to lead to new types of chemical sensors with very high
sensitivity, possibly at the single-molecule level. If successful, spin-based
chemical sensors would be useful in a wide range of chemical, environmental and
biomedical applications. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate
students in the quantum-based science, the researcher team is also engaged with
outreach events and development of public-friendly podcast on quantum-based
chemical detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
research is to explore fundamentally new approaches to detecting and
measuring&lt;br/&gt;molecular binding, cleavage, and dynamical motions at
surfaces by exploiting the unique quantum mechanical properties of NV centers in
diamond. The new sensing approach is based on characterizing&lt;br/&gt;how
electron spins of NV centers interact with spins present in molecules located
nearby at the diamond-water interface. Nanolithographic patterning and ion
implantation methods are being used to prepare samples containing arrays of NV
centers, each of which can be probed and manipulated individually. Nanophotonic
methods are being used to provide efficient ways of optically coupling light
from individual NV centers to optical detectors. The diamond surfaces are being
functionalized with molecules containing well defined spin probes that interact
with the sub-surface NV centers in a manner that depends on the proximity
between the spin probe and the NV centers. Researchers are using the resulting
interactions between the spin of the molecules and the spin of the NV centers as
a potentially novel approach to chemical sensing in which binding or release of
molecules from surfaces is reported via spectroscopic changes in the NV
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.