* 1839194
* EXP: Inclusive Design for Engaging All Learners (IDEAL): Designing Technology for Cultural Brokering
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Yanghee Kim, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2020
* USD 436,025.00

In the United States today, children whose home language is not English make up
about 21% of the current K-12 school-age population. These children often enter
school already behind academically because they have to learn English as well as
the subject being taught. Academic struggles can result in children having
negative perceptions about education and high dropout rates. There is an urgent
need to break this cycle and foster children's confidence so that they view
themselves as valuable contributors to the classroom. This project explores the
creation of an effective program for all children that recognizes cultural and
linguistic diversity as an asset. The project seeks to understand how sociable,
humanoid robots can be designed to guide collaborative interactions among
children who come from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds.
Through this understanding, the project addresses urgent societal needs for
better integration of minority students into U.S. classrooms. Appreciating
diversity is a life skill that is essential for all Americans living in an ever
more diverse society. Taking advantage of social robotics, the project intends
to create this mindset from an early age.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
research is carried out in the context of developing and refining a set of
robot-mediated interaction activities for kindergarten-aged, English-speaking
and Spanish-speaking children. Grounded in socio-cultural theories, the robot
(acting as a playmate) is designed to mediate interactions among children to
create an inclusive learning community. The research questions include i) What
does it take to design robot-mediated collaborative interactions to support
children's development? ii) How do the children's identities and learning
develop as they participate in the collaboration? Spanning two years, the
project uses design-based research methodology by which the interaction
activities are designed, tested, and refined in an iterative cycle. Data
collection is done using the Wizard of Oz method, where a hidden person controls
the robot to assist children's interactions as they learn and play together. A
representative corpus of social interactions between the children and the person
allows the researchers to determine the needed robot capabilities for the
ultimate implementation using a real robot. Ethnographic, participatory
observations of children's interactions and interviews with the children,
teachers, and parents are also conducted. The project team consists of
researchers from the fields of learning sciences, literacy, and computer
science, public school personnel, and a three-member advisory board. The project
outcomes will be disseminated through multiple channels that target academic and
professional communities.