* 1839515
* Emphasis Year in Noncommutative Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Boris Tsygan, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 02/29/2020
* USD 30,000.00

This award will partially support the program "Noncommutative Geometry Emphasis
year" https://sites.math.northwestern.edu/~tamarkin/Emphasis/&lt;br/&gt;at
Northwestern University in the academic year 2018-2019. This program will
include the mini-workshop "Recent developments in Topological Cyclic Homology"
(https://sites.math.northwestern.edu/~tamarkin/Emphasis/Topcyc) and the
conference "Modern Trends in Non-commutative Geometry"
(https://sites.math.northwestern.edu/~tamarkin/Emphasis/Tsyganfest). The mini-
workshop will be held on the weekend Nov 3-4, 2018 and the conference will be
held during the week May 20-24 (Monday-Friday) in 2019. Both events will take
place at Northwestern University in Evanston IL. The goal of this program is to
promote interaction between researchers working in areas related to non-
commutative geometry. The mini-workshop and the conference will provide
opportunities for researchers to disseminate their ideas and to broaden their
perspectives. They will also provide opportunities for graduate students and
postdocs to interact with senior experts in the areas related to noncommutative
geometry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Noncommutative geometry is connected to many
branches of mathematics and mathematical physics and the main idea of
noncommutative geometry is to study geometry via algebras of functions on
"noncommutative manifolds". On such a "noncommutative manifold", the relevant
object is no longer the space of points, but rather an associative algebra,
which may be noncommutative. The topics of the program will include:
noncommutative Hodge theory, (topological) cyclic/Hochschild homology, K-theory,
index theory, deformation quantization, Riemann-Hilbert correspondence and
microlocal categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.