* 1840512
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Resiliency Enhancement and Disaster-Impact Interception (READII) in the Manufacturing Sector
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Heshmat Aglan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 02/29/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. The proposed project
titled: "Resiliency Enhancement and Disaster-Impact Interception (READII) in the
Manufacturing Sector" will address the critical need of reinventing and
revamping the manufacturing sector and its supply chains to become more
resilient to natural disasters (especially hurricanes and floods, but also
considering other possibilities such as earthquakes). The overall vision is to
develop the conceptual framework, fundamental research, educational and training
tools to create proactive and innovative approaches to prevent and mitigate
failure and ultimately enhance resiliency of the manufacturing sector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of the ERC is to create an integrated
framework, a supporting set of transformative concepts and tools, and a multi-
disciplinary collaborative community to effect a paradigm shift in the design
and operation of manufacturing facilities and supply chains with substantial
enhancement in resilience to natural disasters. Towards achieving the overall
vision, the planning grant will support the development of critical elements and
enabling steps based upon: (1) Identifying and bringing together a partnering
community of multi-disciplinary collaborators from academia, industry, and
local/regional/federal agencies to undertake convergent research collaboration,
(2) Building capacity and fostering a culture of inclusion and innovation in the
area of manufacturing-sector resilience, (3) Assessing the manufacturing-
resilience challenges and opportunities to identify the needed research,
workforce development, and outreach within the US Gulf Coast Region (US GCR),
especially within highly-impacted and disenfranchised communities, and (4)
Developing a roadmap for a high-impact ERC proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.