* 1840740
* I-Corps: Human Resource Optimization Software
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Bart De Jonghe, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project involves the
optimization of human resource deployment via technology. More specifically,
this endeavor leverages systems research to inform software with machine
learning to inform how to organize work across industries and align that work
with available human resources in a manner that optimizes outcomes. This
technology can serve to benefit diverse industries; however, it offers unique
value for healthcare settings which often have scare human resources deployed in
rapidly changing environments. In clinical environments, how care is organized
can have significant implications for cost, quality, and outcomes. This software
will collect and analyze large volumes of data related to individuals and the
environment to organize and assign work optimally (i.e. to improve clinical
outcomes, decrease costs and increase efficiency). This technology has
significant commercial potential beyond healthcare environments to any industry
that routinely organizes and assigns work to a workforce where considerations of
individual characteristics and environmental characteristics have significance.

This I-Corps project involves pursuits focused on better understanding the
application potential of research-driven technology in various industries with a
specific focus on inpatient clinical environments (i.e. hospitals). The
technology automates and optimizes nurse staffing in hospital settings. It uses
a data-driven algorithm informed by qualitative and quantitative research to
make nurse-patient assignments that improve outcomes, save time, and reduce
stress. The research driving this technology is inclusive of a review and
synthesis of relevant nursing, health systems, and work science literature as
well as qualitative research involving interviews of nurses and quantitative
research assessing relationships between inpatient clinical work environments
and patient outcomes. The technology integrates research data from nurses,
patients, and hospital structural factors to inform algorithms driving nurse-
patient matches. Machine learning elements of the software facilitate this
optimization process. The software also serves as a mechanism for collecting a
unique data set that records patient-nurse ?exposures? on the individual level
and on an unprecedented scale. Such a data set is of great value to health
services researchers, hospital quality improvement teams, and to our team as it
seeks to improve and customize the algorithm with potential to decrease costs of
care and improve patient and nurse outcomes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.