* 1840866
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: F: Stochastic Approximation for Subspace and Multiview Representation Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Han Liu, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 359,185.00

Unsupervised learning of useful features, or representations, is one of the most
basic challenges of machine learning. Unsupervised representation learning
techniques capitalize on unlabeled data which is often cheap and abundant and
sometimes virtually unlimited. The goal of these ubiquitous techniques is to
learn a representation that reveals intrinsic low-dimensional structure in data,
disentangles underlying factors of variation by incorporating universal AI
priors such as smoothness and sparsity, and is useful across multiple tasks and
domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new theory and
methods for representation learning that can easily scale to large datasets. In
particular, this project is concerned with methods for large-scale unsupervised
feature learning, including Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and Partial Least
Squares (PLS). To capitalize on massive amounts of unlabeled data, this project
will develop appropriate computational approaches and study them in the ?data
laden? regime. Therefore, instead of viewing representation learning as
dimensionality reduction techniques and focusing on an empirical objective on
finite data, these methods are studied with the goal of optimizing a population
objective based on sample. This view suggests using Stochastic Approximation
approaches, such as Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and Stochastic Mirror
Descent, that are incremental in nature and process each new sample with a
computationally cheap update. Furthermore, this view enables a rigorous analysis
of benefits of stochastic approximation algorithms over traditional finite-data
methods. The project aims to develop stochastic approximation approaches to PCA
and PLS and related problems and extensions, including deep, and sparse
variants, and analyze these problems in the data-laden regime.