* 1840504
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for the Global Environment Nutrient Network (GEN-2)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Stanley Grant, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aquatic nutrient pollution, including nitrogen
(N) and phosphorous (P), poses an existential threat to both humans and
ecosystems. Its impacts, which are felt coast-to-coast and around the world,
include noxious algal blooms in streams, rivers and the coastal ocean, ocean
hypoxia and acidification, loss of inland and coastal fisheries, and the
production of potent greenhouse gases that disproportionately contribute to an
increase in temperature in the environment. The ?Three R?s? for mitigating
aquatic nutrient pollution are: Reduction: decrease nutrient released during the
production of energy (N) and food (N and P); Removal: retain P and denitrify
bioavailable N to N2 gas following its creation and use; and Recovery: capture
and reuse N and P from waste streams. Environmental engineers have made great
strides in developing treatment systems for the removal and recovery of
nutrients from waste streams. The next frontier lies in optimizing networks of
treatment systems at the watershed-to-continental scale while taking into
account: (1) all three R?s (not just removal and recovery); (2) natural
attenuation by terrestrial vegetation, wetlands, and stream corridors (i.e., the
stream and associated riparian and hyporheic zones); and (3) the non-linear
responses of ecosystems to nutrient loading. In this grant we will carry out
planning exercises and three workshops with the goal of developing a Convergent
Engineering Research Center (C-ERC) to address these grand challenges. Our NSF
C-ERC will be founded on a computational platform (GEN-2) that brings together
engineers, hydrologists, oceanographers, ecologists, economists, political
scientists, education experts, and a broad cross-section of stakeholders, in
pursuit of practical solutions to nutrient pollution at continental-to-global
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through planning exercises and three workshops we
will select and refine our: (1) team of scholars, learners, and stakeholders;
(2) research questions and approaches; (3) educational and outreach activities;
(4) leadership structure and analytical tools needed to promote deep
collaboration among team members; (5) approach for ensuring that engineering
education and under-represented minority recruitment/inclusion is ?in the DNA?
of everything we do; and (6) analytical tools for assessing the Center?s impact.
Our planning products will be informed by boundary organization theory, and co-
produced by a diverse group of highly qualified scholars (including 23
researchers across 11 universities and three countries) working in four
complementary teams. The Watershed Team will develop GEN-2 and assure that it
seamlessly integrates with other continental-scale modeling frameworks,
assimilates real-time and historical data, and advances the design of next
generation water quality observational networks. The Ocean Team will utilize
existing regional ocean models to evaluate the relative importance of land-based
nutrient sources and natural oceanographic processes (such as nutrient
upwelling) on coastal ocean water quality. The Policy Team will evaluate
possible solutions to nutrient pollution through the lens of cost-benefit
analysis, behavioral economics (using randomized trials to evaluate the long-
term efficacy of proposed interventions), and political science (using case
studies to uncover governance innovations likely to facilitate management
transitions). Finally, the Society Team will utilize NSF I-Corps principles to
elucidate goals and ?pain points? of stakeholders and foster an inclusive
ecosystem of learners, scholars, and stakeholders that reflects the demographic
make-up of the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.