* 1840870
* Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure: Upgrade of the Large High Performance Outdoor Shake Table to Six Degrees of Freedom
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* J Luco, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2022
* USD 16,859,717.00

The large, high-performance, outdoor shake table (LHPOST) experimental facility
at the University of California, San Diego, is the largest facility of its kind
in the United States for conducting earthquake engineering research on civil
infrastructure, and has the world's largest payload capacity (20 MN). Because
there are no overhead height restrictions, this facility can accommodate the
tallest structures ever tested on any shake table. The LHPOST, originally
designed to accommodate six degrees of freedom (6DOF), was supported for
construction during 2002-2004 as a single degree of freedom (SDOF) system, by
the National Science Foundation (NSF), Network for Earthquake Engineering
Simulation (NEES), Major Research Equipment and Facilities Construction account,
due to budgetary constraints. As an SDOF system and a multi-user national
research facility, the LHPOST has been supported by NSF for operations and
maintenance under the NEES (FY 2005-FY 2014) and the Natural Hazards Engineering
Research Infrastructure (NHERI) (FY 2015 to date) programs. This award will
upgrade the LHPOST from its current SDOF configuration to a full 6DOF
capability. In its upgraded configuration, the LHPOST will be able to reproduce
all six components of motion (two horizontal and vertical translational
components, as well as pitch, roll, and yaw rotational components) experienced
by the ground during earthquakes. It will provide a one-of-a-kind facility to
test large to full size civil infrastructure, such as structural, nonstructural,
geo-structural and soil-foundation-structural systems, under strong earthquake
excitation. The ability to test infrastructure under the full range of combined
horizontal, vertical, and rotational seismic input motion is critical for
research that can lead to effective, economical,and practical new infrastructure
designs, as well as seismic rehabilitation and retrofit strategies for existing
infrastructure, to improve the seismic performance for post-earthquake
resilience, public safety, and national welfare. The 6DOF LHPOST will provide
critical landmark datasets to support the development, calibration, and
validation of high-fidelity, physics-based computational models of civil
infrastructure systems that will progressively shift the current reliance on
physical testing to model-based simulation for the seismic design and
performance assessment of such systems. The experimental capabilities provided
by the 6DOF LHPOST will support U.S. leadership in earthquake engineering
research. The upgraded shake table will also provide a unique tool to educate
graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students, as well as the news media, policy
makers, infrastructure owners, insurance providers, and the public, about
natural disasters and the national need to develop effective technologies and
policies to prevent earthquakes from becoming societal disasters. This award
supports the National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The upgrade of the LHPOST to 6DOF will be achieved by
adding two horizontal actuators and reconfiguring all four horizontal actuators
into a V-shape at both longitudinal ends of the shake table's 12.2 meter long by
7.6 meter wide platen to provide bi-axial horizontal motions, as well as the yaw
motion capabilities. Each of the existing six pressure balanced vertical
actuators/bearings will be equipped with a high-flow servovalve to enable
vertical, pitch, and roll motion capabilities. To operate the 6DOF table, the
number of hydraulic power units will be increased from two to four and the total
size of the accumulator banks will be increased from 9,500 to 37,800 liters. A
new piping system will be installed between the accumulator banks, the
horizontal and vertical actuators, and the surge tank. A third nitrogen-filled
hold-down strut will be installed between the bottom of the platen and the
bottom of the reaction block to increase the overturning moment capacity of the
table. The existing SDOF shake table controller (both hardware and software)
will be replaced by a controller with 6DOF capabilities. A new hydraulic
distribution system controller will also be provided to handle the safety
interlocks, control of the hydraulic power units, and control of the accumulator
charging and blowdown. Additionally, the height of the existing four safety
towers will be doubled to protect the hydraulic power building from potential
specimen collapse. During the upgrade, operations of the shake table under NHERI
will cease for a period of 14 months between mid-2020 and mid-2021. Before
reopening the facility for operations and research, commissioning of the
facility, including acceptance and characterization tests, will be
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.