* 1840672
* EAGER: Understanding Electrochemical Alloying Reaction of Nanostructured Silicon with Magnesium: Impact of Nanoscale Silicon Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Eric Detsi, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 07/31/2020
* USD 180,931.00

New forms of energy storage needed for our national prosperity requires the
development of new materials and processes. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) will support fundamental research that will
contribute to new insight on processing nanostructured silicon, which may serve
as a high performance anode material for magnesium-ion batteries. Magnesium ion
batteries have been suggested as a safe and inexpensive alternative to the more
conventional lithium ion batteries. This research looks to overcome the
fundamental barrier that restricts the storage of magnesium in nanostructured
silicon, and study the relationship between the new processing route and the
material performance. The surface of conventionally processed nanostructured
silicon is covered with native silicon oxide, which restricts the storage of
magnesium in silicon. The new processing route investigated here promises to
lead to oxide-free nanostructured silicon, making it possible to reversibly
store magnesium. The relationship between the size of the synthesized
nanostructured silicon, the synthesis parameter, and the storage performance
will be determined. Results from this research will open the way to the use of
silicon -- the second most abundant element in the earth's crust, in a magnesium
battery, which will benefit the US economy and society. In particular, it will
lessen the concern of the material shortage in lithium and cobalt, which are
currently used in rechargeable batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reversible
electrochemical alloying reaction of nanostructured silicon with magnesium
remains a challenge. In this project, it is hypothesized that processing of
oxide-free nanostructured silicon is the key to successful alloying reaction of
silicon with magnesium. To verify this hypothesis, a new in situ processing
route to oxide-free nanostructured silicon will be investigated. This process
creates the nanostructured material in situ in a magnesium-ion battery cell when
the battery is being charged and discharged. The reversible alloying reactions
of silicon with magnesium will be directly investigated in the same magnesium-
ion battery cell throughout charging and discharging cycles. This processing
approach makes it possible to avoid any exposure of the nanostructured silicon
to air, thus avoiding the formation of undesirable native silicon oxide surface
films that hamper the reaction between silicon and
magnesium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.