* 1840896
* NeuroDataRR: Replication of cortical microstructure correlations with face and object recognition
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Isabel Gauthier, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 649,679.00

Face recognition is an important skill that most people begin to acquire early
in life, while other human activities depend on expertise that only some of us
learn as adults (e.g., recognizing cars or matching fingerprints). Prior work
with a small sample of only men found that it is possible to predict behavioral
performance in such tasks based on the thickness of the cortex in a part of the
brain that responds preferentially to faces. Importantly, the manner in which
face and non-face recognition abilities were predicted by brain structure was
different, with individuals with thicker cortex being better at recognizing
vehicles than those with thinner cortex, while individuals with thinner cortex
performing better in face recognition tasks. In addition, for faces, only the
thickness of the deeper, early developing, layers of the cortex predicted
performance. This research will test whether these results replicate in a larger
sample of men and women. It will investigate how connections between face-
selective cortex and other parts of the brain sensitive to social interactions
could help explain how early experience with faces influences the thickness of
deep cortical layers. A better understanding of how the structure of the brain
relates to visual abilities could extend predictions to a wide range of
occupations such as forensics, medical imaging, and homeland security. The work
could also transform how we study cortical development in neurological disorders
such as Autism Spectrum Disorders. The project will improve participation of
underrepresented middle and high school students from Nashville public schools
and increase scientific literacy, via the team's contributions to the School for
Science and Math at Vanderbilt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to
advance our understanding of how the cortical microstructure of visual areas
relates to individual differences in visual abilities. Using ultra-high
resolution imaging at 7 Tesla and state-of-the-art psychometric measurement of
visual abilities, the project will replicate and extend findings relating visual
recognition of faces and objects to the laminar structure of cortex in the
fusiform face area (FFA). The project will also test for replication of the
relation between one's social network size and the size of the amygdala (AMG),
and test whether AMG size mediates the correlation between face recognition and
the thickness of FFA's deep layers. The work will generalize prior findings with
men to a sample of women, expand behavioral testing to new object categories,
and compare laminar effects in FFA to those in other visual areas. Studying the
neuromarkers of visual abilities can increase our understanding of brain-
behavior relationships beyond already successful domains like general
intelligence or health-related behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.