* 1840668
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Integration of Quantitative and Documentary Methodologies in the Analysis of a Segmentally-Rich Language
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Bryn Hauk, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2022
* USD 17,284.00

Much of what we know about how human languages work is based on only a handful
of well-studied languages, chiefly from Western, industrialized countries.
Meanwhile, nearly half of the world's 7,000 languages are under threat of
disappearance, presenting linguistics with the urgent challenge of documenting
under-studied languages while communities still use them. This dissertation
project addresses these issues not only by documenting an under-studied,
segmentally-rich language, but through groundbreaking adaptation of experimental
methods to a fieldwork setting to provide rich, quantitative data of the type
normally only available for well-studied languages. The researchers will conduct
the first quantitatively-driven investigations of the sound system and grammar
of Tsova-Tush, a critically endangered Northeast Caucasian language spoken in
Georgia. This language family and region are both dramatically underrepresented
in linguistics, meaning that quantitative data from this language are
particularly valuable for helping to increase the diversity of the database
available to linguistic science. Further, its location in Georgia is an ideal
fieldwork setting for adapting experimental methods for an endangered language:
Tsova-Tush is spoken in a rural, agricultural village with many of the
challenges of other fieldwork sites, but with reliable enough access to transit
and telecommunications to make the application and troubleshooting of
experimental methods feasible. Finally, the documentation will provide valuable
data about a segmentally complex language that will further our understanding of
the cognitive demands of human language complexity in general. Broader impacts
include a public repository of recordings and transcriptions, the training of a
doctoral student, and facilitating access to linguistic resources for a minority
language group to enhance scientific understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
quantitative studies in the dissertation focus on three linguistic questions:
the status of long vowels and consonants, the grammaticality of demonstratives
and pronouns (indexicals), and the readability of a proposed writing system. It
has been suggested that Tsova-Tush has both plain and "intensive" consonants, as
well as short, long, and "hyperlong" vowels, but linguists lack the phonetic
details to establish the exact properties of this complicated sound system.
Through a detailed acoustic study with multiple speakers, this project will
describe the durational properties that distinguish these consonants and vowels.
Further, Tsova-Tush has a complex system of indexicals, distinguishing three
deictic distances ('here'/'there'/'over there'), whose grammatical uses are
poorly understood. In this project, an experiment will be conducted, in which
speakers will be asked to judge the grammaticality of sentences with indexicals
in a wide variety of contexts, thus establishing the parameters of indexical
shift. Finally, based on the findings of these studies, the researchers will
test the readability of a proposed Tsova-Tush writing system and provide
speakers with linguistically sound recommendations for developing written
materials in the language. The dissertation's description of the successes and
challenges of the quantitative studies in a documentation scenario will help
improve the methodologies of both documentary and experimental
linguistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.