* 1840891
* GEM: Modeling Ultra-Low-Frequency (ULF) Waves in the Near-Earth Magnetosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Yan Song, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2023
* USD 446,132.00

An outstanding question in space physics is how energy is transported throughout
the near space environment. Radio waves at ultra-low frequencies (0.3-3 kHz)
serve as both a transport mechanism for energy throughout the magnetosphere and
ionosphere and an important diagnostic of the space plasma properties. This
project creates a new physics-based model to better understand the dynamics of
the near-Earth space environment. The broader impacts of this project include
developing new models relevant to our understanding and prediction of space
weather - a national priority set out in the National Space Weather Action Plan
- and the training of a graduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultra-low-
frequency (ULF) waves play a major role in the transport of energy in the near-
Earth regions of the magnetosphere. The research will involve the development of
a magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) wave code and its application to several problems
involving ULF waves in the magnetosphere. The primary focus will be on the
application of this model to problems in magnetoseismology, using these waves as
a diagnostic of the plasma distribution throughout the magnetosphere. This can
be accomplished both by a study of the properties of field line resonances as
well as through the travel times of ULF waves from an impulsive source. While
previous versions of the wave code have either been two-dimensional, or three-
dimensional but with azimuthal symmetry, the code now allows for local time
dependence of the ionosphere and plasmasphere. This allows for studies of the
day-night differences in the ionosphere as well as the role of conductivity
enhancements, such as in the auroral zone, or depletions, as can occur in the
sub-auroral plasma trough. Including plasmaspheric asymmetry will allow for the
dawn-dusk differences in the plasmasphere structure, including the possible
presence of plasmaspheric plumes. Development and application of a global ULF
wave model that can investigate these interactions is the primary goal of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.