* 1840043
* CICI: RDP: Supporting Controlled Unclassified Information with a Campus Awareness and Risk Management Framework
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Baijian Yang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 598,373.00

Protecting Controlled Unclassified Information (CUI) is mandated by the
executive order 13356, and today is required for research in sectors such as
defense and aerospace. Regulatory requirements for research will increase, with
CUI regulations covering categories including Agriculture, Financial, Legal
Records, and Business information. When combined with existing regulations
already seen by universities, such as HIPAA, and the European Union's GDPR, a
well-defined and consistent framework for working with regulated data is
critical for institutions of higher education. This project describes a cost-
effective ecosystem (REED+) to manage regulated data that meets the compliance
requirements found in a campus environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REED+
framework integrates NIST SP 800-171 and other related NIST publications as the
foundation of the framework. This framework serves as a standard for campus IT
to align with security regulations and best practices, and create a single
process for intake, contracting, and facilitate easy mapping of controlled
research to CI resources for the sponsored programs office, human subjects
office, and export control office. The framework allows researchers to
experience faster intake of new funded projects and be more competitive for
research dollars. Using student-developed training materials and instruction,
researchers, administrators, and campus IT are now able to more clearly
understand previously complicated data security regulations affecting research
projects. The ecosystem developed from this project enables new partnerships
with government agencies, and industry partners from the defense, aerospace, and
life science sectors. Experiences and best practices in providing
cyberinfrastructure and security awareness developed from this collaboration are
documented and shared with the broader CI and campus community through
conferences, journals and workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.