* 1840370
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Resilient Rural Infrastructure (RRI)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Andrzej Nowak, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 06/30/2023
* USD 97,750.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rural areas in the U.S. are home to sixty million
people, occupy 97% of the land area, and supply the bulk of the nation's food
and natural resources. The overarching goal of the proposed activity is to
understand and positively impact the significant physical and human
infrastructure needs of rural U.S. communities through research supporting the
design, development, and implementation of resilient rural infrastructure. One
of the challenges in conducting large-scale research is to simultaneously ensure
significant potential impact while keeping the studies tractable so as to not
overwhelm resources. In this planning grant, various types of rural communities
will be targeted such as: communities in the southeast U.S., Puerto Rico, and
Native American communities within the Great Plains. These communities and the
educational institutions that support them will be targeted in order to increase
the participation of groups and geographic regions that are too often
underrepresented in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective
of this project is to leverage the resources of a planning grant to develop and
nurture relationships with the stakeholder community in a deliberate, early-
stage process in an effort to develop a research team that is well poised to
successfully compete for an Engineering Research Center addressing a highly
complex, high-societal impact challenge. Inadequate and failing rural
infrastructure is an important though arguably overlooked problem of national
significance requiring center-scale, converging engineering research. If
successful, this will be the nation's first-ever center dedicated primarily to
the study and improvement of rural infrastructure. The goal is to develop a
convergent research team of multidisciplinary subject-matter experts to
successfully reengineer the nation's rural infrastructure. However, the current
team is lacking stakeholders from the target rural communities and the
educational institutions that support them (largely primary and secondary
schools and local junior colleges). The team will also explore additional areas
of expertise needed to address the this complex challenge (e.g., public health,
public policy).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.