* 1840732
* EAGER: Suppressing Lithium Dendrite Growth by Functionally Graded Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Huixuan Wu, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2021
* USD 287,942.00

Current lithium-ion batteries use a mixture of active materials, conductive
additives, and binders, which have been quickly reaching the limit of their
functionality in terms of energy density, power efficiency, and durability. This
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project addresses
developing a fundamental scientific understanding of a new manufacturing process
as well as addressing the bottleneck in the development of the next generation
of rechargeable batteries. The technology can also be applied to the fabrication
of other newly designed materials, such as free-standing and binder-free
composites. The broader impacts are potentially very large, and the approach
could be transformative, as the approach has direct application in the
automotive, electronics, agricultural equipment, aerospace, and defense
industries. As such, the project directly impacts economic welfare and national
security of the United States. In addition to supporting graduate students, the
project will bring education opportunities for learning state-of-the-art
fabrication processes to a diverse array of students, including women, the
disabled, and underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering,
and math (STEM). Social events like the annual Maker Faire at Kansas City (a
two-day exhibit and science show, that drew more than 17,000 visitors ranging in
age from toddlers to grandparents from nearly all 50 states in 2017) will be
utilized to disseminate and share the research findings, as well as bring
education to the general public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While being the lightest
metals (0.534 g/cm3) and possessing the lowest negative reduction potential
(-3.05 V) against a standard hydrogen electrode, lithium metal is merited with
extremely high theoretical specific capacity (3,829 mAh/g) as compared to carbon
anode in lithium-ion batteries (with a specific capacity of 372 mAh/g). Although
promising, the development of rechargeable lithium metal batteries has been
impeded by such bottlenecks as Li dendrite growth. To address this issue, the
Electric-Field-Augmented Ultrasonic Spray Pyrolysis (EFAUSP) process will enable
the fabrication of functionally graded materials (FGMs), which can suppress Li
dendrite growth. However, to date, there exists a knowledge gap in understanding
the synergistic effects of the spray's generation, transport, and deposition in
the EFAUSP process. For example, the turbulent jet with sprays possesses a
series of eddies that determine the distribution of deposition droplets or
particles and, eventually, deposition pattern. The research will provide
comprehensive knowledge of the turbulence-spray interactions to realize the
fabrication of FGMs. In addition, new knowledge and tools will be developed to
examine what the best FGMs are for controlling and suppressing Li dendrite
growth, which will have a significant impact on the battery industry. This
potentially transformative work is a crucial step on the path to making
rechargeable lithium metal batteries commercially available. Moreover, the
fundamental knowledge gained in the work will allow the development of a simple,
low-cost, and scalable fabrication technology that could revolutionize battery
fabrication. This technology will have a significant impact on society through
its effects on energy, transportation, the portable device industry, and other
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.