* 1840663
* RCN:  Eco-Evolutionary Dynamics in an Urban Planet: Underlying Mechanisms and Ecosystem Feedbacks
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2023
* Marc Johnson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 10/31/2023
* USD 498,817.00

Cities across the globe are driving rapid evolutionary changes in plants,
animals, fungi, viruses, and other organisms. Organisms can adapt to the urban
environment by changing their physiology, morphology, and behaviors. Because
these organisms can play important roles in nutrient cycling, pollination, seed
dispersal, water and air purification, and food production, any changes in their
traits might have significant effects on human well-being. The challenge is to
understand the mechanisms of urban-driven evolutionary change and determine
whether these changes might affect ecosystem function at the planetary scale.
This complex challenge can only be addressed by combining the expertise, data,
and analytical methods of evolutionary biologists, ecosystem scientists,
ecologists, urban ecologists, palaeoecologists, and archaeologists. A new
Research Coordination Network (RCN) will bring together scientists from
different institutions to design and perform long-term cross-comparative
studies, to synthesize the science, and to explore mechanisms that link urban
development patterns to rapid evolution and the potential for those changes to
feedback to shape ecosystems. The RCN will train scholars, postdocs, and PhD
students, and will recruit members with diverse backgrounds offering them direct
experience in collaborative, transdisciplinary research. The network will
organize conference workshops and symposia, develop searchable databases,
maintain an interactive website, lead collaborative papers, develop
undergraduate and graduate seminars at the participants' institutions, and
create a science-practice exchange program between scientists and conservation
planners. The RCN will establish pilot cross-city citizen science projects to
monitor eco-evolutionary dynamics and convey key findings to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants will explore four central questions:
(1) What is the evidence for urban signatures of phenotypic change distinct from
natural and other anthropogenic drivers? (2) To what degree does urban trait
change differ among branches of the tree of life, or among distinct life-history
strategies, traits or biomes? (3) To what degree can trait changes be attributed
to phenotypic plasticity or to evolutionary change? (4) What are the functional
consequences of urban-induced evolutionary changes on ecosystems? The goal is
for the team to more accurately predict the responses of populations,
communities, and ecosystems to urbanization. Investigators will use meta-
analyses of individual character variation among urban and non-urban
environments and multimodel inference to evaluate competing hypotheses and to
assess the relative importance of predictor variables. They will also use
targeted mechanistic experiments to test specific predictions suggested by the
meta-analysis and use partitioning metrics to separate the contributions of
phenotypic plasticity and evolutionary change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.