* 1840476
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Global Biodefense (PERC-GB)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Karen McDonald, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Planning Grant project is focused on
activities that will identify and bring together the technical and practical
expertise necessary to address the major societal challenges of biodefense.
Biodefense challenges, like infectious diseases and bioterrorist attacks, can
have a direct impact on individuals, as well as serious consequences for
agriculture. This has a direct impact on the food supply and food security. A
national priority to address these growing public health, economic, and societal
threats is research and development that enable the 1) rapid detection of
infectious agents/toxins, 2) rapid diagnosis, 3) rapid production of medical
countermeasures, and 4) rapid and efficient deployment of these medical
countermeasures. In addition to being rapid, these technologies must also be
cost-effective and deployable under a variety of resource-limited situations.
The planning grant will advance the field of biodefense by bringing together
faculty, students and stakeholders from different disciplines to address
technical needs. It will also support education through the involvement of
undergraduates and graduate students in the planning grant activities. The
planning grant activities will help identify research directions needed to
protect lives and preserve animal and plant health in the face of natural and
intentional biological threats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the planning
grant activities include (1) a detailed understanding of the basic science,
engineering, computational, social science, workforce development, innovation
ecosystem, and diversity and inclusion components needed to address this
societal problem; (2) identification of strategic academic, industry, and
governmental partners, as well as specific areas of expertise needed, unique
existing facilities and testbeds required for success; (3) identification of the
stakeholder community, establishing relationships with them, and using their
knowledge base to inform (1) and (2) above; (4) independent evaluation and
refinement of the concept of the proposed NSF ERC; (5) development of a center
identity (i.e. name, vision statement, goals, strategic model), and (6) creation
of an effective leadership/management structure. These benefits are not possible
without bringing faculty and stakeholders together in person. These interactions
will establish areas of partnerships in convergent research, identify gaps and
prioritize activities and strategies for an ERC. The planning grant activities
will culminate in a 2-day workshop, bringing together faculty from the partner
universities, stakeholders from industry, governmental agencies, funding
agencies, non-profits, community and workforce development organizations along
with students. In the end, planning grant activities will establish a stronger,
crystallized vision for the scope, leadership structure, team, partner network,
and activities of an Engineering Research Center in Global
Biodefense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.