* 1840457
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Tribology to Create Reliable, Efficient, Sustainable Transportation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* James Batteas, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,999.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.

Vehicles consume approximately 19% of the world's energy and produce
approximately 23% of total greenhouse gas emissions each year. Over 30% of this
energy consumption originates from simply overcoming losses due to friction and
wear. Further, many new energy-efficient technologies are obstructed by issues
related to friction and wear. For example, low viscosity lubricants can greatly
reduce energy losses in engines and drivetrains, but there is still no solution
to prevent the harsher wear that results when lower viscosity lubricants are
used. Such new technologies are impeded by the lack of fundamental knowledge in
tribology - the study of friction, lubrication, and wear. Related to this, there
is a lack of advanced materials, components, and design approaches in industry
that are aimed at reducing friction and wear. Moreover, the tribology workforce
in the U.S. is ageing and dwindling due to a lack of education and training
efforts. This planning grant will bring together a diverse set of innovators to
identify the most promising technologies, the best-equipped team, and the most
receptive industry and institute partners to form Tribo-CREST: the ERC for
Tribology to Create Reliable, Efficient, Sustainable Transportation. Tribo-CREST
will aim to transform the efficiency, reliability, and sustainability of vehicle
technologies with a primary focus on engines and drivetrains. The ERC this
planning grant will be working towards will aim to produce new knowledge,
methods, and facilities; transformative commercial impact; and a reinvigorated,
diverse, tribology workforce.

Tribology is a highly convergent research domain. Phenomena related to physics,
chemistry, solid mechanics, surface science, fluid mechanics, thermal science,
and materials science all exist and interact at the contact between two sliding
surfaces. Tribologists must understand and predict these complex phenomena,
which occur at a dynamic interface hidden from view. Thus, tribology solutions
require the deep integration of knowledge at the intersections of multiple
domains, new and innovative experimental and simulation tools, and diverse teams
who can assemble the multi-faceted perspectives needed. While this poses
tremendous challenges, it also illustrates the scale of the opportunity for a
tribology-focused ERC. To accomplish this, the proposing team will identify
methods, facilities, people, and industries whose partnership will result in an
ERC proposal for cutting-edge research and education on vehicle engine and
drivetrain technology. This involves studying advanced materials with engineered
surfaces where performance hinges not only on strength, but on weakness: recent
work has shown that the best engineered tribological systems achieve easy
sliding while maintaining low wear through dynamic formation and regeneration of
soft interfacial films. The planning grant team will integrate the input of
30-40 experts from academia, industry, research institutes, national
laboratories, industry consortia, and professional societies, who will help
formulate the basis for a visionary ERC. The team will assess how the ERC can
exceed national averages for participation of women, minorities, Veterans, and
first-generation low income students (FGLIs) by leveraging the diverse
populations and successful diversity programs of the lead institutions:
U.C.-Merced (53% Hispanic students); Texas A&M U. (10th nationwide in Hispanic
PhDs and a top-ranked school for Veterans); U. Florida (in the top 10 for
Hispanic and African American bachelor's and doctoral degrees); and U.
Pennsylvania (a private university with need-blind admission whose engineering
school has increased its FGLI population substantially in recent years).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.