* 1840464
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for One Water
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* William Walker, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,971.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arid and semi-arid regions of the southwestern
U.S. and the world are threatened by dwindling usable water supplies, driven by
drought, growing and competing demands, and increasing salinity. Many of the
U.S./Mexico border States, and especially the Colorado and Rio Grande river
basins, face a future water crisis that includes increasingly frequent and
severe periods of drought and growing demands for water in the urban,
agricultural, and environmental sectors. The ?siloed?, piecemeal water
management approach of the past 100 years is unable to sustain our cities and
farms in the future, while meeting environmental and social concerns, as well.
We need a ?One Water? management approach, one that is holistic, comprehensive
and integrated to meet the challenges of the 21st century. We propose here a
novel, innovative, and convergent planning process to develop a team of
engineers, scientists, and stakeholders with a unified understanding of water
sectors, problems, and solutions and a shared vision for the One Water
Engineering Research Center that will generate new technical discoveries with
broad societal impact. We will meet the water challenges of our water scarce
region while training the water resource professionals of the future.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Our goal is to formulate and implement a planning
process that is informed by recent NSF-funded basic research on team science and
convergent learning across disciplines and perspectives. This process will
provide a model for how to effectively lead convergent research teams during
their early, formative stage. With a strategic series of stakeholder focus group
meetings, researcher summit meetings, and researcher working meetings, we will
generate a shared vision among researchers and stakeholders of a new kind of ERC
? one that catalyzes transformative innovations through the synergies created by
deeply integrating diverse perspectives. The product will be a proposal for a
One Water approach to the management of water on a landscape scale, one that
integrates the needs of all sectors of water users with social and environmental
needs. The convergent product of this planning grant will be an integrated team
with a dynamic system understanding that will serve as the roadmap for future
water management. Our vision for the One Water Center is that it will provide
the strong underpinning of water research, engineering, management, education,
and outreach needed to develop this roadmap, one that is based on innovation and
cutting-edge science and technology, to solve the seemingly intractable problems
of meeting the water needs of all major use sectors in the coming decades. Our
testbed for this One Water Approach will be the Paso del Norte region of the
U.S./Mexico border, a particularly challenged arid region threatened by water
scarcity, climate, competing demands for water, high rates of poverty, and a
complex water governance system including an international border and multiple
state and local jurisdictions. The results will be widely applicable to other
arid and semi-arid regions of the world where water scarcity is a source of
local and even global conflict.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.