* 1840080
* FW-HTF: Future of Firefighting and Career Training - Advancing Cognitive, Communication, and Decision Making Capabilities of Firefighters
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Weichao Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,494,976.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance
firefighting through a novel augmentation technology system. The project will
involve advanced data, machines, tools, and human-technology relationships.
Cognitive and social science studies will examine the impact of the new
technology on human cognition and firefighters' work, training, and quality of
life. The resulting augmentation technology will enhance the cognition,
communication, and decision-making capabilities of firefighters. This project
will have broader impacts at multiple levels ranging from individual
firefighters to organizations and society. For firefighters, the new technology
will enhance well-being and improve their job satisfaction and safety. The new
technology will also help firefighters save lives and better protect property
and the environment. The project's approach and result can be further extended
to other types of emergency response workers, such as police, security, and
disaster management and recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This convergent project
will advance the research frontiers of technology and social science with a
specialized, scalable, and adaptable data infrastructure. The project will
involve new methods of multi-source non-intrusive data collection; model-based
and learning-based analyses and fire modeling algorithms suited for data-rich
environments; immersive and cross-platform visualizations improving on-site
investigation; and multi-sensory interaction, communication, and decision-making
mechanisms. Cognitive and social science research will reveal how the
augmentation technology can transform the firefighter's work and provide
guidance to effectively design human-technology interactions. The project will
adopt a mixed-methods approach including lab experiments, two major public
report data sources, and two-waves of surveys and interviews of firefighters.
The research team will also develop multidisciplinary course modules for
undergraduate and graduate students and tutorials to be offered at major
conferences in order to recruit a broad participants including women and under-
represented students. Both technical modules and education materials will be
accessible through online platforms including GitHub after evaluation and
improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.