* 1840657
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Cognitive NeuroEngineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Karen Moxon, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2022
* USD 99,996.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;San
Jose State University and University of California, Davis are partnering with
Lawrence Livermore National Labs to plan for a potential Engineering Research
Center in Cognitive Neuroengineering. Cognitive NeuroEngineering is the next
step in the evolution of human interactions with machines. Today, machines are
poised to make this important leap: from interfacing with our peripheral nervous
system using sight, touch, and sound to interfacing directly with our central
nervous system to usher in a world in which everyone will command computers,
household machines and other assistive devices simply by thinking about what
they want to do. It is in our nation?s interest to be at the forefront of this
new engineering discipline and to addresses the cognitive implications of
directly interfacing machines with the central nervous system. To promote the
progress of science and ensure the nation's health, prosperity and welfare we
will develop a diverse team that can effectively address the mission of the
proposed ERC and create a Center that has the greatest opportunity for
socioeconomic impact. To accomplish this, this project will engage a broad range
of stakeholders, from scientist and engineers to clinicians and end-users to
improve opportunities for better understanding and trust between these
communities. In addition, the specialized knowledge that each community brings
will be leveraged to create synergistic partnerships that advances the
scientific, educational, and ethical aspects of this new field. Recommendations
for national workforce development and any changes to our regulatory environment
will be made. There are three major expected benefits of this proposal. The
first is to optimize diversity of the stakeholder community to maximize the
potential societal benefit of this new field of Cogntive Neuroengineering. The
second is improved team dynamics to empower stakeholders to contribute
regardless of status and power differences. The third is more effective
leadership by utilizing evidence based research in team
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Just as Human Factors Engineering has grown into
Cognitive Engineering, Cognitive NeuroEngineering goes beyond current
neuroprosthetic applications and addresses the cognitive implications of
directly interfacing machines with the central nervous system. This potential
ERC represents one of the most important new challenges of the future of work at
the human-technology frontier. Using team-based science, this ERC will embrace
convergent research and address the complexity of interfacing with the central
nervous system and its impact on cognition. Novel data analytic approaches will
be developed, a greater understanding of human cognition will be achieved and
innovative neurotechnologies will be created that are expected to impact society
beyond the goals of the proposed ERC. To develop the proposed ERC in Cognitive
Neuroengineering, this planning grant will be used to 1) enable a series of
planning meetings that culminate in three workshops, 2) travel between the
partner institutions and to relevant stakeholder communities for first hand
exchanges of partner resources and 3) engage a profession facilitator in
strategic planning as well as two experts, one in convergent science and the
other in the team science. The three workshops revolve around our four
Objectives. The first Objective is to identify strengths and weaknesses of our
ERC. The second Objective is to identify opportunities for deployment of our
proposed engineering system and opportunities for diversity. The third Objective
is to fully develop the team and stakeholder community using the latest
techniques of team science, including improving our ability to articulate the
societal impacts. The fourth Objective is to write the ERC proposal. This
planning grant will have the greatest impact on the formulation of a set of
strategic objectives and metrics for our ERC. This will allow us to consider
carefully and more deeply understand the societal impact of our ERC. Since
groups are more likely to engage when they identify with the societal impact of
a project, this will improve stakeholder engagement. In addition, the activities
are expected to develop new ways of thinking to ease the significant
communication and philosophical difference among stakeholders and facilitate the
transdisciplinary nature of the ERC whose constituents have significant
communication and philosophical differences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.