* 1840519
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Wireless Power (WiPOWER) for a Cordless World
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Khai Ngo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 12/31/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching vision of the WiPOWER ERC is to create a "Cordless World" by
providing static and dynamic power charging technologies for transportation
vehicles, devices in homes and hospitals, and devices on/in the human body.
Research thrusts within the center will investigate foundational technologies
required for wireless, tether-free power for daily use devices. Recent advances
accomplished in tunable electronic design offer the opportunity to develop
wireless power transfer (WPT) topologies with the potential to meet the
necessary efficiency, power, function and distance requirements for widespread
implementation. These advances include tunable passive elements (e.g.,
capacitors, transformers, and inductors), metamaterial based enhanced coupling
and routing of wireless power, broad bandwidth current sensors and circuit
architectures that exploit tunability, as well as high-efficiency active
components (switches, filters). Utilizing these tunable electronics based
topologies, wearable devices and sensors (such as a blood glucose monitor and an
insulin pump) can be powered through RF wireless power transmission when the
wearer is inside a house/hospital or in its vicinity. The team will investigate
approaches such as a phase array to direct the power-carrying RF beam toward one
or multiple wearable devices/sensors. Common electronic devices in the home and
offices will be able to operate without cords and plugs. The proposed wireless
power infrastructure will also enable the coming electric and autonomous vehicle
revolution by providing parked charging and dynamic moving charging technology
that meet the high efficiency, safety and reliability requirements. The
workshops organized during the planning phase will consider how to best
coordinate with the industrial, educational and entrepreneurial community on
integrating WPT technology to serve the community at large. The WiPOWER ERC
planning team will engage with broader impacts stakeholders during the workshops
to develop diversity and inclusion plan, technology roadmaps and workforce
development for the center. Planning phase will leverage that experience by
including representatives from the participating institutions broader impacts
community and beyond. The workshops organized during the planning phase will
consider how to best coordinate with the industrial, educational and
entrepreneurial community on integrating WPT technology to serve the community
at large. The WiPOWER ERC planning team will engage with broader impacts
stakeholders during the workshops to develop strategic objectives and milestones
for the center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combination of active and passive
components operating at different power levels are required in order to
implement WPT systems. Each component has its own set of performance metrics,
operational guidelines, testing standard and pricing strategy. Complete
understanding of these variables for all the components needed for WPT systems
is an essential part of the investigations to be conducted during the planning
phase. Reliability and accelerated lifetime testing protocols will be
established to ensure robust deployment in dynamic charging conditions. During
the planning phase, the goal will be to utilize workshops, industrial visits,
conference calls, and exchange programs to develop a consistent summary of the
current technology status, technology barriers, intellectual property,
industrial roadmaps, regulations and standards, and commercialization partners.
One of the emphasis areas in this investigation will be passive components with
added-tunability that have adaptability to different circuit operating
conditions. Tunable capacitors and inductors will help a critical challenge in
WPT - the loss of received power as the gap between transmitting and receiving
coils/plates increases or the coils/plates are misaligned. In addition to low-
loss tunable passive components, state-of-the-art in the area of high-efficiency
power transmitter and receiver active components will be investigated to achieve
cost-effective high-efficiency WPT. Advanced circuit designs using wide bandgap
semiconductors, such as GaN and SiC, will be identified through extensive
interactions with industry partners. Commercialization pathways for ultra-low
power applications requiring specialized low-power IC designs in SOI and in CMOS
will be identified and incorporated in the targeted testbeds. High power,
efficient, and long-life battery systems integrated with WPT will be identified
to provide opportunities to bridge the gaps between charging events. Together
these investigations will advance an ERC designed to support the foundational
requirements around research, engineering workforce development, diversity and a
culture of inclusion, and an innovation ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.