* 1840742
* Quantification of the Impacts of Urban Areas on Heavy Rainfall and Flooding from North Atlantic Tropical Cyclones
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Gabriele Villarini, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 03/31/2023
* USD 399,934.00

This project investigates the how rainfall occurring during tropical cyclones is
altered by urban infrastructure such as paved surfaces. Coastal cities in the
United States are home to millions of people and are vulnerable to extreme
rainfall and flooding caused by tropical storms. It is known that urban areas
increase flooding because of their vast paved surfaces, but less is known about
how urban areas impact the rainfall during these storms. This study examines if
urban areas result in an increase in rainfall during tropical cyclone storms.
Changes in flooding associated with urban development are of broad interest for
flood management. Understanding and quantifying how urban areas impact rainfall
and flooding can lead to improved local flood forecasts. This could help to
inform governmental policy on managing the impacts of floods. This project
contributes to the education of one graduate student, provides internship
opportunities for several undergraduate students to nurture their interest in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Math fields, and offers professional
development workshops for high school teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research focuses on land-falling tropical cyclones impacting major U.S.
cities over a nearly 40-year period to examine the role played by urbanization
in controlling the rainfall and flooding associated with these storms. The
specific goals of the proposed research are to: 1) improve our understanding of
the role of urban areas in modifying rainfall associated with U.S. land-falling
tropical cyclones; 2) quantify the impacts of the cities in exacerbating flood
response; and 3) characterize the urban signature in terms of the alteration of
precipitation and runoff during the passage of tropical cyclones. The proposed
work is built on both observations and modeling results, providing a
comprehensive examination of the interactions between tropical cyclones and
urban areas. The knowledge, tools, and datasets developed in this project
enhance the methodological tools used for characterizing tropical cyclone
rainfall in urban areas and advance interdisciplinary studies of hydrologic and
atmospheric science, regional climate modeling, climatology, and applied
statistics. This project provides professional development workshops for high
school teachers to help them teach weather and
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.