* 1840790
* TWC SBE: Medium: Collaborative: Brain Hacking: Assessing Psychological and Computational Vulnerabilities in Brain-based Biometrics
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Zhanpeng Jin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 590,307.00

In September of 2015, it was reported that hackers had stolen the fingerprint
records of 5.6 million U.S. federal employees from the Office of Personnel
Management (OPM). This was a severe security breach, and it is an even bigger
problem because those fingerprints are now permanently compromised and the users
cannot generate new fingerprints. This breach demonstrates two challenging facts
about the current cybersecurity landscape. First, biometric credentials are
vulnerable to compromise. And, second, biometrics that cannot be replaced if
stolen are even more vulnerable to theft. This research will investigate a new
type of biometric that avoids both of these problems. In particular, the
research will evaluate the strengths and weaknesses of brain biometrics. Brain
biometrics are more difficult to steal than fingerprints, since current
technology for collecting brain biometrics is impossible to use without a
person's knowledge and consent. Brain biometrics, importantly, can also be
cancelled if stolen. This is because there are vast networks of the brain that
generate unique activity, meaning that if a person's brainprint is stolen, they
can generate a new one by tapping in to a different brain network. This
investigation holds the potential to transform existing authentication systems
into more secure and attack-resistant brain biometric solutions; critical for
high-security applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brain biometrics have recently
been shown to be 100% accurate in identifying people, in a pool of 50 users and
across a period of up to a year. This research project will systematically
evaluate the potential vulnerabilities of brainprint biometrics, with the goals
of 1) demonstrating the resistance and robustness of brainprints to the most
likely attacks and 2) developing a comprehensive protection plan addressed at
the most vulnerable aspects of this method. In particular, the interdisciplinary
team plans to investigate psychological and computational attacks. Psychological
attacks consist of attempting to force a user to provide their brainprints under
duress, or attempting to impersonate a target brainprint through biofeedback
entrainment process. Computational attacks consist of attempting to circumvent
brainprint authentication system through presenting a counterfeit or stolen
brainprint, with varying levels of obfuscation, such as the addition of noise,
and attacking the stimuli database. This project will examine potential
vulnerabilities in brain biometrics at an unprecedented level of detail, and
convert the resulting knowledge into recommendations for implementation of brain
biometrics to guard an increasingly vulnerable cyberspace.