* 1840513
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center For Sustainable Energy Smart Solutions (SUESS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Lang Tong, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports planning for a Center-scale
project addressing Distributed Energy Resources (DER). DER such as rooftop
solar, electric vehicles, controllable air conditioners and water heaters are
connecting in increasing numbers. However, DER requires massive amounts of
coordination supported by real-time information flows. There are well-known
technical integration challenges with this transition, but just as importantly,
there are non-technical challenges that are often overlooked. Specifically,
consumers and local communities may not accept DER due to privacy issues, risk
perceptions, distributional and procedural fairness. Such concerns can derail
the transition to a smart and sustainable energy future. To grow to the
requisite scale for real-world impact, renewables and DER require an
interdisciplinary approach that integrates technical and socio-behavioral
considerations. It is clear that such an effort will require a collaborative,
transdisciplinary approach, which is exemplar of convergent research; the
merging of approaches and insights from historically distinct disciplines to
address problems that exist at the interface of multiple fields. This project
supports an interdisciplinary planning process, with engineers and social
scientists, industry, and policy makers, led by Cornell and engaging current and
new partners to provide national leadership to address this
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will plan a Center with the capacity
to address the interdisciplinary technical and socio-behavioral challenges to
DER integration into smart grids. The PIs will apply innovative research in the
science of team science (SciTS), and the design and development of the
transdisciplinary research vision toward a shared, crucial, societal objective,
which has not been widely applied in engineering research. Solutions at scale
will not be adopted without involving social scientists in the engineering
design processes up front, and therein lies a core component of the intellectual
merit of the proposed planning process. The planning process for a potential
Engineering Research Center (ERC) is distinctive in its deep, effective
collaboration across a disciplinary chasm that is rarely bridged effectively.
Thus, in addition to innovative collaborative research in massively distributed
smart electric systems and community psychology, the proposed planning strategy
will provide a case application in SciTS and ensure maximal transition of
knowledge to societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.