* 1840190
* RTG: Algebra, Geometry, and Topology at the University of Utah
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Christopher Hacon, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,492,843.00

This Research Training Group award, "RTG: Algebra, Geometry, and Topology at the
University of Utah" will train a new generation of researchers by engaging and
supporting undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral scholars in
research. The grant particularly aims to encourage students at transitional
moments of their educations, through programs targeted at early-career
undergraduate and graduate students, and with a common goal of both recruiting
and training a diverse workforce of researchers in mathematics. The new summer
pre-REU (research experience for undergraduates) will recruit talented students,
particularly those who might not otherwise be "plugged in" to the possibilities
of the math major, out of their introductory courses, and introduce them early
in their undergraduate careers to the depths of modern mathematics. Research
training seminars will organize focused groups of early-career graduate
students, and occasionally advanced undergraduates, to study a topic and then
transition to working collaboratively on a research project. The award will also
support several conferences, including three organized in collaboration with the
University of Utah chapter of the Association for Women in Mathematics (AWM), as
another aspect of the grant's efforts to identify and encourage traditionally
under-supported mathematical talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Utah
has an active group of researchers in algebra, geometry, and topology, including
such areas as algebraic geometry, commutative algebra, geometric group theory,
number theory, representation theory, and topology. This array of research
interests will feed into the grant's programs at all levels, as the pre-REU,
research training seminar, and conferences all are organized around rotating
subjects within the faculty's areas of expertise. Finally, this RTG grant will
vertically integrate its training programs, with graduate students assisting
with the pre-REU, post-docs engaging with the research training seminars, and a
full range, from undergraduate to post-doc, of young researchers participating
in conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.