* 1840566
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Computing Yourself to be Better - Engineering for Revolutionizing Medical Decision-making (CYBER-MD)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Michael Todd, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving the quality and efficiency of
healthcare - at home, in long-term care facilities, and in hospitals - is
becoming ever more important for patients and the society at large. Although the
two current trends in healthcare - telemedicine and digital medicine - are
making headway, they only scratch the surface of the problem as opposed to
dealing with the root cause. To revolutionize healthcare delivery, we need a
comprehensive biophysical patient model, namely a "digital twin", that fuses
data streams, doctor notes/assessments, and medical histories with a rigorous
computational engine that can make probabilistic predictions of future patient
health/well-being. Healthcare providers will then be able to integrate
traditional knowledge/training with the "data-to-decision" posture of the
digital twin, while working with the patient, to best assess their health,
evaluate options, predict future health, and optimize patient outcomes and
prognosis. The aim of this Planning Grant is to engage and converge a broad
stakeholder community of engineers, data scientists, educators, artists, medical
specialists, hospitals, consulting firms, digital health firms, and health and
government agencies to openly discuss and identify the most urgent engineering
research, education, and outreach gaps that need to be addressed for
revolutionizing medical decision-making and personalized medicine. Once the ERC
is established, the team will partner closely with stakeholders to identify
current issues in medical care, design and build engineering solutions, and
deploy these solutions in phases after careful assessment of their
effectiveness. It is through these activities that truly personalized medicine
will be achieved, where cyber-physical healthcare monitoring can be tailored to
specific patients as they are identified early at risk versus when severe
complications unfold. Furthermore, the education and outreach initiatives of the
CYBER-MD ERC will actively recruit women, underrepresented, and economically
disadvantaged individuals for research and training future generations of
multidisciplinary, convergent scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Healthcare practice today only provides
clinicians with limited amounts of historic patient data, and doctors tend to
rely on outdated training and anecdotal experiences to best care for their
patients. However, given the broad overlap in symptomatology across various
diseases, missed diagnosis and misdiagnosis remains a major problem. The vision
of the CYBRE-MD ERC is to establish a cyber-physical innovation hub, where
engineering breakthroughs in bio-physical modeling, imaging, sensing, data
science, data visualization, and probabilistic risk assessment methodologies
collectively revolutionize the medical diagnostic/treatment process for
improving patient outcomes. The cornerstone of this concept is a "digital twin"
that is born and then evolves with the patient while constantly being updated
over time with new data streams ranging from biometrics to illness/injury
assessments to diagnostic images/results to subsequent treatments. The digital
twin not only presents a new data architecture for storing patient health
informatics, but it also provides transformative health assessment and
predictive analytic capabilities that enable doctors and patients to work
together to improve patient health, well-being, and outcomes. CYBER-MD is
inherently transdisciplinary and spans the entire spectrum of science,
technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics (STEAM) as well as all branches
of medicine. This Planning Grant will convene diverse experts to converge on a
final strategic implementation, define focused research grand challenges,
identify relevant thematic areas, communicate with stakeholders, educate, devise
innovative and broadly implementable education/outreach efforts, and assemble
the most competent and diverse team that underpins this transdisciplinary NSF
ERC. The activities planned directly support convergent research, which is of
utmost necessity for tackling this overarching grand challenge that spans the
fields of STEAM, medicine, healthcare, and public health/well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.