* 1840041
* CICI: SSC: Robust and Secure Internet Infrastructure for Scientific Collaboration
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Richard Jones, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 704,068.00

Scientific collaboration increasingly relies on the Internet as a critical
communication infrastructure. However, the Internet is vulnerable to congestion
and Denial-of-Service (DoS) attacks, which can cause devastating losses of
research resources and results, disrupting scientific collaboration, as well as
to other services. The goal of this project is to develop and deploy defenses to
facilitate robust and secure Internet communication for scientific
collaboration. The developed defenses will address two major connectivity
concerns: minimizing congestion by mitigating amplification DoS attacks, and
preventing route hijacking, that is, circumventing devastating attacks on inter-
domain routing that can prevent communication between remote sites. Throughout
this research, the PIs work closely with the network operators of the University
of Connecticut, the Connecticut Educational Network, and other Research and
Education networks. The project generates tested tools, protocols and free open-
source software, which can be directly integrated into operational networks. The
protection mechanisms developed in this project significantly benefits the
scientific community and the society in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project addresses two of the biggest, long-standing challenges to Internet
Infrastructure robustness and security. Firstly, the project develops new
defenses against amplification bandwidth-DoS attacks; these attacks and
subsequent tools are particularly relevant to university networks. These
defenses combine the emerging Resource Public Key Infrastructure (RPKI)
standard, with an improved Reverse Path Forwarding (RPF) technique, to
effectively filter spoofed packets received from peers. Secondly, the project
develops, implements and deploys an improved RPKI validator for secure inter-
domain routing. This validator addresses deployment concerns and challenges, in
particular concerns about false positives, and provides additional security and
functionality improvements to facilitate wide deployment. Amongst RPKI's
benefits, correct deployment of RPKI prevents route hijacking, which is the most
common type of attacks on Internet inter-domain routing. Route hijacking may be
abused in many ways, including eavesdropping, spoofing and preventing
communication between remote sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.