* 1840559
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Cyber-Enabled Public Services to Achieve Healthy Communities in America's Changing City Regions
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Thomas Bradley, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 04/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is focused around developing an
Engineering Research Center to advance "smart" public service infrastructure,
including water, mobility, power and food, that is locally distributed (units
located at or near point of use). The development of these localized public
service infrastructure (distributed systems) will enable automation for improved
efficiency. These new distributed systems will interact with existing
centralized (a single unit serving a large metropolitan area) systems to create
hybrid systems. The ?smart? feature involves adding sensors and controls to
connect these systems, making them operate in a more efficient manner. The
planned Center will consider the fact that much of the U.S. public service
infrastructure is currently in need of replacement. We aspire to both create and
demonstrate new methods and state-of-the-art technologies that are more
flexible, efficient, secure and responsive to the needs of those who rely upon
them. Furthermore, a centerpiece of our proposed Center is to implement new
approaches to governance, management, financing, decision-making and public
sector engagement around the selection, management and use of public service
infrastructure. If our planning activities are successful, this Center will
transform the landscape of public sector infrastructure toward more efficient
resource utilization; increased public understanding of and engagement with
public service infrastructure; and create educational approaches that will
produce a new generation of engineers, managers, scientists, public service
representatives and engaged citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
grant is to facilitate deeper planning for an Engineering Research Center
concept around Regenerative, Restorative and Resilient Community Infrastructure
Systems (R3CIS). The proposed Center's goal is to accelerate innovation,
development and adoption of cyber-enabled distributed technologies.
Additionally, the proposed Center aims to support institutions (such as
government, management, and financial) that transform regenerative and
restorative infrastructure systems so that it enhances the well-being of public
and planetary health. The proposed Center concept specifically focuses on novel
infrastructure systems that support the public-sector (water, power, mobility,
food). This focus will shift public sector infrastructure planning from being
service-oriented to resource management-oriented. This shift will enhance
efficiency, increase resilience, restore city regions, and improve the
institutional structures that facilitate the equitable distribution of resources
to achieve healthy communities. Further, it puts decision science methodologies
up front to ensure the work is stakeholder-focused and science-based to meet the
needs of communities. In preparing to write an ERC proposal around this concept,
this planning grant focuses on several parallel activities: create and engage a
stakeholder commission for two test-beds (Detroit Metropolitan Area and Rocky
Mountain Front Range) and a science advisory board; define a list of integrated
public service infrastructure technologies and refine and prioritize that list
during the planning year; develop a strategic plan for our Center concept and,
as part of that effort, create a road-mapping process in which we lay out
details of the first two years of the proposed Center. The road-mapping process
is designed to be revisited annually to identify priorities for the coming two
years, with an emphasis of putting ideas into practice; identify and work
closely with those community partners from testbed communities and who work at
the national level advocating for communities. We want to engage community
members from the testbed locations from the start and ensure their participation
in Center visioning; identify the education and outreach elements that emphasize
the integration between academia and practice and create the plan for their
development that will be part of a future Center proposal; nurture and further
develop core plans with foreign partners. Together, these activities during this
planning year will allow our team to develop an integrated system of systems
research vision, detailed plans and partnerships for testbeds, a workforce
development plan, methodologies for the innovation ecosystem, and identify
additional collaborators and up to one additional institution that can fill
expertise gaps. The broader impact of the proposed Center is that it will
ultimately increase public scientific literacy and public engagement with
science and technology. Our methods will enhance multi-stakeholder partnerships
that include academia, industry and other groups. Using a stakeholder-centered
model, we believe our work will improve the well-being of individuals in
society. Importantly, this novel approach will allow for enhanced equity across
diverse populations and help to reduce environmental injustices in the
placement, deployment, use and management of public-sector infrastructure
services. The improvements made to critical public-sector infrastructure will
improve national security and increase the economic competitiveness of the U.S.
Therefore, the planning grant will create the framework for being able to
achieve all these broader impact elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.