* 1840813
* EAGER: Invisible Shield: Can Compression Harden Deep Neural Networks Universally Against Adversarial Attacks?
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Wujie Wen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sandip Kundu
* 01/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

Deep neural networks (DNNs) are finding applications in wide-ranging
applications such as image recognition, medical diagnosis and self-driving cars.
However, DNNs suffer from a security threat: decisions can be misled by
adversarial inputs crafted by adding human-imperceptible perturbations into
normal inputs during training of DNN model. Defending against adversarial
attacks is challenging due to multiple attack vectors, unknown adversary's
strategies and cost. This project investigates a compression/decompression-based
defense strategy to protect DNNs against any attack, with low cost and high
accuracy.

The project aims to create a new paradigm of safeguarding DNNs from a radically
different perspective by using signal compression with a focus on integrating
defenses into compression of the inputs and DNN models. The research tasks
include: (i) developing defensive compression for visual/audio inputs to
maximize defense efficiency without compromising testing accuracy; (ii)
developing defensive model compression, and novel gradient masking/obfuscating
methods without involving retraining, to universally harden DNN models; and
(iii) conducting attack-defense evaluations through algorithm-level simulation
and live platform experimentation.

Any success from this EAGER project will be useful to research community
interested in deep learning, hardware- and cyber- security, and multimedia. This
project enhances economic opportunities by promoting wider applications of deep
learning into realistic systems, and gives special attention to educating women
and students from traditionally under-represented/under-served groups in Florida
International University (FIU).

The project repository will be stored on a publicly accessible server at FIU
(http://web.eng.fiu.edu/wwen/). Data will be maintained for at least 5 years
after the project period.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.