* 1840406
* NSF-NextFlex Workshop on Accelerating Innovative Manufacturing Technology for Flexible Hybrid Electronics; San Jose, California; August 6-7, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Mark Poliks, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2020
* USD 30,480.00

This award provides support for planning, organization and execution of the
joint NSF-NextFlex Workshop on Accelerating Innovative Manufacturing Technology
for Flexible Hybrid Electronics being held in San Jose, California on August
6-7, 2018. The workshop is designed to engage the NSF academic research
community and the NextFlex industry community in discussions on emerging topics
in nanomanufacturing, and flexible hybrid electronics, all of which are integral
to sustainability of advanced manufacturing in America, an enduringly important
sector in the nation's economy. An outcome of the workshop is to identify the
needs for research and education in support of addressing technological and
scientific challenges facing the flexible hybrid electronics industry
spearheaded by the NextFlex Manufacturing USA Institute. The workshop encourages
participation of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, early career faculty,
and women and under-represented minorities in discussions on advanced
manufacturing, nanomanufacturing and flexible hybrid electronics research and
education, which is also important for the nation's prosperity. It stimulates
ideas for future directions in research and career paths. Workshop outcomes are
documented and disseminated as a workshop report and peer-reviewed publications.
The workshop symbolizes the needed collaboration and cooperation between NSF and
the Manufacturing USA institutes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop's
overarching objective is to foster partnerships and stimulate meaningful
research collaborations between the NSF research community, especially, that
formed by researchers in nanomanufacturing, flexible hybrid electronics (FHE)
and related fields, and the NextFlex institute members, comprising of academia,
government laboratories and industry. The workshop informs NextFlex partners of
important advancements generating from NSF-funded research in flexible
electronics and nanomanufacturing, giving them an opportunity to adopt novel
technologies into their industrial-scale FHE systems. At the same time, the
workshop informs NSF investigators of technological gaps in the FHE road-map and
challenges and opportunities ensuing form NextFlex TRL 4-7 research efforts,
both of which could be addressed through fundamental TRL 1-3 research, a task
that NSF can fulfill. Additionally, the NSF researchers are made aware of
NextFlex's capabilities, which may lead to opportunities for future research and
student internships. Flexible hybrid electronics is a critical technology for
the nation with applications in electronics, healthcare, communication, internet
of things, military and security. To meet these demands, NextFlex has identified
the need for new nanomaterials, device designs, integrated systems, process
models and metrology as areas requiring fundamental understanding. Engaging
industrial and academic researchers in discussing their work, sharing best
practices, revealing gaps in research and practice is important in developing
new research directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.