* 1840820
* EAGER: Reduction of Melt Pool Balling in Metal Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Bryan Webler, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2020
* USD 146,279.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant will explore the
feasibility of using alloy metal powder for additive manufacturing. Additive
manufacturing is changing how metal parts are built. The work in this research
focuses on a particular additive manufacturing process where a laser beam traces
a part shape over a layer of metal powder. The powder under the beam melts and
solidifies as the laser moves away. When the trace is finished, new powder is
spread and the trace repeated. Eventually a solid part is built. To build usable
parts, the traces should be flat, continuous layers. This is determined by the
power of the laser beam and the speed at which it travels. At the high values of
power and speed, the melted material solidifies as a series of droplets instead
of a continuous layer. This is called balling and it leads to unusable parts
that are not completely solid. Balling limits how fast usable parts can be built
because building is faster at high power and speed. Surprisingly, most metal
powder compositions for additive manufacturing are based on those commonly used
in subtractive manufacturing processes (e.g. cutting or milling) and are not
optimized for additive applications. The team will tackle this problem by
exploring the feasibility of controlling balling by adding alloying elements to
the powders that change the behavior of the molten metal, and by demonstrating a
new, cost effective method to evaluate different alloy compositions. Both
research components of this EAGER award have the potential to make significant
improvements in the speed and cost effectiveness of powder customization for
additive manufacturing and component fabrication. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research work will investigate the balling defect in
selective laser melting additive manufacturing and the effect of surface active
elements. The reduction in surface energy with addition of surface active
elements is expected to lead to reduce balling, since it has been associated
with Plateau-Rayleigh instabilities and poor wettability. As sulfur lowers
surface tension and strongly influences melt pool shape in laser welding, this
research will investigate the effect of sulfur alloying content on stainless
steel alloy melt pools. To overcome the prohibitively high costs associated with
the fabrication of small batches of customized alloy metal powders for research
purposes, this EAGER award will evaluate the suitability of testing on solid
test samples. Solid test samples will be fabricated by arc-melting and machining
processes. Initially the bulk material composition of the solid samples will be
the same as commercial metal additive powders. Tracks of laser re-melted
material will be made on these samples over a range of beam power and travel
speeds with a focus on power and speed combinations where the transition to
balling is expected. Tests will also be conducted with different powder layer
thicknesses on the samples, and then on samples with varying sulfur content.
Melt pool shapes and microstructures will be characterized and compared. The
potential contributions of this work are validation of a cost-effective test
method to evaluate alloy composition for selective laser melting additive
manufacturing using solid samples, and a demonstration of process-related defect
reduction through adjustments to alloy composition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.