* 1840058
* Polar Seabirds with Long-term Pair Bonds: Effects of Mating on Individual Fitness and Population Dynamics
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Stephanie Jenouvrier, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 03/31/2023
* USD 673,718.00

Many animals, from crustaceans to humans, engage in long-term relationships. The
demographic consequences of divorce or widowhood for monogamous species are
poorly understood. This research seeks to advance understanding of the drivers
of partner loss and quantify its resulting effects on individual fitness and
population dynamics in polar species that form life-long relationships. The
project will focus on pair disruption in two seabirds that form long-last pair
bonds: the wandering albatross and the snow petrel. Unique long-term individual
mark-recapture data sets exist for these iconic polar species, allowing for a
comprehensive study of the rates, causes and consequences of pair disruption and
how they may differ among Antarctic species. Insights might be gained regarding
the effects of changing environmental regimes as well as by direct and indirect
effects of fisheries as a by-product of this research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the project is to better understand
the implications of different drivers of pair disruption and quantify its
resulting effects on individual fitness components and population growth rate
and structure for two procellariiformes breeding in the Southern Ocean. The
project will focus on the wandering albatross and the snow petrel, which both
form long-lasting pair bonds. The unique long-term individual mark-recapture
data sets allow for a study of the rates, causes and consequences of pair
disruption and how they differ among species with different life histories as
well as expected differences in mechanisms and rates of pair disruptions. The
study will result in a detailed analysis of the impact of social monogamy and
long-term pair bonds on individual fitness components (vital rates: survival,
recruitment and fecundity; life-history outcomes: life expectancy, age at 1st
breeding and lifetime reproductive success; and occupancy times: duration of
pair bond or widowhood) and population growth and structure (e.g, sex ratio of
individuals available for mating). Specifically, the project will
assess:&lt;br/&gt;1. Variations in pair disruption rates, and if they are
related to global change (by-catch in the case of albatross widowing, and
climate in the case of petrel divorce) by developing a statistical multievent
mark-recapture model. &lt;br/&gt;2. Impacts of pair disruption on vital rates,
specifically whether i) greater familiarity and better coordination within pairs
improves breeding performance and survival, ii) mating costs reduce the
probability of breeding and iii) divorce is more likely to occur after a
breeding failure.&lt;br/&gt;3. Impacts of pair disruption on life-history
outcomes and occupancy times using Markov chain stochastic life cycle
models.&lt;br/&gt;4. Impacts of pair disruption on population dynamics by
developing a novel non-linear two-sex matrix population model.&lt;br/&gt;The
research will include sensitivity and Life Table Response Experiment analyses to
examine the respective effects of fisheries, climate, vital rates, and pair-
disruption rates on life-history outcomes, occupancy times, and population
growth and structure, and their variations among year and
species&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.