* 1840903
* Meeting: Stress phenotype: linking molecular, cellular and physiological stress (Society of Integrative and Comparative Biology Symposium, January 5, 2019 in Tampa, FL).
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Haruka Wada, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 08/31/2019
* USD 15,876.00

Most organisms respond to environmental and social stressors by a stress
response. However, knowledge of how the stress response is integrated across
levels of organization from molecules, to cells, to the whole organism remains
limited. This symposium will bring together biologists across levels of
organization and at different career stages to gain a richer insight into how
organisms respond to stress. During the symposium, speakers from different
levels of organization will alternate with one another. Immediately following
the symposium, a structured round table discussion will be hosted aimed at
identifying key outstanding questions in stress biology and integrative
approaches that can be used to study the stress responses of animals, including
domesticated and rare species, across levels of organization. There will also be
complimentary oral and poster sessions geared towards early career scientists
from diverse backgrounds to increase the potential for idea exchange and
collaborations between scientists at different career stages and that
traditionally study the stress response at different levels of
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most organisms initiate a highly conserved stress
response in the face of environmental and social stressors. Yet, information
about how the stress response is integrated across levels of biological
organization from genomes to phenomes is incomplete. However, it is becoming
increasingly clear that a comprehensive understanding of the evolution of the
stress response will require integrative studies that span levels of analyses.
This information will be critical for predicting how selection will influence
the expression of this complex phenotype at the organismal level, as well as how
the integration of the underlying mechanisms will influence the evolutionary
response to selection. As diverse organisms are expected to experience rising
stress exposure in the face of anthropogenic disturbance and rapidly changing
environments, this knowledge is becoming increasingly
urgent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.