* 1840453
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Soft Energy and Power
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Yossef Elabd, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the rise of flexible, and/or wearable
electronics, there is currently no power source that satisfactorily matches the
"soft" mechanical properties of the object to be powered. Envisioned
applications potentially include sensors, medical devices (e.g. cochlear
implants), intelligent packaging, and clothing that converts body heat into
electricity to power devices like a mobile phone. Further mechanical integration
of power, electronic and thermal management technologies will have major
targeted societal impact on the quality of life of millions of workers and
individuals; as well as to dramatically improve safety and well-being. A barrier
to this challenge is that researchers often focus on an individual component,
without holistically addressing the integrated system itself. Therefore, the
main goal of this engineering research center planning grant is to identify and
build a dynamic team of academic, industry, and national lab stakeholders that
will focus on the common goal of soft energy and power, in which each
stakeholder's expertise is impactful and synergetic. The Texas A&amp;M
University team plans to strategically utilize these planning funds for the
engagement of partners for development of an engineering research center (ERC)
proposal on the topic of Soft Energy and Power (SEP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanically integrated, "soft" energy and power (SEP)
currently faces many challenges, which can only be met by integrating expertise
and know-how from a diverse team using a convergent approach. The currently
perceived challenges include: 1) balancing mechanical properties with energy
generation and/or storage properties, 2) integration between the human form and
the device to be powered, 3) long-term durability and 4) cost, economics, and
environmental (life cycle) considerations. Initially proposed ERC SEP thrusts
include wearables, structural energy and power, intelligent packaging, and
systems and design. These thrusts rest upon the knowledge of transport,
kinetics, actuation, thermal management, systems design, battery safety, phase
change materials, and mechanics of integrated composite materials. To this end,
the planning grant will enable the formation of the ERC team, which will include
university faculty, key industrial partners, and national laboratories.
Together, the team will be involved in the identification and refinement of the
goals and the associated engineering barriers upon which to focus in the ERC
proposal. Specifically, the outcomes of this planning grant will be that ERC SEP
(1) thrusts will be vetted and selected, (2) the team membership will form,
evolve, and expand, (3) new technologies and knowledge bases will be identified,
and (4) an ERC proposal will be submitted, as appropriate. This will be achieved
through workshops to be held at Texas A&amp;M University in Fall 2018 and Spring
2019, and systematic team (academe, industry, government) meetings to drive the
common agenda and formulate a powerful and impactful NSF ERC
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.