* 1840941
* Collaborative Research: Individual Based Approaches to Understanding Krill Distributions and Aggregations
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,11/30/2023
* David Murphy, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 11/30/2023
* USD 349,677.00

Antarctic krill (Euphausia superba) are an ecologically important component of
the Southern Ocean's food web, yet little is known about their behavior in
response to many features of their aquatic environment. This project will
improve understanding of krill swimming and schooling behavior by examining
individual responses to light levels, water flow rates, the presence of
attractive and repulsive chemical cues. Flow, light and chemical conditions will
be controlled and altered in specialized tanks outfitted with high speed digital
camera systems so that individual krill responses to these factors can be
measured in relevant schooling settings. This analysis will be used to predict
preferred environments, define the capacity of krill to detect and move to them
(and away from unfavorable ones). Such information will then be used to improve
models that estimate the energetic costs of behaviors associated with different
types of environments. Linking individual behavior to those of larger krill
aggregations will also improve acoustic assessments of krill densities.
Understanding the capacity of krill to respond to environmental perturbations
will improve our understanding of the ecology of high latitude ecosystems and
provide relevant information for the management of krill fisheries. The project
will support graduate and undergraduate students and provide training for as
post-doctoral associate. Curricular materials and public engagement activities
will be based on the project's aims and activities. Project investigators will
share model results and predictions of krill movements and school structure with
experts interested in krill conservation and management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use horizontal and vertical laminar flow
tunnels to examine krill behavior under naturally relevant conditions.
Horizontal (1-10 cm per second) and vertical (1-3 mm per second) flow velocities
mimic naturally relevant current patterns, while light levels and spectral
quality will be varied from complete darkness to intensities experienced across
the depth range inhabited by krill. Attractive phytoplankton odor will be
created by dosing the flumes to obtain background chlorophyll a levels
approximating average and bloom conditions, while repulsive cues will be
generated from penguin guano. Behavior of individual krill in all conditions
will be video recorded with cameras visualizing X-Y and Y-Z planes, and 3D
movements will be reconstructed by video motion analysis at a 5 Hz sampling
rate. The distribution of horizontal and vertical swimming angles and velocities
will be used to create an individual based model (IBM) of krill movement in
response to each condition, where krill behavior at each model time step is
based on random draws from the velocity and angular distributions. Since krill
commonly travel in groups, further experiments will examine the behavior of
small krill schools in these same conditions to further parameterize variables
such as individual spacing. Researchers will examine krill aggregation structure
from 3D video records of krill swimming in a specially designed kriesel tank,
and compute nearest neighbor distances (NND) and correlations of swimming angles
among individuals within the aggregation. Krill movements in the IBM will be
constrained to adhere to observed NND and angular correlations. Large scale
oceanographic models will be used to define spatial environments in which the
modelled krill will be allowed to move using simulated schools of 1000-100,000
krill. Model output will include the school swimming speed, direction and
structure (packing density, NND). Researchers will compare available acoustic
data sets of krill schools in measured flow and phytoplankton abundance to
evaluate the model predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.