* 1840686
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Enhancing Impact of Broadening Participation in Computing Efforts through the STARS Cohort Conference Attendance Program
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Tiffany Barnes, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 63,432.00

Temple University, in collaboration with North Carolina State University, will
use their team's experience with the Students and Technology in Academics,
Research, and Service (STARS) Computing Alliance to create a new activity - the
STARS Cohort Conference Attendance Program. The effort will develop, test, and
evaluate a model that faculty can use to support cohorts of students attending
computer science (CS) conferences. The STARS cohort model has been shown to
increase students' sense of belonging, identity as computing professionals,
engagement, and academic outcomes, with disproportionately positive benefits for
students from underrepresented groups in computing. This project will extend
that model, engaging and training members of the Computer and Information
Sciences and Engineering (CISE) Directorate's Principal Investigators (PIs) in
building community among students attending conferences.

The STARS Cohort Conference Attendance Program will support the development of
the model, a pilot workshop to disseminate that model, provide scholarships for
20 PIs to attend a STARS Cohorts training workshop, supply 100 scholarships for
undergraduate, graduate students, and faculty (particularly those from Minority
Serving Institutions) to attend either the Richard Tapia Celebration of
Diversity in Computing or the Grace Hopper Celebration of Women in Computing in
5-person cohorts. Thus, the STARS Cohort program will provide a low barrier to
entry for new PIs wishing to engage in meaningful BPC efforts, in the hopes that
the experience will serve as a hook to engage the new-to-BPC PIs in post-
conference BPC cohort activities at their home institutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.