* 1840088
* FW-HTF: Human-Machine Teaming for Medical Decision Making
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Suchi Saria, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,500,000.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim. Algorithmic advances in artificial intelligence are
transforming human work in diverse areas including transportation, finance,
national security, and medicine. Machine intelligence presents opportunities to
increase human work productivity and the quality of jobs through augmenting
human capabilities. Effective teaming between humans and intelligent machines
similar to effective human-human teamwork has the potential to yield significant
near-term gains. This project explores the challenges of human-machine teaming
in medical decision making. Health care is one of the most difficult challenges
that the United States is facing. The US spends $3 trillion dollars in health
care each year, while medical error is the third leading cause of death. Human-
machine cognitive teaming creates a new model of patient care in which providers
team with intelligent cognitive assistants to enhance quality of care under time
pressure, taxing workloads, and uncertainties in medical conditions. This
project explores the potential for effective human-machine teaming to mitigate
such challenging problems in health care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
this project seeks to understand (1) whether human-machine teaming can benefit
medical decision making and decision making in other related high stakes
domains; (2) the guiding principles for designing effective human-machine teams;
(3) barriers that currently exist for building such teams; (4) novel solutions
needed to address barriers in order to develop highly performant teams; and (5)
the economic and societal impacts of the planned approach for human-machine
teaming. Understanding effective human-machine teaming, including the broader
implications in the workspace and in human workflows, will contribute to
positive transformation of human work. In particular, it is anticipated that the
outcomes of this project will result in improvements in hospital utilization and
reduction of medical errors. The project integrates multiple disciplinary
perspectives, including computer science, medical expertise, health policy, and
decision making. The impacts of the research will extend to multiple hospitals
in the Baltimore region. Furthermore, the project will engage local high school
students in summer research experiences, and the outcomes of the research will
be integrated into undergraduate curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.