* 1840947
* EAGER: Empowering Out-of-School Time Educators and Students through 4-H and the Land-Grant System
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Janet Golden, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2019
* USD 299,950.00

In response to and in alignment with an effort undertaken by the National
Science Foundation's Computer and Information Systems and Engineering (CISE)
Directorate to increase broadening participation in computing (BPC) activities
among its Principal Investigators (PIs), the University of Nebraska-Lincoln
(UNL) and the National 4-H Council (4-H) will pilot an effort to support CISE
PIs in engaging underserved youth in computer science(CS) - specifically
computational and algorithmic thinking - during out-of-school time settings. The
project will develop a CS Professional Development (CSPD) toolkit that includes
real-world, video-based learning modules, facilitated in-person professional
development opportunities, and distance learning experiences to support
educators in encouraging youth to develop their CS skills. Materials in the
toolkit with be developed and, in some cases, delivered by members of the CISE
community. 4-H reaches nearly six million youth through the nation's land grant
university (LGU) system, and has already embarked on a partnership with Google
to teach youth both technical and interpersonal skills at three LGUs. This
proposal will expand upon that foundation by developing, designing, and testing
CS professional development resources at those three 4-H OST CS sites. The
resources will then be packaged into a transferable toolkit that can be
eventually scaled to reach the 600,000 volunteers and 3,500 educators that
currently facilitate 4-H programming within LGUs and potentially opening the
door for many additional members of the CISE community to contribute to 4H
activities on a regular basis.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.