* 1840816
* GOALI: Charge Interactions in Transport of Mixed Solutes in Nanofiltration Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Sinan Keten, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2024
* USD 334,079.00

As freshwater scarcity increases with growing population, energy demand, and
industrialization, membrane systems will play an increasingly important role in
water purification. Nanofiltration membranes are ideal for selective contaminant
removal and operate at significantly lower energy cost than reverse osmosis
systems. However, poor understanding of electric charge interactions between
water contaminants and the membrane at the molecular level makes application of
nanofiltration membranes difficult to understand or predict in many situations.
The scientific challenge lies in predicting how interactions between the charged
membrane and multiple charged contaminants affect the membrane's ability to
remove the contaminants while allowing water to pass freely. A computational
approach called molecular dynamics simulation can be used to model the
interactions of the membrane and the contaminants at the atomistic level. This
makes possible better prediction of real membrane performance for a wide range
of contaminants and paves the way computer-aided design of superior
nanofiltration membranes tuned to remove particularly troublesome or difficult
contaminants. The approaches developed here can be extended to other membrane
systems, perhaps resulting in an entirely new paradigm for designing and
predicting the performance of membrane molecular structures and compositions in
a wide range of applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-equilibrium molecular
dynamics simulations will be used to explore the molecular-scale physics and
chemistry of nanofiltration membranes. The objective of the research is to
understand the charge interactions between charged polymeric membranes and mixed
ionic solutes that affect contaminant rejection and water flux. Piperazine and
trimesoyl chloride monomers will be polymerized to create a virtual polyamide
nanofiltration membrane in which the charge can be adjusted by assigning non-
protonated functionality among the carboxylate groups in the membrane. The
membrane will be challenged with a variety of single and multiple mono- and
divalent solutes in a virtual environment using pressure-driven non-equilibrium
molecular dynamics. This allows the exploration of multiple ion interactions
with the membrane, examples of which include how cations interact with the
negatively charged membrane to influence anion passage or how the presence of a
dominant salt affects the passage of trace ions. Moreover, the simulations will
provide a deep fundamental understanding of contaminant selectivity and
rejection as well as water flux in charged membranes, leading to more rigorous
approaches for prediction of membrane performance and the potential for
developing superior "designer" membrane nanostructures and charge distributions.
The approaches developed here can be extended to reverse osmosis membranes and a
broad range of other membrane applications. Molecular dynamics simulations have
the potential to become the first and decisive step in designing and improving
membranes for water purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.