* 1840540
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Advanced Streetscape Sensing, Communications and Computing (ASTRSCC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Shivendra Panwar, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 10/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental question to be explored through this ERC planning grant is how
future generation wireless networks, combined with cutting-edge computing, may
improve the life and landscape of local communities at the street level
(streetscape), where engineering solutions can impact individuals directly.
Pursuing science at the streetscape is challenging: it pits our scientific
understanding against the messy complexity of human action and interaction, at
scales of space, time, and impact that often outstrip our experimental ability
to provide supporting data and analysis. This ERC will examine how to develop a
deep understanding of the local streetscape needs and experiences amid all of
the hustle and bustle that implies. This information will then be used to
identify how that understanding can be quickly applied to large-scale smart city
infrastructure. Improvements in infrastructure can be leveraged to return
services at local scale to different users with locality-defined specificity.
The initial planning grant activities will focus on a newly awarded NSF Platform
for Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR) testbed entitled ?COSMOS? (Cloud-Enhanced
Open Software-Defined ?Mobile Wireless Testbed for City-Scale Deployment) in an
area of 1 sq mile in West Harlem (New York City). COSMOS examines how to fill-in
critical gaps in smart city services along the streetscape, where individual
people experience technology and the urban environment in often surprising ways
that fall beyond the reach of current-generation smart city technology. Using
the planning grant, the team will expand that reach beyond the Harlem testbed to
other cities, as well as to rural settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ERC
planning efforts will explore how future generation wireless networks, combined
with cutting-edge computing, may improve the life and landscape of local
communities at the street level. It will focus on smart city functionality at
very local scales in five applied thematic areas: The future of retailing,
particularly cashier-less retail; Road safety, focused primarily at the
interface between vehicles, streets, intersections, and crossing behavior of
children and the elderly; Ethical security in public spaces, particularly
benefits and privacy pitfalls of remote monitoring of individual and crowd flow
on streets and around sensitive facilities; Last-meter logistics, especially
interim dynamics between existing delivery and loading logistics and forthcoming
autonomous logistics at the street-side; and The future of outdoor work,
especially work performed on and around streets by city workers such as police
and emergency service providers, as well as traffic control, maintenance and
construction crews, utilities, and sanitation providers. The potential for
highly interactive real-time applications for individuals at the very local
scale is profound for the five thematic areas already identified. It is very
likely that through the planned community engagement, equally or more important
thematic application areas will be identified.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.