* 1840660
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for the Arctic 2050: Preparing for Human Displacement at the Climate Change Frontline
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Frank Witmer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 05/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intended planning grant for the Engineering Research Center for the Arctic 2050
(ERCA2050) will develop the workforce, processes, and technologies necessary to
plan, build, and maintain resilient communities for Arctic peoples displaced by
climate change. This planning effort will develop a structure for ERCA2050 by
connecting research partners across the world, developing workforce development
pathways with Alaska?s homegrown students as well as those outside Alaska,
incorporating diverse perspectives, and exploring opportunities for innovation
toward marketable engineering solutions, testbeds for these products, and
aggregated and accessible data. This planning effort is aligned with NSF?s new
vision for ERCs: it features a strong social impact as described above,
incorporates convergence by drawing from across a wide array of disciplines,
features a diverse stakeholder community advisory committee to ensure broad
engagement, and incorporates specific expertise in team science organization and
science communication. This project also aligns with two of NSF's Grand
Challenges: Navigating the New Arctic and Growing Convergent Research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key components and deliverables include a dedicated fellow
to coordinate planning activities, two community innovation festivals, and a
year-long seminar series to enhance stakeholder connections. The community
festivals will explore questions around convergence, stakeholder community, team
formation and effective leadership and management, and societal impact.
Information from these discussions will be synthesized into different levels of
maps and spatial representations, which will be overlaid to find connections,
gaps, and needs. These conceptual maps will be constructed for local resource
availability, landscape parameters, social livability factors, educational and
innovation pathways, and global impacts, factors that will ultimately form the
components of ERCA2050. This planning project will seek to design an ERC that
will engage students in research at all levels, with recruiting efforts
targeting students from Alaska?s rural communities, and students from
communities in similar contexts. The effort will broaden participation by Alaska
Native populations by including them as key stakeholders in our process, both in
planning our ERC roadmap and in their active role as participants in resilience
efforts. Project personnel reflect NSF's commitment to gender and racial
diversity. The creation and regular involvement of the stakeholder advisory
committee will enhance partnerships between academia, communities, government,
and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.