* 1840363
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Design by Anyone and Build Anywhere (iMOS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Binil Starly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2021
* USD 99,999.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. The vision for this ERC
is to solve the challenge of engineering the tools for anyone to engage in
product design and have the ability to build the product anywhere. This ERC
would study foundations for an underlying network connected operating system
that drives the manufacturing of products (iMOS: Internet enabled Manufacturing
Operating System). This project envisions center scale activities that would
enable humans to focus on their innate creativity while having tools that take
care of lower level actions necessary to translate design intent to fully
featured product models capable of it being manufactured. Once designed, the
vision would enable a human to have the product be manufactured by capable and
available service providers through a single click interaction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requires a convergent approach requiring
expertise in Manufacturing Engineering, Computer Science, Industrial
Engineering, Psychology, Economics and Business Management. This theme combines
current convergent themes in Harnessing Data in the 21st century and Future of
Work at the Human-Technology Frontier. It will bring design, manufacturing and
innovation to small companies, entrepreneurs and even students. Moreover, this
approach to building supply chains will better utilize existing capacity,
minimize marketing costs and the tedious and exhausting job of developing a
supply chain. It also has to potential to expand US manufacturing and
employment. This will have impact in rural America and enable start-up and small
minority owned businesses to compete. The integration of widely disparate fields
that integrate engineering,manufacturing, computer science, and behavioral
sciences will enable a new paradigm for engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.