* 1840560
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for REstorative infrastructure through Convergent Engineering and Psychology (RE&amp;#8208;CEP)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Elke Weber, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2020
* USD 98,898.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
infrastructure influences everyone, and even those who never use it. Buildings
and roads are where we spend most of our time and also account for the majority
of energy use and associated emissions in the United States and globally. This
project pursues transformative infrastructure improvements through a new
approach merging engineering and psychology. The new approach promises solutions
that do not rely solely on material resources, which often cost less than purely
technological responses, and can be more rapidly translated from research to
practice. Beyond better infrastructure, this project's merging of engineering
and psychology promises societal impacts in three additional ways. First,
through engineering workforce development, by not only better preparing
engineers for current engineering jobs, but also by extending the types of jobs
for which engineering students are prepared. Second, through diversity and
culture of inclusion, by broadening the pool of people who see themselves as
potential engineers and by appealing to a more diverse group of prospective
engineers. And third, by building an innovation ecosystem through the embedded
industry partnerships that are central to this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to plan for an ERC that envisions services
(e.g., shelter, mobility, and water) provided via infrastructure that goes
beyond reducing negative environmental impacts to actually creating positive
ones. Such restorative infrastructure addresses engineering grand challenges and
supports global development goals. Restorative infrastructure is elusive,
however, in large part because it requires merged understanding of technological
and social systems, and therefore of engineering and psychology. The potential
ERC will pursue convergence research between these disciplines, focused on
identifying obstacles to and opportunities for creating restorative
infrastructure. The project core team brings together engineers and
psychologists, academics and practitioners, already working together on
convergence research for restorative infrastructure. This planning grant will
help the core team mature these unique existing relationships and extend team
formation to a larger stakeholder community. The team plans to facilitate
engineering workforce development with embedded research residencies in which
researchers study fundamental questions in natural contexts with program
partners. The core team will identify and fill gaps in disciplinary and
practical expertise through in-person planning charrettes held in conjunction
with the ideas42 Behavioral Summit (October 2018, New York) and Engineering
Sustainability Conference (April 2019, Pittsburgh). Building upon the in-person
meetings, virtual bi-weekly meet-ups will include invited presentations followed
by structured conversation around ERC pillars. Economics and other fields have
advanced their theoretical foundations by rigorously incorporating psychology to
account for systematic deviations from "rational" models of consistent, utility-
maximizing, thinking and behavior. This ERC seeks analogous advances for
engineering, through the social focus on restorative infrastructure. Research
will advance understanding of environmental sustainability, infrastructure
systems, and engineering design. Pursuing this vision will make much-needed
intellectual contributions to both extend the boundaries of engineering as well
as bring more applications of psychology into engineering-related research and
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.