* 1840988
* International Workshop on Numerical Modeling of Earthquake Motions: Waves and Ruptures, Smolenice, Slovakia June 30-July 4, 2019
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Eric Dunham, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 01/31/2020
* USD 28,000.00

This is a travel award to promote participation in the Numerical modeling of
earthquake motions: waves and ruptures workshop in Slovakia hosted by the Solvak
Academy of Sciences. Earthquake rupture dynamics and ground motion simulation
are central to seismology and earthquake engineering. Much excellent earthquake-
source-related research occurs in Europe, Asia, and the rest of the world.
International scientific exchange serves to enhance productivity and excellence,
as well as train the next generation of seismologists and experts in earthquake
source processes and computational seismology. Funding in this travel proposal
will support approximately 24 U.S. students, early career scientists, and
members of underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ground motion
simulation and, more recently, dynamic rupture modeling are at the heart of
seismic hazard calculations and studies of earthquake source processes. A wide
range of numerical methods are being used, and there are growing efforts to
perform verification and validation of the simulation codes. In addition,
researchers are now routinely performing dynamic rupture simulations of actual
earthquakes and slow slip events, addressing questions about how ruptures
navigate fault geometric complexities; the role of friction, pore fluid
pressure, inelastic material response, and dynamic weakening mechanisms on
rupture nucleation, propagation, and arrest; etc. This international workshop
will bring together modelers from different countries with observational
seismologists and experimentalists, facilitating exchange of scientific
knowledge and ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.