* 1840987
* EAGER: Evolutionary responses to endocrine system dysregulation tested through independent losses of salamander metamorphosis.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Ronald Bonett, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 08/31/2024
* USD 183,122.00

The endocrine system is a collection of diverse glands that secrete hormones,
which are often essential regulators of physiological and developmental
processes. The actions of hormones can range from the control of blood glucose
levels to the transformation of a tadpole into a frog. The fundamental
biological roles of hormones in diverse processes suggest that they have been
important in shaping animal form and function. However, the dynamic nature of
hormones and their varying responses has presented challenges to understanding
how alterations to the endocrine system have impacted animal evolution. This
study utilizes a group of salamanders that vary in sensitivity to thyroid
hormone to test how changes to the endocrine system influence patterns of
evolution at different levels of organization. Mechanisms of hormone action are
a fundamental part of animal systems, and are important at many levels of
science education. This project will include curriculum development in
organismal biology and evolution for secondary education, as well as
undergraduate and graduate-level training in conducting integrative biology
research. This research will fund two professional development workshops in
comparative and molecular endocrinology for Oklahoma educators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide a compelling test of the
consequences of endocrine system evolution on phenotypic, transcriptomic, and
genomic diversification. It will also serve as a model for analyzing the
evolution of dynamic traits. Even though all salamanders utilize thyroid hormone
for at least some functions, in some paedomorphic species thyroid hormone has
become dysregulated from metamorphosis. This research will use the multiple
independent losses of thyroid hormone controlled metamorphosis in salamanders to
test how hormone dysregulation influences patterns of morphological,
transcriptomic, and genomic diversification. Experimental treatment with thyroid
hormone will be used to test for differences in tissue sensitivity among the
larvae of biphasic and larval form paedomorphic salamanders. Morphological and
transcriptomic data from the experiment, as well as genomic data, will be used
to evaluate rates of evolution across different levels of organization. The
prediction is that thyroid hormone regulation should constrain evolution, while
dysregulation of this endocrine signal should promote
diversification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.