* 1840309
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Health Information Visualization and Exploration (HIVE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Steven Jiang, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2020
* USD 98,958.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We
are making tremendous progress in healthcare through the wide adoption of
advanced technologies including electronic health records, mobile devices and
sensors, and genetic profiling approaches. Because of these advancements, groups
such as consumers/patients, clinicians, healthcare administrators, and public
health officials must make decisions in increasingly data-rich environments. It
is therefore essential that we present these data to decision-makers in
understandable and actionable ways, via well-designed data visualizations
tailored to varied end users. An ERC focused on health data visualization could
help transform this vast and growing amount of health data into useful,
actionable information. This ERC planning grant will provide a unique
opportunity to bring together researchers and stakeholders from across the
nation to systematically plan for an ERC that will improve healthcare decision-
making - and therefore health outcome - by fundamentally changing the way health
data visualizations are designed, developed, and implemented. The planning grant
will also allow the research team to develop an ERC that will strengthen our
engineering workforce by providing a diverse group of students with
transdisciplinary mindsets, experiences, and skills to work in the rapidly
growing health information technology and data science
landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After conducting the planning grant activities,
we will be positioned to submit a strategic ERC proposal with a clear and
cohesive 10-year vision, driven by a large interdisciplinary team of researchers
and stakeholders from academia, industry, and government. We will also have
operational structures and procedures specified to facilitate long-term shared
visioning, efficient and effective operations, professional development
opportunities, high-value student training, and clear communication of center
activities to diverse audiences. The planning grant will involve continuous
asynchronous collaboration between the research team members, an in-person
research team visioning workshop, and a 2-day facilitated workshop. The workshop
will involve interdisciplinary researchers from the team members? institutions
and members of the stakeholder community, including those from healthcare
provider organizations, technology companies, insurance companies, and
government agencies. The team will also generate a summary report of lessons
learned from the planning process, aimed to help other teams who may be
undertaking large planning efforts in different research
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.