* 1840607
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Hurricane Urban Planning Hazards Research (HUPHR)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Danny Reible, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award serves as a planning grant for a proposed
Engineering Research Center (ERC) that will address the challenge of chemical
and biological hazards of hurricanes and severe storms from coast to inland.
This is a challenge that has significant societal impact affecting human health
and loss of life especially for disadvantaged communities that lack the human,
financial and technical resources to identify, plan for and respond to the
potential risks. Chemical and biological hazards can stem from failures in
chemical processing, storage and disposal facilities, water or wastewater
infrastructure, and hospitals and human health care delivery systems. In most
cases, the exposures and potential exposures are novel, only occurring when the
chemical and biological safety net has been pulled back temporarily by the wind,
storm surge and flooding from the storm. The efforts will identify and
understand the challenges to communities and community health and the connection
between communities stressed by severe events and disease vectors that might
lead to outbreaks. Particular needs include better predictive tools for
identifying potential hazards and the risks they may pose in extreme events and
real time understanding of the realized risks. The convergence of the physical,
chemical and biological sciences and engineering with the medical and public
health communities is critical to successfully coupling the hazards with
realized risks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning approach includes high
performance charrettes with stakeholders to develop an in-depth understanding of
the challenges to be addressed in the ERC. A knowledge-workshop will be used to
develop the ERC components, and integration efforts will enable positioning the
ERC within the current research landscape. Web-enabled video conferencing with
science and engineering experts is planned for the purpose of knowledge sharing
and team formation for the ERC in advance of a culmination workshop focused on
team building and leadership. The planning grant will bring together the diverse
groups involved in the challenge of biological and chemicals hazards during
hurricanes and severe storms that normally do not interact and collaborate,
leading to a truly convergent evidence-based and diverse research collaboration.
Most importantly, vulnerable communities will be engaged, particularly
disadvantaged populations into the ERC. The goal is to gain informed insight
into stakeholder expectations and needs and clarifying diverse community
understanding and perceptions of their environment, and health and safety. The
intellectual merit is in the effort to understand how to frame an ERC to best
address complex societal challenges through convergent multidisciplinary
efforts. The broader impacts are through the identification and resolution of
challenges associated with extreme event-driven environmental impacts on
communities, particularly minority, disadvantaged and immigrant
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.