* 1840841
* Understanding Oxygen Exchange and Transport at Surfaces and Grain Boundaries of Electroceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Peter Crozier, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2024
* USD 582,481.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Many important technologies rely on the ability to
utilize and manipulate oxygen. For example, most energy arises from oxygen
reacting with fuels through combustion processes. Environmental technologies,
such as the automotive catalytic converter, eliminate toxic gases like carbon
monoxide through controlled reactions with oxygen. Emerging information
technologies utilize oxygen transport in materials to develop high-density
digital storage devices. There is potential for much better control and
manipulation of oxygen by exploiting special properties of ceramics that can
absorb, transport, and selectively release oxygen on demand, leading to higher
data storage capacities, greater energy efficiencies, and a cleaner environment.
The research in this project explores how oxygen can be incorporated,
transported, and released from ceramics. Ceramics are believed to have specific
sites on the surface where oxygen (from air) can easily enter the material.
Using newly developed microscopes powerful enough to see atoms, in conjunction
with advanced computational methods, this project is searching for these entry
points and will use this information to design new classes of materials that
significantly enhance oxygen exchange rates. Oxygen transport within the ceramic
can be dramatically slowed down by nanoscale internal boundaries. Understanding
the way in which oxygen can interact with these internal boundaries provides a
roadmap for developing new materials with high oxygen transport, impacting areas
such as sensors, membranes (used in gas and liquid separations), and fuel cells.
This research addresses foundational concepts in materials science and provides
excellent training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students who are
actively involved in all aspects of the project. In particular, they are gaining
expertise in the areas of advanced materials, microscopy, and computational
methods. Graduates will typically find employment in the digital technology
industry, materials characterization, basic research facilities, and academia.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Oxygen exchange and transport within
oxide ceramics has the potential to significantly improve technologies related
to energy, the environment, and data storage. Critical to these improvements is
the need to develop a fundamental understanding of how oxygen from gas molecules
exchanges with a ceramic surface and incorporates into the crystal lattice.
Surface structures such as steps and strained atomic terraces are the likely
sites where oxygen exchange is most facile. Recent advances in dynamic in situ
atomic-resolution electron microscopy allows atomic exchange processes to be
visualized on the surface of a ceramic in real time. A major goal of this
research is to identify the surface sites which are most active for oxygen
exchange and to engineer new materials surfaces which maximize the exchange
rate. Transport of oxygen through polycrystalline ceramics is often hindered by
the presence of grain boundaries. Doping the grain boundaries with high
concentrations of selected cations can improve the grain boundary ionic
conductivity, but the reason for the enhancement is not yet understood. To
understand the mechanistic origin for the improvement in transport through
heavily doped grain boundaries, extensive materials modeling is being carried
out using a combination of molecular and quantum mechanical theories.
Ultimately, this tactic allows the elements associated with the highest
transport to be identified, enabling grain boundary engineering approaches to be
developed to create much faster ion conductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.