* 1840714
* EAGER: An Open Mobile App Platform to Support Research on Fraudulent Reviews
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Bogdan Carbunar, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 149,999.00

The pressure to succeed in online, peer-review websites has created a black
market for search rank fraud. Fraud workers, who may control hundreds of user
accounts, connect with product developers through crowdsourcing sites, then,
from the accounts that they control, post fake activities, ratings, and reviews
for site-owners' products. Most peer-review systems use fraud detection to
filter out fake activities, but fraud nevertheless persists. Academic fraud
detection research has been hampered by a scarcity of validated fraud data, the
lack of a platform on which to evaluate and compare solutions, and the
unwillingness of commercial peer-review sites to share insights, algorithms, and
data. This project is developing an open mobile app platform, the first
collaborative environment for the research community to ethically commission and
share validated fraud data, classify observed fraud posting behaviors, evaluate
fraud detection algorithms, and experiment with the inner functionality of an
app market. This platform has the potential to significantly advance fraud
detection research and make it more relevant to commercial peer-review sites,
thus helping reduce the daily exposure to fraud of their millions of
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate, develop and evaluate
an online framework to study search rank fraud in app markets. The team is
building an open-source app market to collect ground truth fraud datasets,
validate existing and discover new fraud behaviors, and evaluate fraud detection
solutions in a live environment. The team will develop protocols of interaction
with fraud workers that will evaluate the quality of the data that they post
using assurances of its fraudulence, attribution of fraud, and similarity to
fraud posted in commercial sites. The team will develop new techniques to
validate the output of fraud detection and prevention algorithms that transform
participating fraud workers into human oracles. To help bridge the gap between
assumptions made by fraud detection solutions and strategies employed by fraud
workers, the team will develop semi-structured questionnaires and conduct user
studies with fraud workers recruited from crowdsourcing sites, to identify and
classify their most popular fraud preferences, constraints, capabilities and
evasion strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.