* 1840621
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for DEmocratizing Manufacturing Accessibility for Designers (DEMAND)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Larry Birnbaum, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Mehdi Ferdowsi
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision for the Engineering Research Center (ERC) for
Democratizing Manufacturing Accessibility for Designers (DEMAND) is offer the
potential for every designer to fabricate any product seamlessly and intuitively
regardless of: 1) expertise or background, 2) connection with manufacturing
firms, and 3) product volume (from one of a kind to millions). This vision will
be achieved by breaking the deep information "asymmetry" in the existing
manufacturing ecosystem and establishing a new Cloud-centric platform on which
the designers' ideas and needs can be matched, in real time, with manufacturers'
capabilities and capacities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The realization of this ERC
vision will democratize manufacturing so that designers of all capabilities,
including laypeople, will be empowered to see their ideas realized as useful
products. Interested parties will be able to engage in manufacturing activities
that can help serve the needs of our evolving society. This framework, in
partnership with small and medium businesses, will also help to increase
manufacturing output and support the engineering education of our future
workforce. The convergent research and collective talent associated with the
effort will also be used to explore and create an inclusive environment for
underrepresented groups and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.