* 1840273
* RoL-FELS:RAISE:  Specialization and decision making among synctial nuclei
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* N. Louise Glass, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Cells containing multiple nuclei (syncytial cells) are common across the entire
tree of life and are found in every biosphere from bone, muscle, placenta and
embryos of animals to the complex networks formed by fungi, water- and slime-
molds. Yet little is known about the advantages an organism receives from having
multinucleated cells, or how multiple nuclei communicate and coordinate to
control cell behavior. This project will use biological and mathematical tools
to test whether and how nuclei within multinucleate cells of the filamentous
fungus Neurospora crassa adopt different roles in response to changes in the
fungus' environment - allowing for a flexible division of labor within the cell.
In addition to revealing general rules for nuclear coordination, the project has
potential to enhance fungal productivity for food production and biotechnology.
The project will offer graduate and undergraduate students interdisciplinary
training in mathematical modeling, cell biology, genetics and novel microscopic
imaging technology. In addition, new K-12 outreach activities will be catalyzed,
including training of teachers and creation of new lesson plans on real world
applications of mathematics and the utility of quantitative analysis in biology.
Finally, the syncytial cell research community will be stimulated by a workshop
that brings together mathematicians and scientists studying multinucleate cells
in diverse organisms, including fungi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multinucleate cells
allow the proportion of nuclei that contribute to any specific function to be
dynamically tuned according to cellular requirements. But such division of labor
is impossible if nuclei that share cytoplasm also see identical proteins and
environmental cues. So, for nuclei to behave autonomously, protoplasm must be
organized to control communication between adjacent nuclei. This project will
use computational imaging, genetics and mathematical modeling to study how
nuclei form communities within multinucleate cells and to dissect cellular
processes that control these emergent communities. The focus will be on
digestion of complex carbohydrates by Neurospora crassa to: 1) analyze the
adaptive costs/benefits of nuclear coordination and division of labor; 2)
determine the length scales of nuclear cooperation and autonomous behaviors; and
3) develop a linked mathematical model for inter-nuclear communication and
coordination, focused on identifying general mechanisms that enable nuclear
communities to stably emerge from interactions of relatively few macromolecules
whose abundances are dominated by Poisson noise. The project will help discover
new rules of life for how coordinated behaviors emerge from autonomous nuclei in
filamentous fungi, and in syncytial cells generally, within cellular
compartments that range from microns to meters in
size.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.