* 1840230
* RoL: FELS: RAISE:  Rules That Govern Seasonal Migration of Birds Through the Air
* BIO,EF
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Jeffrey Kelly, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 999,655.00

Each year in the Northern Hemisphere, birds, bats, and insects fly north in
spring and south in autumn. These aerial migrations have fascinated people for
millennia; however, given the difficulty of tracking animals flying through the
open skies, little is known about the rules that govern life in the air. Human
activities have local and global impacts on these migrations by eliminating
stopover habitats where migrants rest and refuel during their hazardous journeys
and by altering atmospheric conditions. This project asks whether aerial
migrants can keep pace with these rapid changes and what traits make some
migrants more adaptable to change than others. The collaborative team of
biologists and meteorologists will develop and employ advanced animal tracking
methods to reveal both the precise locations of birds during migratory flights
and the atmospheric conditions they fly through. This tracking will include
novel microsensors placed on birds and aerial vehicles to collect heretofore-
elusive data streams that reveal the environment experienced by birds in flight.
The research team will combine these new observations with weather radar data
from across the U.S. that already captures massive quantities of data on
migrating birds, bats, and insects as they fly over the countryside. This
combination of new and existing data may yield novel insights into migrant
behavior within their changing atmospheric habitats. By bringing together
scientists across disciplines, this research will develop and test different
ways to enhance communication, collaboration, and teamwork among the next
generation of students and their teachers. Finally, this project will
communicate to the public how the changing environment influences the timing of
migration over and through their communities. Workshops in schools and community
centers and work with local landowners will foster "citizen science" and
adaptive strategies to contribute to this national effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To uncover scaling rules that control phenology of life in
the air, this study implements a research framework that integrates the
spatiotemporal rescaling hypothesis and the metabolic theory of ecology. From
this basis the study predicts that seasonal phenology of aerial migration is
accelerating in response to environmental changes and that small-bodied migrants
should have a greater capacity to speed up migration than larger-bodied
migrants. The project studies the central flyway of North America and focuses on
the impact of the central plains low-level jet on aerial migration patterns. The
low-level jet is a prominent feature of the North American atmosphere to which
many aerial migrants are known to be highly adapted. Recent evidence that the
low-level jet is both expanding in geographic scope and intensity provides an
ideal context for testing the study's predictions. The project team will
leverage existing open-access and newly collected data from two coincident
aerial migration systems; nocturnal bird and insect migration. Sensors for
tracking location and atmospheric conditions will be placed on migratory birds
that span two orders of magnitude in body size. Integrated biological and
meteorological data will be used to improve our understanding of the rescaling
of the low-level jet and to test predictions about how that rescaling impacts
the phenology of life in the air.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.