* 1840432
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Intelligent Infrastructure for Safe, Efficient and Resilient Mobility (ERC-I2SERM)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Pravin Varaiya, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2021
* USD 97,682.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant award supports the design of
an Engineering Research Center (ERC) focused upon potentially transformative
science and engineering research that promises to make our roadways safer, more
reliable, more efficient, and more environmentally sustainable. This research
will stimulate the transformation of the way we travel and deliver goods and
services. Roadways and highways are not only national economic lifelines but
impact every sphere of societal activities. Next generation transportation
infrastructure must have sufficient capacity, making it able to grow with the
increasing demand and address the emerging connected, automated and shared
vehicle technologies. It should also be resistant to interruptions, able to
withstand all manner of regional natural hazards. Finally, it must be aesthetic,
have negligible environmental impact, and use minimal resources. These
interrelated demands present an opportunity for a new era of intelligent
transportation infrastructure based on new materials, sensing and automation,
and greater interactions with the world. We imagine future highway and roadway
systems which extensively utilize cutting-edge (smart) materials, smart and
adaptable infrastructure, smart transportation systems and physics-guided data
science to achieve safety, resiliency, and efficiency. Such an intelligent
infrastructure will be able to sense, interpret and interact in real time with
its environment. This allows for anticipation and adjustment to external
stimuli, such as those posed by traffic and extreme events. The planning grant
activities will provide the platform for identification of key technical
challenges, their potential solution hypotheses, and the disciplinary
contributions that will lead to formation of the most effective ERC.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To identify key technical challenges to resilient
transportation infrastructure, the planning team will engage deeply with
stakeholders and domain experts. This will be done through a dedicated workshop,
panel discussion(s) and a team building retreat. The results of these
engagements will form the basis for fine tuning the technical topics and
coordination of the research agenda across the core areas and to define the
linkages among the disciplines. The expected outcome will be identification of a
set of critical research issues and a broad yet convergent research program.
This allows for a clear definition of the structure and roles within this
envisioned multi-university center. These planning activities will also define
the ways the center will be able to represent diverse institutions from the
viewpoint of geography, types of students served (including minority students)
as well as their location in or near major metropolitan areas. The planned
stakeholder engagement, workshop, and retreat are expected to impact the outlook
of academic investigators towards these societal challenges, as well as how the
stakeholders (e.g., industrial innovators, policymakers, citizens) perceive
scientific research. The planning activities will also engage graduate and
undergraduate students to provide them exposure to emerging transdisciplinary
research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.