* 1840440
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Rapid Innovations in SystEms Engineering and Agricultural Sustainability (RiseEnAg)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kemafor Anyanwu-Ogan, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,940.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
projected global increase to 9 billion people by the year 2050 will impose
significant challenges on our ability to produce enough food for the world's
population. Specific challenges that hinder our ability to meet the world's food
security needs include: 1) our inability to sense and quantify, in a strategic
way, physical and chemical variables in the environment and in-planta across
scales; 2) the lack of scalable data analytics and multi-scale models that
transform concurrent datasets across multiple scales into decision making
strategies for improving crop yield and minimizing crop loss; and 3) the lack of
intelligent data cyber-infrastructures that efficiently integrate heterogeneous
data, supporting the development of complex multi-scale biological models. This
planning grant will be used to support the development of an Engineering
Research Center Proposal on Rapid Innovations in SystEms Engineering and
Agricultural Sustainability (RiseEnAg). The proposed Engineering Research Center
will use convergent research to accelerate engineering innovation in plant
sensor development, data analytics, and data integration via three synergistic
research thrusts: 1) Sensor Development, Calibration, and Integration; 2) Data
Mining, Machine Learning, and Multi-scale Modeling; and 3) Data Management and
Integrative Cyberinfrastructures. Phenotyping testbeds will be engineered to
induce complex growth conditions and monitor biological and chemical responses.
These "tools of discovery" will address the challenges of today's growers by
translating real-time knowledge of crop and soil health and an increased
understanding of relationships across the biological scale, into actionable
strategies that advance crop field performance, increase post-harvesting
longevity, and minimize post- harvest biomass loss. The RiseEnAg Engineering
Research Center will aim to target a complex grand challenge (food security) and
defines the convergent space of research that merges the ideas, approaches, and
technologies from engineering and the biological sciences needed to address it
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the RiseEnAg convergent engineering research
center is to establish engineered systems platforms that integrate advanced
sensors, data analytics, and phenotyping testbeds that address stakeholder (e.g.
growers, researchers, and industry) challenges and accelerate research towards
the goal of increased food security in the 21st century. RiseEnAg will develop
the engineering tools needed to achieve this goal via three integrated research
thrusts. Research Thrust 1 (Sensor Development, Calibration, and Integration)
will develop and employ sensors for monitoring physical, chemical, biochemical,
and molecular parameters, both in-planta and in the environment, to include
rhizosphere microbiota-chemical interactomes that are key to plant performance.
Research Thrust 2 (Data Mining, Machine Learning, and Multiscale Modeling) will
develop scalable modeling and machine learning algorithms for formulating
integrative plant analytics and building decision support systems for growers.
Research Thrust 3 (Data Management and Integrative Cyberinfrastructures) will
develop a robust, adaptable, and scalable framework for storing, accessing, and
analyzing heterogeneous biological datasets. High-throughput phenotyping plant
growth testbeds will be engineered to induce complex growth conditions and
monitor biological and chemical responses in-planta and in the soil. These
testbeds will accelerate the identification of novel biological and
environmental targets that, when manipulated individually or in combination, can
produce the desired performance outcomes under diverse growth conditions. Funds
allocated via this planning grant will provide the resources needed to 1)
explore and identify unique and common challenges across all stakeholders that,
if addressed, accelerate us toward the common goal of agricultural
sustainability, 2) identify novel areas of engineering that can contribute to
addressing these problems and target potential roadblocks where innovation is
needed, 3) outline specific goals for the remaining three fundamental components
of the CERC (Engineering Workforce Development, Innovation Ecosystem, and
Culture of Inclusion), and 4) formulate working draft of the final CERC
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.