* 1840968
* Collaborative Research: Interactions Between Incipient Continental Rifting, Fluvial Systems, and Regional Climate in Southern Africa: The Okavango-Makgadikgadi Complex, Botswana
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2017,07/31/2024
* Sarah Ivory, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2024
* USD 177,122.00

The Okavango Rift Zone (ORZ) and Delta (OD), and the Makgadikgadi Paleo-Megalake
(MPL) form a&lt;br/&gt;dynamic system in northern Botswana, southern Africa,
where tectonic activity, climate change,&lt;br/&gt;sedimentation, vegetation,
fauna, and human influences interact with each other at various spatial
and&lt;br/&gt;temporal scales. This award provides support for a
multidisciplinary study of the interactions and feedbacks between incipient
continental rifting, drainage patterns, and Neogene/Quaternary regional climate
in the ORZ-OD-MPL complex. The objectives are to develop: (i) a structural and
tectonic model of the ORZ-OD; (ii) chronologies for the evolution of the OD and
infilling phases of the MPL; and (iii) histories of drainage basin expansions
and contractions of the complex climate/vegetation in the OD-MPL, and the links,
or lack thereof, between the ORZ, OD, and MPL. The overarching scientific
question is: to what degree tectonics interacted with surface processes and
climate in the ORZ-MPL system, and what feedback loops were involved in this
interaction to control the environmental evolution of central southern Africa
since the Miocene?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will use a combination of
seismology and sediment cores to look at the geometry of the rift faults and
sediment fill. The material from the cores will additionally be used to
establish provenance of the sediment and build climate records. These two
datasets from the cores will be used to assess the relative importance of
climate (via variable erosion) versus tectonic control (river migration/capture,
etc.) on sediment supply. A 2D numerical model will integrate these data to
explore the effect of basin asymmetry and sediment loading and how these
feedback into basin development via loading and strain
localization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;