* 1840902
* EAGER: Decomposing Operating Systems for Better Control over Policy and Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Samrat Bhattacharjee, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Mobile personal and internet connected devices (called Internet of Things (IoT)
devices), provide functionality including communication, image/audio capture,
location determination, and biometric sensing. The enhanced functionality of
these devices has enabled two new classes of attacks: data breaches from
malicious software applications and Operating Systems (OS) compromises, and
large scale Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) attacks. These attacks often
result from users not being able to control the actions of their devices. Some
actions might be in direct contradiction to the users' wishes. This project
addresses the problem of mismatch between device functionality and user policy
by introducing a new software layer that mediates access to low-level computing
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project designs a new "Policy Kernel" that
mediates with hardware and existing "Functionality Kernels". To demonstrate the
policy-kernel's versatility, the proposed work includes implementation of
prototype applications that address privacy leaks in mobile devices, DDoS
prevention in IoT devices, and maintaining device integrity even if the
functionality kernel is compromised. The policy kernel selectively intercepts
all hardware access by existing kernels, and ensures that the user policy is not
violated. Applying the user policy requires the policy kernel to be able to
disable access to hardware selectively, and to transform or reduce the
resolution of data returned by hardware devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to apply user policy unambiguously and securely will solve, perhaps, the
biggest emerging problem for personal- and IoT devices. Prototype applications
will demonstrate the versatility and potential of the proposed work: enabling
functionality for important scenarios that, for now, must be accepted on
`"faith". The proposed design relieves device manufacturers from having to
anticipate how their product will be used, where it might be placed, who will
use it, and what sensitive data it might inadvertently collect. Such a design
can provide a foundation for how secure and privacy-preserving system software
for personal- and IoT devices is built.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The policy kernel
source code, along with application code will be publicly available. All
research results will be disseminated via conference and journal publications.
All code, data, analysis tools, and publications will be online at
https://www.cs.umd.edu/projects/secpath.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.