* 1840199
* Restoring the Salish Sea: Food Sovereignty and Clean Water in the Pacific Northwest
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* David Oreiro, Northwest Indian College
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,199,999.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
intellectual leadership of TCUP institutions so that they can address scientific
or engineering needs or interests, specifically for their tribes or communities,
or broadly for the Nation. The TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers)
strand allows TCUP institutions to capitalize on their investments in STEM
instructional and research capacity. This project titled "Restoring the Salish
Sea: Food Sovereignty and Clean Water in the Pacific Northwest" aligns directly
with that goal through the establishment of the Tribal Enterprise Advancement
Center for Community Marine Research at Northwest Indian College. The center is
affiliated with the existing Salish Sea Research Center, housed at the college,
and partners with the Lummi Natural Resources Department (LNR) of the Lummi
Nation. The focus of the center's work is research and educational outreach
regarding marine matters of the waters of the Salish Sea off the Pacific
northwest coast of the United States. Knowledge gained through this work
contributes to our understanding of the marine ecosystem and is used by the LNR
in managing their aquatic resources to protect water quality and to ensure a
safe and sustainable shellfish harvest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Tribal
Enterprise Advancement Center for Community Marine Research will pursue its
intent through pursuit of two goals: focus on community-identified research
projects using molecular and analytic approaches that increase current capacity
of water quality monitoring and the safety and sustainability of seafood; and
provide analysis of biotoxins in seafood and Salish Sea waters for Lummi Nation
and Northwest Indian College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.