* 1840192
* FW-HTF:  Collaborative Research:  Augmenting and Advancing Cognitive Performance of Control Room Operators for Power Grid Resiliency
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Anjan Bose, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2022
* USD 1,394,337.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by the National Science Foundation.
The FW-HTF cross-directorate program aims to respond to the challenges and
opportunities of the changing landscape of jobs and work by supporting
convergent research. This award fulfills part of that aim. Effective decision
making by power grid operators in extreme events (e.g., Hurricane Maria in
Puerto Rico, the Ukraine cyber attack) depends on two factors: operator
knowledge acquired through training and experience, and appropriate decision
support tools. Decision making in electric grid operation during extreme adverse
events directly impacts the life of citizens. This project will augment the
cognitive performance of human operators with new, human-focused decision
support tools and better, data-driven training for managing the grid especially
under highly disruptive conditions. The development of new generation of tools
for online knowledge fusion, event detection, cyber-physical-human analysis in
operational environment can be applied during extreme events and provide energy
to critical facilities like hospitals, city halls and essential infrastructure
to keep citizens safe and avoid economic loss for the Nation. Higher performance
of operators will improve worker quality of life and will enhance the economic
and social well-being of the country. The project's training objectives will
leverage existing educational efforts and outreach activities and we will
publicize the multidisciplinary outcomes through multiple
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will integrate
principles from cognitive neuroscience, artificial intelligence, machine
learning, data science, cybersecurity, and power engineering to augment power
grid operators for better performance. Two key parameters influencing human
performance from the dynamic attentional control (DAC) framework are working
memory (WM) capacity, the ability to maintain information in the focus of
attention, and cognitive flexibility (CF), the ability to use feedback to
redirect decision making given fast changing system scenarios. The project will
achieve its goals through analyzing WM and CF and performance of power grid
operators during extreme events; augmenting cognitive performance through
advanced machine learning based decision support tools and adaptive human-
machine system; and developing theory-driven training simulators for advancing
cognitive performance of human operators for enhanced grid resilience. A new set
of algorithms have been proposed for data-driven event detection, anomaly flag
processing, root cause analysis and decision support using Tree Augmented naive
Bayesian Net (TAN) structure, Minimum Weighted Spanning Tree (MWST) using the
Mutual Information (MI) metric, and unsupervised learning improved for online
learning and decision making. Additionally, visualization tools have been
proposed using cognitive factor analysis and human error analysis. We propose a
training process driven by cognitive and physiometric analysis and inspired by
our experience in operators training in multiple domain: the power grid,
aircraft and spacecraft flight simulators. A systematic approach for human
operator decision making is proposed using quantifiable human and engineering
analysis indices for power grid resiliency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.