* 1840771
* Support for Doctoral Students from U.S. Universities to Attend the 11th International Conference on Educational Data Mining (EDM 2018)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Neil Heffernan, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 07/31/2022
* USD 19,600.00

This award will support 10 doctoral students from the United States to attend
the 11th Educational Data Mining (EDM) conference. Scheduled events include
keynote talks by world-renowned researchers, full and short oral presentations,
poster presentations, workshops, tutorials, interactive events, and the Doctoral
Consortium (DC). The DC will include oral presentations and poster sessions in
which students present their work. These sessions will be specially scheduled to
prevent competition with other conference events and maximize attention by
seasoned researchers. Students will be paired up with senior members of the EDM
community who serve as mentors during the conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
EDM conference promotes scientific research in the interdisciplinary field of
educational data mining, which is concerned with developing methods for
exploring the unique types of data that come from educational settings, and
using those methods to better understand students and the settings in which they
learn. EDM is the convergence of computer science disciplinary research in
databases and data mining and learning science. EDM research activities are
aimed at applying data mining to analyze data generated by various information
systems that support learning or education (in schools, colleges, universities,
and other academic or professional learning institutions and informal
learning).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.