* 1840196
* SBIR Phase I:  A Novel Method for Atmospheric Correction of Earth Observation Satellite Data
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,09/30/2019
* David Groeneveld, ADVANCED REMOTE SENSING, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide software service to correct Earth
observation satellite (EOS) data to at-ground reflectance. EOS must look through
the Earth?s atmosphere that induces systematic error in measuring the actual
reflectance of ground targets through scatter and attenuation of light.
Atmospherically-induced error affects data utility because the atmospheric
aerosol content, i.e., humidity, dust, pollen, smoke particles, etc., fluctuates
greatly, impacting applications for global monitoring, defense and agriculture.
The value of data could make this a significant and growing market opportunity
if the specifications are met successfully.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to correct aerosol-induced error in EOS data
by reversing the effect, found empirically to be structured, independent of
aerosol type and potentially predictable through measurement of dark target-
reflectance ? water bodies clear of aquatic vegetation, entrained sediment and
specular reflectance from windblown waves. The method of study is extraction and
statistical analysis of Landsat 8 data, the standard reference for calibration
and validation of data from all other EOS platforms. This problem is approached
through a series of heuristic investigations to (1) reconstruct relationships of
blue, green and red bands to near infrared (NIR) originally fitted using Landsat
5 and 7 data (longer wavelengths may not be addressed because they are resistant
to atmospheric affects), (2) use these relationships to reverse the error, (3)
develop methods to select, proof and apply dark targets that calibrate the
correction, and (4) measure residual error by comparing post-algorithm
reflectance to at-ground reflectance measured by portable spectrometry. The
residual error is likely due to uncertainty associated with dark targets. Once
developed and proofed, the algorithm will be brought to the Landsat 8 Cal/Val
team for validation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.