* 1840416
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Advanced Organ Biofabrication
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2019
* William Wagner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 11/30/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biofabricated organs could eliminate declining
quality of life and premature death for millions of patients with organ failure.
Organ transplantation is an effective therapy, increasing patients? life-spans
and quality of life for years to decades. However, there are only about 30,000
natural donor organs available every year. Additionally, artificial organs are
either incapable of permanent support (lungs and livers) or far less effective
than transplanted organs (hearts and kidneys). Unlike artificial organs,
biofabricated organs will be composed of tissue and thus fully biological.
Therefore, these organs will be less prone to complications. Greater
availability and better function will also allow these organs to be implanted
earlier than current donor organs, before there are severe decreases in a
patient?s quality of life. To achieve this goal, however, new material,
technologies and methods for making these organs must be developed. This effort
will require the collaboration of a team of scientists from many research areas.
It will also require the support of industry, foundation, health care, and
community partners. Therefore, this grant will develop a plan for the creation
of a Center for Advanced Organ Biofabrication to oversee this effort. To achieve
this, the academic team at Carnegie Mellon University, the University of
Pittsburgh, and the University of Texas El-Paso (UTEP) will work with these
partners to develop scientific and educational goals for the Center that ensures
success innovating scientific and technological breakthroughs, building a
diverse transdisciplinary work force, and creating mass-produced biofabricated
organs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within this planning grant, we propose to establish
the scientific and educational objectives of the Center and establish a network
of industrial, foundation, community, and clinical stakeholders to support its
mission. We will utilize the requested funds to support the following
activities: (1) monthly online meetings and two separate site visits with the
academic partners to review facilities and develop research, educational,
diversity, and industrial consortium plans, (2) meet with companies developing
biological products, biofabrication hardware, and pharmaceuticals to develop
consortium priorities, and (3) hold a larger, local planning meeting with
academic, industrial, foundation, and clinical stakeholders. Meetings with the
academic partners will allow us to (1) confirm shared research priorities, (2)
build transdisciplinary teams to meet our research, educational, and industrial
goals, (3) plan for intercampus research interactions between students at all
levels, (4) develop diversity plans, with special emphasis on the role of UTEP
as a majority minority institution, and (5) further refine our lists of ideal
industrial consortium partners. Online meetings with selected companies will
allow us to discuss common scientific interests. The meetings will also create a
project-based consortium in which companies have access to thought leaders in
this field, become educated in the latest research tools and techniques, support
specific research projects, and have the ability to license resulting
intellectual property. Lastly, the year-end summit will be held to present a
comprehensive outline of our ERC proposal to our research and educational
partners, selected industrial groups, foundations, and clinicians. This will be
essential to ensuring a strong, supportive community around this work, and we
will use the feedback from this meeting to prepare our full ERC
proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.