* 1840295
* I-Corps: Remote monitoring of commercial pollination honey bee colonies
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Tom Schryver, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 10/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will supply
commercial beekeepers with a way to remotely monitor and identify honey bee
colonies in need of management in real time, regardless of location, allowing
for a reduction in annual colony loss. Currently, commercial beekeepers must
rely on time intensive manual inspections to determine which colonies need
assistance in the field. This practice is especially resource intensive for
commercial migratory beekeepers who frequently relocate their honey bees to
fulfill pollination services for US farmers. In addition, this proposed approach
will allow for measuring impact of various agricultural landscapes on honey bee
colony health, enabling farmers to engage in quantitative based discussions with
farmers about pollinator friendly best practices. Ultimately this I-Crops
project focuses on leveraging the economic importance of honey bees to create
financial incentives for pollinator friendly farming practices across
agricultural landscapes.

This I-Corps project leverages traditional large dataset analysis and machine
learning to decipher and detect adverse conditions within the honey bee colony,
and how the landscapes in which colonies reside contribute to overall colony
health. This is possible through continuous monitoring of the internal colony
environment, which is meticulously regulated and stable when the colony is
healthy, and utilization of long range low power communications infrastructure.
When a colony is unhealthy or suffers an adverse event, like the loss of a
queen, the colonies internal environment is disrupted. Honey bee populations
have experienced large annual losses recently and although substantial research
has been conducted on honey bees residing in backyard or university research
apiaries, no work (apart from limited popular press interviews) have attempted
to document the problems, economic and biological, that commercial migratory
beekeepers and their bees face on their annual pollination cycle. Remote
monitoring of these commercial colonies will provide much needed insight into
the inner lives of this cohort of economically critical insects, in addition to
providing optimization and logistical support to an essential component of US
agricultural production.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.