* 1840492
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Comprehensive Energy Storage Solutions in Electrified Transportation
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Chunting Mi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 02/29/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will lay the groundwork for a
new NSF Engineering Research Center, CESSET: Comprehensive Energy Storage
Solutions in Electrified Transportation with the proposed mission to match the
accelerating needs of our society for mobility and accessibility with
sustainable and renewable energy. Given that fossil-fuel-based transportation is
a major source of pollution worldwide, immense opportunities exist to deflect
the planet's climate trajectory by electrifying transportation with renewable,
decarbonized power sources assisted by dynamically controlled distributed energy
resources. It is expected that the innovation CESSET is aiming to bring will
reverse the stark projections of human-created climate change and air-pollution.
Beyond health benefits, such a transformation will have positive economic impact
by dramatically reducing oil imports and by reconfiguring domestic
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This new transportation future requires
research into advanced energy storage. Although the automotive industry has
started the trend towards vehicle electrification and there is significant
funding for energy storage, progress has been slow and compartmentalized. In
preparation for a new Center-scale research effort, a rigorous scoping study is
needed to reveal synergies, identify the most impactful research directions,
develop strategies that will foster integration between disciplines, and secure
the correct combination of expertise and partner institutions. In this planning
grant, CESSET's strategy in achieving its vision will be formed with special
emphasis on developing multidisciplinary course and training programs, and
influencing national and international policy and market trends. In the context
of the proposed planning grant, impact beyond university research will be
pursued through a series of meetings and workshops with
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.