* 1840570
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for EMpowering People to achieve Optimal Well-being through Engineering Research: EMPOWER Center
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Julia Higle, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,998.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Health inequities are not isolated but
intricately interconnected with education and wealth as highlighted by complex
problems such as the Flint water crisis. Disparities within these areas
negatively affect the well-being of individuals, communities, and society.
Community-based, private and public social-action agencies, such as soup
kitchens and housing shelters, tend to operate in isolation and often have
limited ability to communicate let alone collaborate with other agencies. The
opportunities and challenges that lie within the intersection of health,
education, and wealth require engineers, social scientists, and computer
scientists working together to improve the well-being of individuals and
communities. To address these disparities, this planning grant will bring
together multiple, diverse interest groups to drive meaningful societal impacts
and inform the development of a human-centered engineering research center. This
proposed center will be focused on EMpowering People to achieve Optimal Well-
being through Engineering Research (EMPOWER Center). Regional planning meetings
will connect non-profit agencies to each other, to potential industry partners,
and to the engineering community. This will facilitate information sharing, idea
generation, and foster the development of regional stakeholder community
networks to revolutionize how our nation addresses well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed EMPOWER Center will harness, synthesize, and
learn from data. This data will be gathered from disparate sources that are
distributed, historically disconnected, and have varied levels or a lack of
structure. The goal of these activities is to help inform and empower
communities to address disparities. We will develop a data-enabled intelligent
community-wellness monitoring system that enables policy makers, community
leaders, and individuals to make informed decisions that yields improved
wellness. This planning grant will develop and engage community partners as
members of the research team and establish an inclusive culture for all key
stakeholders. To achieve our goals, the planning grant will: develop a network
of research partners, non-profit agencies, and industry partners from the
breadth of regions covered by the ERC partner institutions; form a convergent
research team that integrates expertise within engineering, social sciences,
ethnographic research, education, medicine, and business with community-based
thought leadership; and identify specific community-centered and community-
informed research goals for the EMPOWER center. The EMPOWER Center will capture
the power of convergent research as engineers, ethnographic researchers,
computer scientists, social and behavioral scientists, educational experts, and
members of the medical, legal, and business communities collaborate to improve
the wellness of individuals and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.