* 1840022
* I-Corps: Bio-Inspired Underwater Vessels for Coastal Monitoring, Inspection and Station-Keeping
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Oscar M Curet, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to understand
the problems that the industry and federal agencies face during the operation of
underwater vehicles for applications such as, ocean monitoring, inspection of
coastal structures, rescue missions and/or hydrographic survey. Autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) are key for multiple underwater missions including
detecting and mapping submerged wrecks, ocean bed-floor, polluted water, as well
as surveillance of coastal zones and coastal structures. In many circumstances
AUVs are preferred over conventional towed instruments or marine surface
vehicles because AUVs can get closer to the area of interest, they can cover
large areas without constant monitoring or hover hazardous areas without putting
at risk humans life. Although current AUVs have many capabilities, one main
limitation is their inability to perform precise station-keeping which allows
the vehicle to hold its position and adjust for currents. New technology in
underwater propulsion will permit the development and control of a new
generation of highly maneuverable vessels that have to operate in more
challenging environments. The proposed work is expected to increase the
partnership between academia, marine industries and national defense agencies.
In addition, it will promote the progress of science and national security using
bio-inspired technology.

This I-Corps project focuses in the propulsion technology and control strategy
for AUVs that needs to operate in tight space, low-speed with high mobility and
perform station-keeping missions. Bio-inspired undulating fin can provide
multiple advantages including: superior maneuverability to control forward
motion and directional maneuver with a single undulating fin; precise maneuvers
suitable for station-keeping and maneuvers in tight spaces; reduce risk to get
tangled in marine plants and ropes with less impact on the marine ecosystem;
relative low speed with likely lower acoustic signature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.