* 1840314
* RTG: Analysis of Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Arie Israel, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,495,920.00

The goal of this project is enhancing in several directions the research-
training activities in the area of the Analysis of partial differential
equations (PDE) at the University of Texas (UT) at Austin. The Analysis of PDE
is an area of Mathematics that is central to the development of Natural
Sciences. Indeed, PDE are used in the modeling of many phenomena, like the
atomic properties of matter, the dynamics of celestial bodies, the mechanics of
fluids and gases (used for example in weather forecast), and the study of
electromagnetic phenomena (fundamental to modern communications). This variety
of applications is reflected in the complexity of a field rich in open problems
and fruitful research directions. The training of graduate and undergraduate
students in Analysis is thus crucial to the scientific and economic
competitiveness of the US, and so is any effort to attract students to the area.
At the same time, leading students to achieve a view of the subject that is not
merely technical and overly specialized, but also succeeds in emphasizing the
versatility and depth of the field, requires the coordinated work of a
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The five co-PIs (Israel, Maggi, Patrizi, Pavlovic,
Vasseur), together with the larger group of PDE experts at UT Austin (including
Beckner, Caffarelli, Chen, Gamba and Ren), are strongly committed to research
training, with a combined research activity that covers a vast area of
interconnected topics in PDE, and has received international recognition. This
project will include 5 postdoctoral fellowships and 20 annual graduate
fellowships, thus increasing the number of US citizens trained in the Analysis
of PDE at UT Austin; and a comprehensive series of actions aimed at increasing
the visibility of our activities among undergraduate students, both internally
and externally to UT Austin, and with particular emphasis on students from
universities in Central Texas serving large minority populations. The
educational activities of the group (seminars, courses, informal lectures,
reading courses, etc.) will be carefully revisited and enhanced, to expose
trainees to new ideas, and to multiply the opportunities for mentoring,
teaching, professional development, and interactions at all levels. An annual
Summer Program and a professionally designed and maintained website will
increase the national visibility of our program and help dispersing its most
successful practices. The ultimate expected outcome is creating positive lasting
changes in the research training culture at our department and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.