* 1840218
* CICI: RDP: Open Science Chain (OSC) - A Novel Distributed Ledger-Based Framework for Protecting Integrity and Provenance of Research Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Viswanath Nandigam, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 818,433.00

Data sharing is an integral component of scientific research and associated
publications. Researchers have the ability to extend and build upon prior
research when they are able to efficiently access, validate, and verify the data
referenced. Facilitating the future reuse of data in a secure and independently
verifiable manner is critical to the advancement of research. Open Science Chain
(OSC) allows a broad set of researchers to efficiently share metadata and easily
verify authenticity of their scientific datasets in a secure manner, while
preserving provenance and lineage information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;OSC is a
web based cyberinfrastructure platform built using distributed ledger
technologies that allows researchers to provide metadata and verification
information about their scientific datasets and update this information as the
datasets change and evolve over time in an auditable manner. The researchers are
able to search, verify and validate scientific datasets and link datasets to
show lineage information. OSC features a web-based portal with user-friendly
interfaces for metadata registration, data search and verification capability.
OSC has been designed and implemented using real world scientific datasets from
a diverse set of use cases ensuring the broad applicability across scientific
domains. OSC enables sharing and verification of datasets among wider research
communities including large facilities, smaller labs, individual researchers and
students while promoting good data documentation practices. OSC increases the
confidence of the scientific results and promotes data sharing, which in turn
increases productivity and promotes good science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.