* 1840265
* RTG: Data-Intensive Research and Computing at the University of California, Merced
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Arnold Kim, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 05/31/2024
* USD 2,092,605.00

The overarching objective of this program is to address the national need to
train the next-generation workforce to be highly skilled in the field of
computational and data-enabled sciences. To achieve this objective, we propose
to establish the Data-Intensive Research And Computing (DIRAC) Research Training
Group (RTG). The DIRAC RTG leverages strengths of the UC Merced Applied
Mathematics faculty to provide undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers a training experience that prepares them for careers in
academia, industry, and government. A key challenge is that computational and
data-enabled sciences involve inextricable ties between mathematics, science,
technology, and engineering. UC Merced Applied Mathematics is well positioned to
address this challenge because of its three main approaches to science that will
be at the core of this RTG: (1) modeling of physical and biological systems, (2)
scientific computing, and (3) data analysis. To provide its trainees a
collaborative training experience in computational and data-enabled sciences,
the DIRAC RTG will foster Small Mentoring and Research Training (SMaRT) teams,
which are vertically integrated, community-based mentoring structures, each
centered on one of four research themes: (I) energy and the environment, (II)
sensing and imaging, (III) mathematical biology, and (IV) numerical analysis.
These SMaRT teams will provide support to individuals, guide their training, and
produce a well-trained, nimble workforce that can contribute to the fast-paced
modern computational research. Additionally, the DIRAC RTG is committed to
serving the underrepresented and first-generation students that UC Merced
Applied Mathematics actively recruits into its undergraduate and graduate
programs. Built into each SMaRT Team are active measures for recruiting
inclusive teams of trainees, providing continuous mentorship and support to
retain these trainees, and developing the professional skills of trainees needed
to succeed upon completion of this training
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational and data sciences are new paradigms
for scientific inquiry and discovery that incorporate mathematics, statistics,
computer science, and domain-specific knowledge. Since computational and data-
enabled sciences are relatively new, their natural and effective integration
into existing training programs in mathematics remains to be perfected. This RTG
project brings together the entire Applied Mathematics faculty of UC Merced with
the common goal of developing a modernized and comprehensive training program
for undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral associates that
integrates these subjects in a natural and effective way and prepares the
trainees for successful careers in academia, government, and industry in a broad
range of fields. The proposed RTG project has three major components: (1) a
balanced curriculum tightly integrated with research which is modernized to
reflect the current needs in computational and data-enabled sciences; (2) a
vertically integrated mentoring program that engages undergraduate, graduate,
postdoctoral associates, and faculty participants; and (3) the development of
extensive, dynamic, and supportive communities focused on education, research,
and professional development. The thematic research areas considered focus on
timely and important issues and are divided into (I) energy and the environment,
(II) sensing and imaging, (III) mathematical biology, and (IV) numerical
analysis. This training program focuses on enhancing each trainee's skills and
experience in the process of research (as opposed to just the products of
research) and provides practical teaching training, communication skills, and
professional development. The activities in this RTG are crucial to making
systematic improvements to the existing training program at UC Merced, which can
then serve as a model for other programs. These institutional changes will
profoundly transform mathematics programs and have long-lasting impact on
training the future generations of computational and data-enabled
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.