* 1840301
* RoL:FELS:RAISE: Building and Modeling Synthetic Bacterial Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* John Glass, J. Craig Venter Institute, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Charles Cunningham
* 08/31/2023
* USD 998,985.00

Over the past century, biological research into how living cells function has
led to advances in medicine, industry, and our understanding of what life is.
Even with these extraordinary scientific discoveries, scientists still are far
from understanding many of the first principals of cellular life. Synthetic
Biology is a field that is an amalgam of molecular biology, biochemistry,
computational science, and engineering. The rationale for this research is to
fully understand how chemical components come together to make a living cell.
This research may result in the construction of a bacterial cell from non-living
parts. Recent work at the J. Craig Venter Institute produced a bacterial cell
that had only a minimal set of genes necessary for life. The organism had only
474 genes and almost all were very similar to genes in the other organisms that
live on Earth. Despite all of the advances of biological science, researchers
still do not know the function of more than one third of those essential-for-
life genes. The synthetic bacterial cells created through this project will
catalyze an expansion of biological knowledge that may result in better health,
improvements in biomanufacturing, new tools to preserve the environment, and
other applications that will enhance the lives of humans everywhere. The rule of
life to be investigated asks, on the molecular level, what are the necessary
components of an organism that are required to call it alive? The researchers
will use results of the experimental studies to develop theoretical frameworks
for understanding the basic components and key elements of a living
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To build a synthetic cell this project will combine
the expertise of three scientists from different fields. The project leader,
John Glass, is a synthetic biologist and part of the Venter Institute team that
constructed the minimal bacterial cell. Kate Adamala is a biochemist with
expertise building non-living cell-like vesicles. Chris Kempes is a
computational biologist who creates mathematical and computational models of
living cells that will guide the selection the chemical parts that will be
assembled. This team will combine a synthetic DNA genome capable of programming
cell and cellular hardware such as enzymes, membranes, amino acids, salts, and
vitamins in such a way as to form a bacterial cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.