* 1840842
* Collaborative Research: Mechanisms of marine organohalogen bioaccumulation and neurotoxicity
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Isaac Pessah, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 423,900.00

There is an urgent public health need to better understand the relative risks
and benefits associated with consumption of seafood. This project will
investigate how natural and man-made organohalogen compounds, some of which are
known to be toxic, accumulate in marine food webs on the way to human
consumption. Researchers at UC San Diego Scripps Institution of Oceanography and
UC Davis will investigate the biological mechanisms behind the uptake and
concentration of these compounds, and also the mechanisms that make them toxic.
The project will support two postdoctoral researchers, thus directly
contributing to the development of early career scienctists. The research is
jointly supported by NSF and by the National Institute for Environmental Health
Sciences (NIEHS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two aims. Aim 1 seeks to
understand cellular mechanisms that control how toxic marine compounds,
specifically organohalogens, bioaccumulate, focusing on xenobiotic transporters
as the key pathway. The investigators will determine the interactions of the
four major human xenobiotic transporters (XTs) with environmentally relevant
natural and man-made marine organohalogens. In parallel, they will take
advantage of recent progress with heterologous transporter-expression and
CRISPR/CAS9 gene editing in sea urchins, to dissect the functional role of XTs
in governing bioaccumulation in marine cells. Aim 2 of the project will
determine the structure-activity relationships governing neurotoxicity of marine
pollutants. The team will use primary cultures of hippocampal neurons cultured
from male and female wild type mice to determine how activity at these molecular
targets alter neuronal calcium dynamics and morphology using real-time
fluorescence cell imaging and morphometric approaches. In addition, they will
determine how hippocampal neurons that express a particular mutation alter
sensitivity to organohalogens, and ask whether these effects are gender-
specific. These studies will address the critical need to better understand the
molecular mechanisms by which naturally occurring and man-made seafood
pollutants accumulate in target cells and perturb the calcium dynamics essential
for normal neuronal network development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.