* 1840470
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Convergent Genomics
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Jennifer Reardon, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.

Genomics is transforming health, nature, and society in the 21st century, as new
technologies make genomic data available, accessible, and useful to an
increasingly wide range of stakeholders. To reap the transformative benefits of
genomics, however, better integration between what genomic technologies are
feasible and what genomic technologies are useful is necessary. Convergent
genomics adapts to the changing relationship between the development of ideas
and technology and the individuals, groups and institutions that are affected by
these innovations. The convergent model integrates recognized leaders from
engineering, natural, and social sciences with experience in technology
development, genome analytics, and the integration of science and social impact
analysis. This planning grant will capture interdisciplinary expertise in a
manner that maximizes the power of convergent genomics--that is, a genomics in
which engineers work alongside natural and social scientists, formulating the
foci of work and the novel forms of engagement needed to realize them. Through a
series of three workshops focused on identifying research themes, stakeholders,
and organizing principles, the problems facing the growing genomics community
and the specific tools and resources needed for convergent genomics will be
developed.

Genomics, due to the speed of technological innovation, volume of data produced,
and expertise required to generate and interpret these data, is at high risk of
evolving through narrowly focused research communities that are heavily siloed
and not motivated to serve the best interests of society. The UCSC Genomics
Institute has the unique combination of expertise in device and instrument
development, genome analytics, and social sciences to be a global leader in
engineering technologies that are designed to maximize both technological power
and social impact. Through a series of three planning meetings and with the help
of a facilitator, we will develop a proposal for an Engineering Research Center
(ERC) with activities that will revolve around four pillars of genomics
innovation: Integrated device and instrument technology; data science; training
the next genomic engineering work force; and establishing and protecting the
innovation ecosystem of the genomics field. These pillars, which represent the
intellectual merit of our proposed ERC, require a convergent and holistic
approach that far exceeds the scope of small-scale projects and small teams of
investigators, thus achieving the broader impacts that are the promise of
convergent genomic innovation. For instance, technologies that glean molecular
information must do so from diverse biological samples efficiently and
accurately and communicate results to a broad constituency of stakeholders.
Devices and instruments are valuable to the public only if resulting data and
information are accessible, equitable and open, and shared in a manner that is
cognizant of the complex challenges of privacy and justice. Similarly, questions
of storage of, access to, and ownership of genomic data and technologies present
formidable challenges that will result in policies that affect everyone across
society. Activities such as implementation of a cross-departmental undergraduate
mentoring program and establishment of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site in concert with other academic partner institutions will integrate
trainees into this convergent environment. Open workshops, symposia, and
outreach activities, which will be developed throughout the planning period,
will engage the public and other stakeholders.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.