* 1840826
* Meeting Proposal: 3rd International Brassinosteroid Conference, Aug 1-4, 2018, San Diego, CA, USA
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Yanhai Yin, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Brassinosteroids (BRs) are critical plant hormones that not only regulate plant
growth and development, but also plant responses to various environmental
stresses. Application of BRs has been reported to improve crop yield and stress
tolerance and transgenic overexpression of BR biosynthesis genes have been shown
to increase crop yield. A full understanding of BR functions, signaling and its
cross-talk with other signaling pathways is therefore crucial to reap the
benefits of BRs in agriculture. The 3rd International Brassinosteroid Conference
is organized by the BR hormone research community with help from the American
Society of Plant Biologists' (ASPB) Meeting Management Services. The goals of
the conferences are: (a) to bridge the gap between traditional approaches and
systems biology/novel techniques; (b) to visualize new ways to test hypotheses
regarding BR signaling; (c) to assess the current status of the field and
articulate important questions that remain outstanding; (d) to promote
interactions and facilitate new collaborations and (e) to inspire young
scientists to pursue BR-related research. The NSF grant will be used to secure
the conference venue and to support students, postdoctoral fellows and junior
faculty members to attend the conference from US Institutions. A meeting report
will be published, which will be written by graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows under the supervision of international organizing committee
members.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular genetic studies in the past decades have
determined and characterized both BR biosynthesis and signaling pathways.
Recently the field has made significant progress using new technologies and
through collaborations with other scientific disciplines. New BR signaling
components have been discovered and the mechanisms of BR perception and signal
transduction have been depicted at the molecular and in a few cases at the
atomic levels. At the same time, genomics, proteomics and systems biology
approaches are revealing complex regulatory networks through which BRs regulate
thousands of genes and crosstalk with other signaling pathways in the regulation
of plant growth and responses to both abiotic (such as drought, cold, heat) and
biotic (bacterial, fungal and viral) stresses. The conference will bring
together some of the top scientists, including some young and new scientists to
the field, to share their exciting new findings and promote further progress.
The meeting will foster new collaborations between different groups, and
different disciplines to facilitate future discoveries and to explore ways to
transform current knowledge into agricultural
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.