* 1840944
* Collaborative Research: CubeSat: High-Cadence Measurement of Solar Flare Hard X-rays
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* John Sample, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 01/31/2024
* USD 438,003.00

The IMpulsive Phase Rapid Energetic Solar Spectrometer (IMPRESS) experiment is a
CubeSat science mission to study hard X-ray emission from solar flares. IMPRESS
will develop a new CubeSat-based capability to observe a wide range of solar
flares (from microflares to X class flares) with high time and energy
resolutions. These new observations of solar hard X-ray emissions will address
outstanding problems in high-energy solar physics and advance our scientific
understanding of solar flares, which play an important role in the development
of space weather in the near-Earth environment. The project will also support
integration of research and education to develop a knowledgeable STEM workforce.
The project will support an early career female PI and provide her an
opportunity to lead a CubeSat mission. This is important because it is a step
towards developing senior leadership. Women are under-represented at senior
leadership positions in geospace sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Impulsive
Phase Rapid Energetic Solar Spectrometer (IMPRESS) is a solar hard X-ray (HXR)
spectrometer based on proven instrument concepts and carried on a 3U CubeSat
platform. IMPRESS will perform HXR spectroscopy of solar flares in the rising
phase of Solar Cycle 25. The target launch date is late 2021 into a Low Earth
Orbit (LEO) with an inclination angle less than 60? and altitudes greater than
450 km. The scientific objectives of the IMPRESS mission are (1) to investigate
flare electron acceleration timescales by measuring short (&lt;2 second) spikes
in HXR time profiles; (2) to investigate electron beaming in solar flares via
stereoscopic HXR directivity measurements; (3) in collaboration with new space-
based instruments, to provide a complete assessment of flare-accelerated
electron distributions from thermal to non-thermal energies; (4) to develop and
demonstrate a high-energy radiation detector that can measure a vast range of
brightnesses in solar flares, precipitating electron microbursts, and other
astrophysical bursts without pileup or saturation. This project will provide
training and education opportunities for students at all levels (freshman
through graduate students). The project will also engage students from a local
community college CubeSat design and development phase. Solar activity is the
ultimate source of all space weather and IMPRESS will study the fundamental
particle acceleration that occurs in flares as a way to better understand the
processes which impact earth and the geospace
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.