* 1840751
* EAGER: Using Large-scale Web Data for Online Attention Models and Identification of Reading Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Mor Naaman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2022
* USD 298,752.00

Media websites now capture intricate measures of engagement from millions of
readers. These measures, such as in-page scrolling and viewport position, can
help us understand patterns of user attention beyond simple measures like time
spent on page. This exploratory project will transform the use of this under-
utilized attention data by showing how such data, mostly in the context of
online news articles, can lead to better understanding of user behavior online,
and help capture (and reason about) user attention at scale. However, such data
is extremely noisy and challenging to analyze. The researchers will explore
developing new techniques for data analysis to reason about the connection
between language, text, and attention on the Web. Using these data, and novel
analysis techniques, the project will also explore how to identify users with
reading difficulties, and potentially support them in online reading tasks. The
potential outcomes of this project are algorithms and methods that can be used
by news content providers to develop a refined understanding of different types
of readers, according to how they interact and read news articles online. More
importantly, potential outcomes also include advancements in how such publishers
can detect, and support, users with reading difficulties. Such advancement has
the potential to lead to improvements in online experiences for the estimated 7%
to 15% of the population who suffer from reading disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project directly addresses multiple challenges in making this
new type of large-scale data useful and usable in different settings, and is
likely to result in a number of key intellectual contributions in large-scale
information management, machine learning, and human computer interaction. The
first significant challenge is in modeling and processing the raw large-scale
data to result in a robust attention signals. The data is extremely noisy and
challenging to analyze and understand, with news articles of different formats,
different content types, used by different groups of users. Second, the project
will make a unique contribution by using novel deep learning techniques to
understand the interaction between language and attention, at scale. Such
modeling can extend current Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques to
improve methods for the analysis of language and of narrative in the context of
news articles, and more broadly for reading tasks. Finally, a combination of
field studies and large-scale data analysis will be required to understand the
attention patterns of users who may have difficulties in reading. A field study
will collect data from users who are known to have reading disabilities, in
order to develop a technique that can help estimate a user's reading difficulty
from the attention data in a large interaction dataset. This project will thus
inform work that combines NLP and Human-Computer Interaction to suggest possible
paths for supporting such users in online reading tasks. In order to support
further research and reproducibility, the resulting data, software, and models
used in this project available to other researchers, as possible. The project
results will be disseminated via research papers and talks to be academic and
industry audiences, and through the project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.