* 1840980
* Student Support: 2019 Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference and 47th North American Manufacturing Research Conference; Erie, Pennsylvania; June 10-14, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Johnson Samuel, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2021
* USD 49,920.00

This award supports 78 graduate and undergraduate students studying at US
institutions to participate in the co-located conference event consisting of the
2019 International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference sponsored by
the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 47th Annual North American
Manufacturing Research Conference sponsored by the North American Manufacturing
Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers. These two
leading conferences in the Manufacturing Engineering field act as global bridges
between industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions. The
award provides student participants with opportunities to exchange ideas with
leading researchers and engineers from worldwide industrial and governmental
facilities, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic and
international engineering schools. In addition to nurturing a global
manufacturing vision, participants will learn the latest research areas and
results in manufacturing fields.

This award will provide support for conference registration and accommodation
for student attendees. The call for student support applications will be
disseminated through postings on main conference websites, promulgation through
conference organizers, track chairs, and symposium organizers, and direct
communication with students involved in poster session, student design
competition and student author research presentation competition. The submitted
applications go through a selection process by the conference committee. The
eligibility criteria to receive the funding include (1) students must be from US
institutions and (2) students must be actively participating in the conference
through presenting a paper or poster, or participating in a competition, with
preference given to students from underrepresented minorities. After the
conference, the list of student awardees will be announced on the main
conference website, in the Manufacturing Science and Engineering 2015 post-
conference report in the Manufacturing Engineering Division's Newsletter, and in
the Award and Recognition section on the North American Manufacturing Research
Institution's website. This award will enable these students to improve their
knowledge of manufacturing technologies, and help them to become engineers and
researchers to lead the next generation of US manufacturing.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.