* 1840886
* EAGER: Anomalous submarine volcanism during glacial terminations: Exploring archives from the global mid-ocean ridge system
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* David Lund, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 07/31/2019
* USD 49,939.00

Knowledge about how and why climate has changed in the past is important for
understanding the sensitivity of the climate system and the potential for future
climate change. There are many natural processes that are linked to climate and
associated sea level changes. Continental glaciation draws down sea levels as
ice sheets grow, and raises sea levels when ice sheets recede. The release of
volatiles, especially carbon dioxide (CO2), from submarine volcanoes along the
~50,000 miles of mid-ocean ridges is also thought to play a role in modulating
climate. Sea level changes and volatile release are linked through changes in
pressure on the sea floor and underlying Earth's mantle. It is hypothesized that
a reduction in pressure (through a drop in sea level) can trigger increased
mantle melting and eruption of lava onto the seafloor, and consequent degassing
of magmatic CO2 that can raise the CO2 content of the atmosphere and cause
global warming. Warming in turn results in increased glacial ice melt, which
provides a negative feedback to the process. Recently published work from the
Pacific-Antarctic Ridge in the Southeast Pacific suggests that a recent glacial
termination was characterized by anomalous mid-ocean ridge volcanism at that
location. However, it is not clear if this is simply a coincidence or a global
event. This research seeks to address this question. To do this, eleven sediment
cores from existing collections will be examined. Cores were selected on the
basis of mid-ocean ridge axial proximity, water depth, and core length. These
characteristics are necessary for recording volcanic fallout from ridge volcanic
eruptions that would indicate active magmatism. The research involves, intensive
geochemical and microscopic study of the sediments, the use of oxygen isotopes
to determine core stratigraphy and coherence, and quantitative estimates of
volcanic ash content. If successful, the work could have implications for our
understanding of climate and rates of climate change. Broader impacts also
include the training of undergraduate and graduate students at the University of
Connecticut. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research builds on a preliminary study
of a single site in which a relationship appeared to exist between the waxing of
continental glaciation and the increased incidence of mid-ocean ridge magmatism
followed by rapid glacial melting. This research tests the researcher's novel
and controversial hypothesis by expanding the observations to multiple locations
on three major mid-ocean ridge spreading centers: the Mid Atlantic Ridge, the
East Pacific Rise, and the Central Indian Ridge. A set of sediment cores are
available for study through NSF-supported seafloor sample repositories. These
cores have essential criteria needed to shed light on the research question: a
location that is close enough to a mid-ocean ridge that volcanic ash and ejecta
from eruptions therein are likely to be components of the sediment, length such
that cores span multiple continental glacial cycles, and water depth. Goals of
the project are to determine whether the results found on the Pacific Antarctic
Ridge are representative of conditions of glacial terminations at mid-ocean
ridges worldwide. Sediments from the cores will be processed to separate
foraminifera that will be analyzed for oxygen isotopes to determine their
stratigraphy and ages at high resolution. Sediments will also be examined for
evidence of ash, ash layers, and other volcanic ejecta; the total amount of
volcanic material; and volcanic particle morphology and grain size. Geochemical
analyses on the sediments will take place to look for indicators of basaltic
particles, usually evident from the weight percent of titanium in the samples.
These data will be compared to the known timing of periods of continental
glaciation to see if there is a correlation between the increase and decline of
glaciation and corresponding seafloor magmatic
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.