* 1840276
* Workshop: Blue Skies Manufacturing Workshop at the 2019 MSEC/NAMRC; Erie, Pennsylvania; June 10-14, 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* K. Scott Smith, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,996.00

This award provides funds to continue the "Blue Skies Manufacturing Workshop"
during North America's largest manufacturing conference - the co-located 2019
International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC) sponsored
by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 47th Annual North
American Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC) sponsored by the North
American Manufacturing Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing
Engineers. This conference will take place from June 10-14, 2019 and is hosted
by Pennsylvania State University, Erie, Pennsylvania. This is the ideal venue
for the workshop, which is designed to identify bold visions for the
manufacturing sector more than ten years in the future, and to identify the
required basic research needed to achieve that bold vision. These two leading
conferences in the manufacturing engineering field act as global bridges between
industries, government laboratories, and academic institutions. Blue Skies
Activities will include: 1) Brief introductory presentations by Workshop
organizers and others; 2) Presentations by 6-8 manufacturing thought leaders; 3)
Interactions among workshop participants, NSF program directors, Manufacturing
thought leaders, and staff of the interagency Advanced Manufacturing National
Program Office. The speakers will be selected from one-page abstracts and their
travel to the workshop will be supported by this award. A panel of judges will
evaluate the presentations and decide upon a winner. The Society of
Manufacturing Engineers continues to award the David Dornfeld Manufacturing
Vision Award to the best presentation. The workshop, expected to be attended by
at least 100 attendees of the conference, is intended to be the annual event
that will help articulate and develop a broad manufacturing vision, and to
catalyze support for that vision. The vision will be a useful resource for
policy makers, federal funding agencies, companies developing their own
manufacturing strategies, university researchers, and others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The support will cover (1) the registration fees, and (2)
the travel fees for the speakers and PIs. The call for abstracts is disseminated
through the Society of Manufacturing Engineers and the American Society of
Mechanical Engineers; the submitted applications go through a selection process
by the conference committee. The highest rated applications will be invited to
give full presentations. After the conference, a summary of the Blue Skies
visions will be published as a North American Manufacturing Research Institute
white paper.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.