* 1840756
* NeuroDataRR: Predicting intelligence from resting-state fMRI: parcellation, pipelines and models
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ralph Adolphs, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 578,971.00

Individual differences in cognitive abilities ultimately derive from differences
in brain function. Recent studies have been able to predict, to some degree,
individual differences in intelligence from the connectivity pattern among brain
regions obtained at rest with functional magnetic resonance imaging (rs-fMRI).
However, it remains unclear how reliable these findings are, how well they
replicate, and to what extent they generalize to other samples. These questions
have also limited our understand of what it is in the neuroimaging data that
drives these predictions; for example, are there specific brain regions, or
specific ways that the data are processed that make a difference? To address
these questions this project will begin with a successful initial finding,
predicting intelligence from rs-fMRI with a particular approach, in a large data
set (the Human Connectome Project data, HCP). Building from this initial
finding, a series of research aims will then investigate how different kinds of
analyses might yield different results, how statistically reliable the findings
are, how well they replicate, and how they generalize to databases other than
the HCP. These findings will be high methodological value to all scientists
working in this field and will also yield initial answers to important questions
regarding the neural basis of intelligence. All work will use open-science
practices including but not limited to pre-registration and data sharing of data
and software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project capitalizes on recent success in
predicting general intelligence (g) from resting-state fMRI (rs-fMRI) data in
the Human Connectome Project dataset (HCP). Its principal aims are to
investigate the reliability, reproducibility, and generalizability of this
finding. A first aim will quantify the effect of brain alignment, rs-fMRI
denoising, brain parcellation, and model-learning strategy on the prediction of
intelligence from rs-fMRI in the HCP. The aim will quantify how choices at key
intersections in this processing decision tree affect final prediction results.
This investigation will provide a valuable inventory of possible processing
pipelines, and the difference that different parameter choices make; aim to
yield a single "best" combination of analytical choices; and explore which
anatomical brain regions, and networks, can best predict intelligence. A second
aim will add graph-theoretical summary features and externally driven brain
states to improve the prediction of intelligence in the HCP. Do features derived
from rs- or task-fMRI yield substantially better predictions? Do models built
separately from each paradigm, and for different tasks, point to shared
anatomical regions? Combining features from both paradigms, what is the best
prediction we can obtain? To investigate the generalizability of results
obtained, the results will be replicated across three independent datasets: the
Enhanced Nathan Kline Institute - Rockland Sample (NKI-RS; target 1000
participants, 6-85 year-olds), the NIH Adolescent Brain Cognitive Development
dataset (ABCD; target 10,000 participants, 9-10 year-olds), and the Cambridge
Center for Ageing and Neuroscience (Cam-CAN; 700 participants, 18-88 year-olds).
These pre-registered studies will quantify how robust are the brain predictors
of intelligence (to different subject samples, and different MRI acquisition
methods).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.