* 1840249
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Advancing a Circular Water Economy (ACWa-Econ)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Timothy Smith, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 94,227.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By
the year 2025, two-thirds of the world's population is expected to live under
conditions of water-stress. This has been identified as an enormous global risk,
based on the potential impact of this water crisis on society. The National
Science Foundation's Engineering Research Center (ERC) program provides national
investment in engineering solutions for high-impact societal benefit, and this
planning grant will be used bring together scientists, engineers, industry
leaders, social scientists, and entrepreneurs to develop the framework for an
ERC that will ultimately lead to breakthrough on how water is treated and
managed in the United States and beyond. The potential benefits of the project
are (1) increased capacity within institutions and the scientific/engineering
community to perform impactful and inclusive research on the circular water
economy, (2) enhanced understanding of methods to increase diversity and create
a culture of inclusion within a research enterprise, (3) strengthened
relationships between water-focused researchers and the industrial, non-profit,
government, and community partners that can facilitate societal impact, and (4)
knowledge among the team of different leadership and management approaches and
their benefits and challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The provision of clean
water and the development of strategies--technological, economic, and societal--
to create a true circular water economy is clearly an area of high-impact
societal benefit. For this reason, we have proposed a series of planning
activities that will allow us to build capacity and an inclusive culture around
the challenge of solving technical water provision and reuse problems while also
addressing the global and national health and economic risks of water stress and
water reuse. We will work to incorporate the expertise of scientists, engineers,
and computational scientists with the perspective of entrepreneurs and social
scientists. Central to these activities will be the inclusion of individuals
who, by nature of their cultural, racial, gender, or ethnic identification, see
problems and solutions differently, and the tight integration with industrial,
governmental, and non-governmental partners that are critical to implementing
research into a true circular water economy. Through this grant we will share
deep subject-matter expertise, co-create novel hypotheses and focal points for
future research, identify critical characteristics of an inclusive culture and
effective strategies for including diverse researchers, perspectives, and
approaches into a large research effort, and identify successful management and
leadership strategies for large and diverse groups. These activities will build
national capacity to make smart water reuse a reality, as well as facilitate
inclusion and better leadership across all those involved with the effort. The
plan that develops will be technically grounded, broadly supported by
stakeholders, and will incorporate risk aversion, economics, and different
corporate and cultural "frames" to facilitate high-impact solutions to the
problem of water-stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.