* 1840477
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Polymer Enhanced Biology -  CPEB
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Coray Colina, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an expected global population nearing 10
billion by 2050, meeting food, energy, and water needs has surfaced as one of
the most profound challenges of the new millennium. With new technological
advances, these significant global problems that threaten the health, wealth and
security of the US can be alleviated by fusing biology and polymers in a
paradigm shifting approaches where polymers are part of the solution instead of
part of the problem. For example, polymer-enhanced cells hold the promise to
eliminate the scourge of salmonella (causing 1.2 million illnesses per year in
the US alone) contamination in poultry by increasing the stability of probiotics
in animal feeds. Polymer-enhanced proteins may eliminate phosphate waste
products in intensive animal farming (if unresolved the phosphate waste will
render land non-arable by 2050) and combat pathogens that can rapidly decimate
agriculture farms. Polymer-enhanced enzymes can decontaminate pesticides at the
point of use before they contaminate ground water (pesticides are now detected
in over 95% of ground water). Polymer-enhanced biocatalysts may be able to
finally degrade and resolve microplastic pollution of our oceans (well in excess
of 10 trillion particles contaminate water sources and only 1 percent of
plastics contaminating our oceans are at the surface). This planning grant will
be used to assemble a large team to develop and deploy biohybrid molecules and
cells as key components in transforming problems of global significance. This
planning grant will be used to formulate the strategy for the team, ensuring
that the work generates pioneering science that impacts
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant will be used to assemble
domain experts and use their knowledge to plan a complex team-based
transformational program. They plan to build an extraordinary interdisciplinary
team that tackles the major barriers that prevent fusion of biotic and abiotic
systems. This grant will support the team building necessary to transform the
focus areas of prediction, synthesis, characterization and utilization of
biohybrids. The Strategic Planning Initiative will begin with four mini-retreats
in designated Focus Areas. In each mini-retreat, a small group of specialists
will meet to identify the barriers, solutions and people that will form the
team. Next, two Global Impact mini-retreats will bring together leaders in
polymer-enhanced biology with those in food, water and pollution threats to
sustainability. The mini-retreats will serve as the starting point for the
deliberations during the final planning session that will be used to develop the
research, education, outreach and partnership consensus for an eventual ERC in
Polymer-Enhanced Biology. Throughout the retreat and planning process, the plan
is to focus on developing a comprehensive strategy in the four interconnected
ERC foundational components: research, engineering workforce development,
diversity/culture of inclusion, and the innovation ecosystem. The plan is to use
new science and engineering to impact society through education, infrastructure,
and innovation. Team-based science at the interface of chemistry and biology
will deliver solutions to high priority problems of global
significance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.