* 1840359
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Energy Storage System Enabled Society (ESSENSE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Alex Huang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. This award funds an
effort to use team collective science and knowledge to build a strong
collaborative culture. The planning team will engage investigators in strategic
planning and potential test-beds exercises to enable revolutionary breakthroughs
in electric energy storage and the power electronics integration. The project
will plan a collective research effort to create innovative technological
solutions and lay the foundation for achieving affordable, clean, resilient, and
secure electric energy sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the technical
barriers and challenges to distributed, autonomous, and modern power systems
that meet national energy needs, the investigators will explore: (1) Solid State
Batteries, (2) Nanocomposite Capacitors, (3) Wide-Band Gap Power Devices, and
(4) Integrated Power Electronic and Electric Storage for Grid-tied Application.
The plan is to organize two workshops, each lasting two days, to bring together
faculty members and researchers from the partner institutions, national labs,
and industry for team formation to address the targeted research and societal
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.