* 1840452
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Precision Microbiome Engineering (PreMiEr)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Christine Hawkes, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbes have co-evolved over millions of years
and assembled in highly optimized microbial communities (microbiomes). Over the
last several decades scientists have begun to discover the power microbiomes
harness and how microbiomes could be leveraged to benefit society. While some
successes have been achieved in translating the growing fundamental scientific
knowledge linking microbiomes to practical applications, in general, a
systematic and replicable framework is needed for consistently bridging the gap
between fundamental scientific discovery and technology development. This
planning grant will create the visionary platform and collaborative network to
establish an Engineering Research Center for Precision Microbiome Engineering
(PreMiEr) that will enable engineers, microbiologists and other natural
scientists to work alongside theorists, model builders and computational
scientists to develop integrative models that will serve as the foundation for
engineering discovery and application to develop a broad range of technologies
designed to address global challenges in agriculture, environment, health and
energy. PreMiEr's research activities will enable microbiome manipulation to
promote beneficial microbes such as those that restore ecological function by
degrading toxic soil pollutants, improving crop yield by increasing stress
tolerance, decreasing our reliance on fossil fuel by producing biofuels and
weakening undesirable microbes such as those that destroy crops and contribute
to disease. PreMiEr will shift microbiome research from a descriptive to a
predictive framework, a shift which is key to advancing microbiome engineering,
promoting engineering innovation and facilitating research translation.
Furthermore, by incorporating social scientists into the PreMiEr research
framework, non-social scientists' work will be informed by consideration of the
ethical and policy implications of their evolving microbiome engineering
discoveries. Creation and integration of these activities will result in an
accelerated research translation process designed to speed up bench to market
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant combines Core Vision Leadership
Team brainstorming and integration meetings with four catalytic accelerator
workshops, mapped to PreMiEr's four research themes (Environment, Agriculture,
Health and Energy) which will deliver a transdisciplinary research and societal
impacts agenda and identify the broader team partners and expertise that is
critical to the formation and success of this Center. The expected benefits of
the planning activities include: 1) crystallizing PreMiEr's engineering research
themes, thrusts and cores; 2) defining a transformative agenda designed to
advance microbiome research from descriptive to mechanistic to application
studies; 3) creating structure for successful translation of PreMiEr's research;
4) defining critical societal impacts linked with an assessment plan that
incorporates evolving international standards on relevant societal impact
indicators; and 5) designing an inclusive PreMiEr training structure to broaden
STEM participation and enhance domestic and global workforce development.
PreMiEr's research design, informed by research-stakeholder team input, will
directly impact society?s ability to supply food, energy and clean water while
maintaining and improving the health of our population and ecosystems. In
addition, through active recruitment of trainees from underrepresented groups
and expanded collaborative partnerships with HBCUs and MSIs, PreMiEr will
contribute to broadening diversity across the US STEM workforce and training the
next generation in interdisciplinary technical and professional skills to
compete in the emerging arena of convergence science. Finally, the translation
of this planning initiative into a proposed engineering research center will
provide a model for the development of other future convergence science
centers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.