* 1840484
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Transformational Science and Manufacturing Innovation on Heterogeneous Materials Joining  - ERC-TRANSMI-HMJ
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Pingsha Dong, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 07/31/2020
* USD 99,282.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. Driven by
transformations in manufacturing and increased need for materials efficiency and
efficacy,most engineering structures and components increasingly require complex
heterogeneous materials joints. Materials joining makes a substantial
contribution to the U.S. economy, being a critical enabling technology for at
least one-third of its gross domestic product and influencing the backbone of
its defense, infrastructure, and economic well-being. Drawing from that, the
vision of the ERC for Transformational Science and Manufacturing Innovation on
Heterogeneous Materials Joining is to transform advanced heterogeneous materials
joining through a comprehensive approach using fundamental science, process
innovation, innovative design, and predictive modeling, coupled with the
development of a vibrant and diverse workforce prepared to create and deploy new
technologies, this center will propel the U.S. to the top of global
manufacturing leadership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary team,
including members from The Ohio State Univ. (lead), North Carolina A&amp;T State
Univ. (NCAT), Univ. of Michigan (UM), and IUCRC-Ma2JIC, will develop the science
and enable the technological transformations that the U.S. and world
manufacturers across key industrial sectors including energy, transportation,
biomedical, and defense, need to face present and future challenges on materials
joining. This planning grant will allow the proposed team to further develop
their center plans for education and workforce development, build a synergistic
team, and detail the scientific and technical challenges to
tackle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.