* 1840191
* CICI: SSC: TrOnto - A Community-Based Ontology for a Trustworthy and ResiliCent Scientific Cyberspace
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Matt Bishop, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2022
* USD 640,000.00

Scientific research relies on an infrastructure of networked computers
(cyberinfrastructure), which need to be secured against malicious threats and
intrusions. For instance, the privacy of clinical trial subjects, the integrity
of medical data, and the safety of tissue samples and cultures can be
compromised if the cyberinfrastructure of a university hospital is breached.
Information Security Officers (ISOs) are in charge of maintaining a secure
cyberinfrastructure for research, but their task is complicated by the speed at
which new threats emerge, and by the proliferation of software (often written in
different languages) and obsolete or specialized hardware among labs and
research centers. ISOs look for answers in their quest to fight intrusions and
vulnerabilities in documentation and on-line discussion forums, but this is a
time-consuming process. To streamline the process, an interdisciplinary team of
researchers are developing a computer system to automatically and continuously
harvest all that knowledge from online sources, organizing it into a network of
concepts and relations that can be queried and reasoned upon to keep ISOs a step
ahead of malicious attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a number
of interconnected modules: 1) A sub-system that identifies concepts and
relations in software documentation, advisory bulletins, and on-line technical
forums, and then retrieves that information using state-of-the-art natural
language processing techniques; 2) An ontology for cybersecurity, which is a
knowledge representation system that organizes the retrieved concepts and
relations into a logical network, allowing for implicit knowledge to be
extracted by means of automatic reasoning algorithms, and; 3) A querying
interface, which allows ISO staff to access the knowledge represented in the
ontology to find answers to their questions about cybersecurity. This innovative
approach to cybersecurity extends the use of ontologies in the biomedical field,
leveraging the metaphor of vulnerabilities in information systems as viruses or
infections. Even though the initial stages in the creation of the ontology will
involve curation by human experts, the researchers expect that the system can
itself automatically thanks to the use of information retrieval techniques,
therefore overcoming one of the known bottlenecks in the usefulness of
ontologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.