* 1840818
* NeuroDataRR. Collaborative Research: Testing the relationship between musical training and enhanced neural coding and perception in noise
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Andrew Oxenham, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2021
* USD 106,769.00

This project will determine whether formal musical training is associated with
enhanced neural processing and perception of sounds, including speech in noisy
backgrounds. Music forms an important part of the lives of millions of people
around the world, and it is one of the few universals shared by all known human
cultures. Yet its utility and potential evolutionary advantages remain a
mystery. This project will test the hypothesis that early musical exposure has
benefits that extend beyond music to critical aspects of human communication,
such as speech perception in noise. In addition, the investigators will test
whether early musical training is associated with less severe effects of aging
on the ability to understand speech in noisy backgrounds. Degraded ability to
understand speech in noise is a common complaint among older listeners and
hearing loss has been shown to be associated with social isolation and more
rapid cognitive and health declines. If formal musical training is shown to
affect improved perception and speech communication in later life, the outcomes
could have a potentially major impact on quality of
life,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Earlier studies have suggested relationships between
early musical training and improved auditory neural processing and perception,
but the studies' impact has been limited by small sample numbers and
inconsistent methods between different studies. This project will test a large
number of participants (N=360) with uniform recruitment criteria and testing
protocols across six different sites. Measures will include the neural frequency
following response (FFR) to speech sounds, behavioral frequency selectivity,
speech perception in noise, speech perception against a background of competing
talkers, pitch discrimination, and auditory masking. The participants will also
complete other assessments, including a personality inventory questionnaire, a
profile of musical perception skills, a spatial reasoning test to assess general
cognitive ability, as well as a background questionnaire to determine socio-
economic status, education, and musical background. Participants will be
selected to span a wide range of ages and musical experience. The neural data
and the speech perception measures will be related to factors of musical
training, such as the number of years of musical training and the age at which
musical training began. Scientific rigor will be assured by preregistering the
study and the analyses and by making the data and analysis code publicly
available via a dedicated website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.