* 1840673
* EAGER: Thermal Laser: a new light source
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Shawn-Yu Lin, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ruyan Guo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Part 1: Nontechnical description Thermal radiation impacts every aspect of our
daily life. Two of the best-known examples are the light emitted from the sun
and from incandescent light bulbs. In both cases, the light is classified as
blackbody radiation. It is random and broad spectrum, difficult to harness but
easy to produce. In contrast, laser light is coherent and directional but
difficult to create. In this program, we propose to study a new type of thermal
radiation - in between the two extremes of blackbody radiation and conventional
laser light-that could contribute to a cheaper, easier solution for generating
coherent light. This study is important for fundamental understanding of a new
mechanism for coherent light generation. Also, a new type of infrared emitter
has important implications for DOD missions such as infrared targeting, tracking
and locating applications. It could also lead to high efficiency optical sources
driven by waste heat or local heaters for heat energy recycling and re-
utilization purposes.

In addition, the proposed research will significantly enhance optics and
photonics education by engaging undergraduate students under a NSF-REU program
at RPIs Physics department. Our emphasis is the interdisciplinary nature of
Physics-related research. Our student target group has been and will continue to
be colleges with little or no graduate research. Recruiting has been focused on
under-represented groups in Physics, including women and minorities.

Part 2: Technical description of the project The goal of this proposal is to
explore a new class of thermal emitter based on metallic photonic crystal (PC)
filament architectures. The filament will emit radiation at a 1.7 micron
wavelength and exhibit laser-like input-output characteristics, i.e. "thermal
laser". The scope of this proposal is to demonstrate (1) a narrow thermal
emission linewidth of 10-40 nm at a peak wavelength of 1.7 micron, (2) an
emission intensity exceeding the blackbody limit by 20 times and (3) a laser-
like input pumping-to-output intensity characteristic. Our approach is to build
thermal laser devices based on a metallic PC and an integrated resonant cavity
for optical feedback. Once the experimental result is observed, it will be
compared to those predicted by a quantum mechanical formulation of a thermally
excited filament. The theory has two important features: (a) the optical gain is
provided by incoherent pumping of localized surface plasmons inside the PC; (b)
the multi-directional feedback mechanism for lasing is provided by the
underlining PC. In addition, we will perform Atomic-force-microscopy and
absorption spectroscopy study of a rough tungsten surface that supports the
dipole-active surface plasmon resonance.

To the best of our knowledge, the proposed concept and realization of a "thermal
laser" is the first of its kind. The successful illustration of a super-
Planckian emission is important for scientific understanding. The successful
development of the laser is also important for thermal photovoltaic application
and for waste heat re-utilization. Since thermal radiation is broadband by
nature, the thermal laser may be tailored to cover UV, visible and infrared
frequencies. Finally, the PC thermal emission can be very efficient with a power
conversion efficiency of > 60%.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.