* 1840962
* Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar (AMISR) Operations and Maintenance
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Asti Bhatt, SRI International
* Cooperative Agreement
* Roman Makarevich
* 01/31/2024
* USD 21,590,865.00

The Advanced Modular Incoherent Scatter Radar (AMISR) facilities, including the
Poker Flat Incoherent Scatter Radar (PFISR), the associated optical
instrumentation in Alaska, the Resolute Bay Observatory (RBO), and the Resolute
Bay Incoherent Scatter Radar North Face (RISR-N), are National Science
Foundation (NSF) Research and Educational Facilities that serve a broad
community of researchers in atmospheric and geospace science. These incoherent
scatter radars (ISRs) are used to examine the properties of the
electromagnetically charged layers of Earth's atmosphere. AMISR science is
directly relevant to several societally important aspects of space weather,
including geomagnetically induced currents, satellite drag, radio scintillation,
radio absorption, the radiation belt particle environment, and space weather
impacts on transpolar aviation. In addition to maintaining infrastructure that
enables research and education, student involvement in AMISR research is
supported by prioritizing student experiments, attending community workshops,
recruiting undergraduates through the SRI Research Experience for Undergraduates
program, recruiting undergraduates at UAF to assist with optical data analysis,
and participating in the annual ISR summer school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project includes the continued operation and maintenance of these facilities at
their current locations with no new construction or major repairs. The AMISR
facilities offer unique observational capabilities that continue to enable a
variety of scientific investigations related to multiple Solar and Space Physics
Decadal Survey goals for Solar Wind-Magnetosphere and Atmosphere- Ionosphere-
Magnetosphere interactions. RBO is the only incoherent scatter radar site in the
world above 80 degree geomagnetic latitude. This location deep in the polar cap
permits unique investigations of the polar geospace environment. The combination
of the advanced radar capabilities of PFISR, the extensive suite of optical
instruments in Alaska, the sounding rocket launch capabilities at the Poker Flat
Research Range (PFRR), and the location of PFRR in the main auroral oval make
PFRR one of the premiere sites in the world for research in upper atmospheric
physics, auroral plasma physics, and magnetosphere- ionosphere coupling. The
AMISR operations and maintenance team will proactively support user-driven
science through a variety of community engagement activities. Furthermore, the
SRI team will develop new data products and documentation to enable future
science investigations. SRI International (SRI), the University of Alaska
Fairbanks (UAF), and ATCO Structures and Logistics (ATCO) will jointly manage
this project. The operation and maintenance plan includes managing user-
requested experiments for each radar, continued operation of continuous low duty
cycle operations at PFISR, routine analysis and distribution of data,
maintenance of existing hardware, and logistical support for all other
instruments at RBO. Additionally, several engineering studies to formulate long-
term maintenance plans for the facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.