* 1840396
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Aging-centric Engineering Technologies (AgETech)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Thurmon Lockhart, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 98,385.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant to establish an Engineering
Research Center brings together researchers from Iowa State University, Arizona
State University, Georgia Tech, and University of California Irvine to study how
engineering technologies can be used to improve the everyday functioning of
older U.S. adults as they age. Older adults represent the fastest-growing
demographic group, which is creating urgent and largely unmet needs for
affordable services, technologies, and environmental support infrastructure for
these citizens to age optimally. Our engineering approach will have a high
societal impact by meeting the needs of older adults and better preparing
individuals, families, and communities for optimal and affordable aging. Our
proposed approach will integrate concepts and ideas from engineering, life
sciences, computational sciences, and social sciences to provide affordable
solutions to the scientific and societal challenges associated with aging. The
planning grant activities will enable us to expand research capacity in this
area by connecting with a broad range of stakeholders and industry. Our
educational and outreach activities will produce diverse, creative, responsible,
entrepreneurial, and globally engaged leaders. All these activities will lead to
an improved fundamental understanding of the most important needs of aging in
place and help create a new research paradigm with engaged stakeholders to
provide transformative and affordable solutions to optimal aging and reduce
growing healthcare costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our proposed approach will
integrate convergent research, education, and technology transfer programs
focused on novel sensor and network technology integrated with Internet of
Things data fusion, designer materials for delivery, and cognitive competence
and enhanced everyday functioning. Together with our industrial and innovation
partners, we will transform the design and manufacture of aging-centric
technologies and lead to rapid commercialization by a systems-approach
encompassing scientific, social, and behavioral considerations from the earliest
stages of conceptualization. The planning grant activities will help us to: (i)
expand research capacity in this research area; (ii) integrate new education,
outreach, and technology transfer activities across the partner institutions;
(iii) engage a broad group of stakeholders and industrial partners; (iv)
strategize on team formation and effective leadership/management; and (v) design
and implement a national survey of older adults to further guide our research
vision. All of these planning grant activities will lead to the development of
the full complement of skills needed to successfully address this complex
societal challenge and build effective relationships with a diverse stakeholder
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.