* 1840435
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Data for Socio-Physical Extreme Event Resilience (Data-SPEER)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Jenny Suckale, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urban resilience against extreme events is widely
recognized as a critical societal challenge for all societal groups, as
indicated by major US Government programs and philanthropic efforts. Our vision
is to create communities that are resilient to extreme natural events and
national security threats though civic minded engineering. This planning grant
will support three workshops to sharpen our research objectives. Across the
workshops, we will deepen our team formation and refine our leadership structure
by incorporating economists, computer scientists, researchers focused on
disasters outside the proposing team's expertise, as well as researchers of
resilience in minority communities. Moreover, we will establish a committed
stakeholder community by convening federal and local resilience policy makers,
emergency managers, and data providers (like technology companies) that can
support and benefit from the planned center. Through these activities, we aim to
help build a stronger society that is better able to withstand and bounce back
from disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to unite engineers,
social scientists, and community leaders to model and design for the dynamic
interplay of physical structures and social systems using modern high-resolution
data. With this effort, the impacts of preparedness and mitigation investments
have the potential to be modeled at individual, household, and community-scales.
We aim to constrain these models using crowdsourced data, high resolution
imagery, and machine learning techniques to quantify the physical and social
impacts of disaster events, planning, and recovery. Additionally, we aim to
merge engineering and social science resilience models to produce more holistic
benefit-cost quantifications of possible community investments and trajectories.
Translating resilience data and modeling into societally beneficial tools and
insights requires the convergence of technical expertise in modeling physical
disaster impacts and social science expertise in modeling community resilience.
The project will drive future convergent disaster resilience research and
prepare a new generation of scientists conversant in engineering and social
science. Such training will include the ability to engage with civic leaders to
jointly work towards reducing economic loss and casualties, while increasing
community well-being in the wake of adversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.