* 1840364
* Workshop: Best Practices in International Research Experiences for Graduate Students
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Brian Mitchell, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 08/31/2021
* USD 119,139.00

The development of global competencies in advanced degreed holders in STEM
fields is critical to innovation, competitiveness, and economic development in
the increasingly international marketplace of science and engineering. This
workshop brings together experts from different types of organizations
(universities, non-profit entities, funding agencies, private sector) that
participate, engage in, or have significant roles in STEM graduate
education/training programs to formulate a series of recommendations on how best
to structure programs that provide international experiences for graduate
students. The goal would be to identify the most efficient ways to support
graduate students in their development of global competencies that will not
increase time-to-degree or detract from their technical contributions. The
workshop also explores related topics such as how to provide international
research experiences to students from under-represented groups and those who are
economically disadvantaged. This event addresses concerns common to
international research experiences for graduate students across all STEM
disciplines. Attendees/participants include representatives from the natural
sciences, biological sciences, physical sciences, engineering, and social
sciences; experts in educational psychology, program evaluation, and
international relations add to the breadth of the
conversation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the workshop are to address
the following topical research questions;&lt;br/&gt;-- What is the appropriate
role of the student's faculty research advisor (research mentor) in identifying,
defining, permitting, and evaluating the advisee's international research
activity?&lt;br/&gt;-- What are the appropriate timing and duration for
introductory, follow-on, and subsequent international research experiences
during a STEM PhD student's education/training? What about a STEM master's
student?&lt;br/&gt;-- What are the appropriate entities/metrics for assessing
the international research activity experiences, defining the appropriate
assessment tools, collecting and archiving data, and conducting longitudinal
studies on international research
experiences?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presenters/attendees are selected by the
organizing committee to reflect as broad a view as possible, including those
calling for major changes in how international research activities are
structured and funded. The outcomes of the workshop will be a publicly-
accessible report with recommendations to the higher education, industry, non-
profit, and governmental agency communities on how to improve global skills
development in STEM advanced degree holders through effective international
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.