* 1840145
* EAGER: Optofluidic Strategies for Therapeutic Delivery of Neurotransmitters to Restore Vision
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* John Finan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 299,984.00

Vision is our most important and complex sense critical to daily living.
Therefore, irreversible blinding diseases of the eye such as macular
degeneration and retinitis pigmentosa that affect over 10 million people in the
US alone have devastating consequences on the quality of life. Loss of vision in
these diseases is due to progressive degeneration of cells called photoreceptors
in the retina. The photoreceptors normally convert the incident light
information into electrochemical signals that are relayed to the brain for the
perception of sight through a complex neural network. Degeneration causes a
break in the neural network and thereby the process of vision, even though the
rest of the neural network is functionally intact. Retinal implants seeking to
replace degenerated cells by stimulating surviving cells with electrical current
are emerging as a promising option for treating such blindness. But, because
current is an unnatural stimulus, they have difficulty restoring naturalistic
vision and visual acuity below the legal blindness limit. Recent research from
the PI's group has demonstrated that stimulating a live retinal tissue in a dish
with the brain chemical glutamate mimics its natural activation following visual
stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificially stimulating the retina with brain
chemicals delivered through a tiny device implanted in the back of the eye could
potentially restore more naturalistic vision and better visual acuity than
current retinal prostheses. A suitable technology for the delivery of chemicals
through an implantable device in the eye, is currently lacking. The proposed
project aims to fill this technological gap by exploring strategies that could
enable light-controlled delivery of therapeutic amounts of brain chemicals using
only natural light passing through the eye. If successful, this project could
accelerate the development of an implantable device to deliver brain chemicals
to the retina and help restore high-acuity naturalistic vision to millions of
people who are blind by neurodegenerative retinal diseases. It could also
potentially prove effective in treating other neurodegenerative eye diseases
such as glaucoma and optic neuritis that preclude the use of retinal prosthetics
and brain disorders such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.