* 1840358
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Healthy and Safe Aging (ERC-HSA)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Pascale Carayon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2020
* USD 99,950.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Between 2016 and 2050, the number of older adults
(age&gt;65) in the US will grow from 49 million to 84 million. The combination
of the growing aging population with increasingly complex care needs presents a
major societal challenge to deliver safe, effective and efficient health care.
While older adults prefer to stay in their home or a familiar environment, they
also require health services, but are at high risk for patient safety issues and
healthcare-associated harm when interacting with the healthcare delivery system.
We need to develop technologies that can help older adults stay healthy and safe
longer: this includes supporting safe interactions of older adults with the
healthcare system (e.g. emergency room, hospital). We plan to develop an ERC for
Healthy and Safe Aging (ERC-HSA) that will engage multiple disciplines
(engineering, health sciences) and older adults and their caregivers to develop
older-care-application-specific smart sensing technologies and integrate them
into the overall coordinated older adult care system. The proposed ERC-HSA will
be integrated in the newly created Wisconsin Institute for Healthcare Systems
Engineering at UW-Madison and will benefit from complementary expertise of
researchers at other Universities. During the ERC planning stage, we will work
with various universities and local groups to develop strategies and programs
aimed at enhancing diversity of our future students and addressing ageism, i.e.
biases targeted at older adults. We will also build stronger ties with the
health technology industry in the Greater Madison area as well as along the
?Health Highway?, a 600-mile Midwestern stretch that spans four states and
represents a growing healthcare ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
ERC-HSA will develop a convergent research agenda organized around expertise in
sensor technologies, data analytics and system design that will be combined with
deep knowledge about aging care to develop technologies that effectively address
the societal problem of healthy and safe aging. With advice of experts in
strategic planning, team science, diversity and aging, we will coordinate
various activities, including webinar on team science and team research,
targeted roundtables and a workshop with industry. We will organize roundtables
to develop the innovative convergent research program and create opportunities
for conversations among researchers from various backgrounds. Older adults and
their caregivers and healthcare professionals will actively participate in these
activities as we propose to do research not on older adults, but with and for
older adults. We will blend expertise in three thrust areas: (1) human-centered
modeling, simulation and design of patient work and clinical workflow, (2)
health/healthcare data analytics, and (3) sensors and sensing technologies. Our
goal is to go beyond designing siloed and fragmented technologies and promote
innovative convergent research that will design the next generation of
technologies for healthy and safe aging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.