* 1840906
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Documenting the Sisseton Dialect of Dakota, a Native American Language of South Dakota
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Lise Dobrin, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 05/31/2020
* USD 18,875.00

A central axiom in the discipline of linguistics is that language change is a
constant and ubiquitous characteristic of human language. While such change is
inevitable, it is very often induced or accelerated by situations of language
contact, which are increasingly common due to population mobility in a
globalized world. This project will contribute to recent scholarship on
grammaticalization, or linguistic change which enhances grammatical complexity
as words referring to objects and actions (i.e. nouns and verbs) develop into
grammatical markers (e.g. affixes and prepositions). It will do so by
scrutinizing dialect divergence within Dakota (dak), a Native American language
experiencing extreme contact with -- and shift towards -- English. This dialect
divergence holds critical insights for theories of language contact and change,
which currently maintain that extreme forms of contact yield morphosyntactic
simplification and interference (grammatical borrowing) from the dominant
language. As recognized in The Native American Languages Act passed by Congress
in 1990, languages spoken by indigenous peoples of North America have a unique
status and significance. When documenting and analyzing the progression of
grammaticalization and its role in differentiating related dialects, this
project will adopt a collaborative research design that enhances the
participation of Native Americans in science research and strengthens STEM
educator development for Native American instructors. Other broader impacts
include the professional development of a doctoral student, enhanced
collaboration between a research university (University of Virginia) and a
tribal college (Sisseton Wahpeton College), and the training of tribal citizens
in documentary linguistics.

This project will investigate the Sisseton dialect of Dakota, a highly
endangered Siouan language spoken in several reservation communities scattered
across the Northern Plains. Because of the historical depth and richness of
scholarly work on Dakota dialects, this language presents a rare opportunity to
examine dialect variation and development in Native America. Yet unlike other
Dakota dialects, Sisseton speech has not received sustained scholarly attention.
While the little research that does exist emphasizes lexical (word) and
phonological (sound system) similarities between Sisseton and related dialects,
this project will analyze the Sisseton dialect's recent and ongoing
morphosyntactic (grammatical) divergence. The Sisseton dialect displays evidence
of enhanced grammatical complexity that elaborates the head-marking
characteristics of Dakota (i.e. making grammatical distinctions on phrasal
nuclei) as opposed to borrowing the dependent-marking characteristics of English
(i.e. making grammatical distinctions on modifiers). In order to enrich and
extend our understanding of how language change unfolds amidst situations of
contact, this project will produce an accessible and archived annotated audio-
visual corpus of Sisseton speech. The project will also produce a dissertation,
and descriptive and theoretical findings will be disseminated via journal
articles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.