* 1840878
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Machine Learning for Dehazing Unmanned Aerial System Imagery from Volcanic Eruptions
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* David Merrick, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* David Miller
* 07/31/2019
* USD 6,331.00

The ongoing eruption of the Kilauea volcano in Hawaii is the first reported time
that small unmanned aerial systems (UAS) have been used for the emergency
response to a volcanic eruption. The Center for Robot-Assisted Search and Rescue
(CRASAR) flew 44 small UAS flights for the Hilo Fire Department and Hawaii
County Civil Defense. The eruption imagery was partially occluded by plumes of
steam carrying toxic gases, something that had not been encountered before. The
plumes interfere with responders comprehending the tactical situation because it
obscures the ground below and often prevents software from generating useful
surface maps. While volcanic eruptions are fairly rare, the same plume problem
is likely to occur in other hazardous material events. Machine learning
techniques for dehazing were only partially successful because plumes present a
very different set of challenges than removing urban haze or smog. This project
conducts rapid research to remove or reduce plumes, from stills and video, in
near real-time in order to support responses to the ongoing disaster. It will
make the datasets available so that they can be used for training and evaluating
new machine learning algorithms. The project will host a follow up workshop at
the 2019 AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence in
Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a UAS open-source imagery
dataset from the ongoing Leilani, Hawaii, volcanic eruption event. It uses the
dataset to expand and refine dehazing algorithms that will help Hawaii public
safety agencies and volcanologists see through the plumes of steam and gas that
is interfering with mapping the extent and volume of the lava. Plumes of steam
mingled with sulfur dioxide interfered with interpreting the boundaries of the
lava field and introduced errors into stitching images together or caused
details to be averaged out. Smog is a homogeneous, thin visual phenomenon while
plumes are heterogeneous and thick, limiting the utility of current techniques
and requiring focused research. The dataset offers an opportunity for a corpus
of real imagery that can serve as machine learning training data and enable
comparison of before and after results. The intellectual merit of the project is
twofold. It provides a unique opportunity to explore a new area of machine
learning for heterogeneous, thick plumes in images. The comprehensive dataset
will enable foundational work in computer vision, machine learning, and
emergency informatics. The research will immediately improve emergency
management of the Leilani eruption event and emergency management in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.