* 1840834
* EAGER: Developing and Bio-Inspired Assembly of Highly Scalable Electromagnetic Soft Actuators for Active Elbow Brace
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Wei Gao, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 07/31/2021
* USD 244,918.00

Neurologically impaired people such as stroke patients often need assistance in
moving their joints. However, current wearable rehabilitation and assistive
devices are either 1) powerful and active but bulky and made of rigid elements
such as exoskeletons and artificial limbs, or 2) flexible but passive with
limited functionality such as joint braces. In spite of recent advances in soft
robotics, there is still no soft actuator (motion-generating device) that is
portable, i.e. can be operated by on-board power sources, scalable to be adapted
to different joint sizes and still have the short response time and high output
force-to-size ratio needed to assist joint motions. To address this need, the
goal of this project is to design, fabricate and evaluate a novel
Electromagnetic Soft Actuator (ESA) that can be easily powered by on-board
batteries and can produce linear force and contraction in a manner that mimics
the behavior of the contractile filaments (Actin and Myosin) inside a sarcomere
(the basic human muscle actuation unit). The ESA is highly scalable and can be
miniaturized to create an artificial sarcomere when assembled in parallel and in
series. A series of artificial sarcomeres will create an ExoFiber. As the
primary activation unit, each artificial sarcomere will be electrically excited
separately. The ExoFibers straps will then be embedded into joint braces to make
them active. Being activated based on the principle of electromagnetism, the
ExoFibers can be quickly energized to generate force and motion. The performance
of an ExoFibers-actived brace for the human elbow joint will be evaluated in a
small-scale pilot study in humans with and without elbow disabilities. Findings
will advance the next generation of flexible, powerful and portable active
braces through scalable soft actuators for joint motion assistance and
rehabilitation applications and will lay the foundations for interdisciplinary
research on the design and analysis of soft actuator networks with dynamic
system and materials design and rehabilitation therapy. Education and outreach
impact will be achieved through the development of a new graduate level class in
Soft Rehabilitation Robotics and working with the UTSA Center for Excellence in
Engineering Education (CE3) and iTEC to involve students from underrepresented
groups from San Antonio in the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This exploratory
project investigates the possibility of fabricating an Electromagnetic Soft
Actuator (ESA) that can be powered by on-board batteries, can produce linear
force and contraction in a manner that mimics the behavior of the contractile
actin and myosin filaments inside a sarcomere and can be miniaturized to create
an artificial sarcomere when assembled in a bioinspired parallel and series
pattern. The artificial sarcomeres can be networked into ExoFibers that can be
embedded in a human elbow brace that can be used for rehabilitation or as an
assistive device. The Research Plan is organized under two aims. AIM 1 is
focused on design and fabrication. The ESA design consists of two antagonistic
solenoids with a spring linkage in between and an internal ferromagnetic core
built with soft materials. By injecting electric current into micro-coils, two
antagonistic electromagnetic fields will be induced, resulting in repulsive or
attractive forces that stretch or compress the springy linkage. The artificial
sarcomere and ExoFibers designs will be assembled using ESAs that have been
bioprinted to facilitate ease of production. The number of ESAs assembled in
parallel will determine the output source and the number of ESAs in series
defines the overall contraction. AIM 2 is focused on development and evaluation
of dynamic properties of an active brace, i.e., brace embedded with an ExoFiber.
Experimental platforms will be set up to test performance at three levels:
single ExoFiber, active brace, and human elbow. The output performance can be
defined in terms of: 1) contraction length, output force, linear stiffness and
bandwidth for ExoFiber, 2) flexion range, torque, angular stiffness and
bandwidth for active brace, and 3) flexion range and comfort and ease of use
with a human elbow. The active brace level will be evaluated while the brace is
placed on a bioprinted arm model. The human elbow level will be evaluated by
conducting a small-scale pilot study in two cohorts of adults: healthy
individuals and subjects with elbow weakness, decreased range of motion, or
stiffness due to stroke. Participants will be asked to perform three types of
exercises: 1) to hold their arm at 5 different flexion-extension stationary
angles while suddenly perturb by a 2Nm torque, 2) to flex and extend their arm
while holding a 2Kg weight at two different speeds (slow and normal) and 3) to
flex their arm while working against a constant torque of
2Nm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.