* 1840221
* RoL:FELS:RAISE: Integrating Statistical Physics and Nonlinear Dynamics to Understand Emergent Synchrony and Phase Transitions in Biological Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alan Hastings, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2023
* USD 999,992.00

This research will use ideas from statistical physics to examine the transitions
to synchrony (events operating in unison) across space in biological systems.
Tools in physics developed primarily to explain how magnetism arises at large
scale from alignment at small scale will be employed to develop detail-
independent explanations for the emergence of synchrony. The work aims to
determine general rules that govern the propagation of information or changes in
biological systems from short-range interactions to large scales, with an
emphasis on ecological systems. Phenomena in this category range from synchrony
across space of oscillations in predator and prey systems to synchrony in
dynamics of neural activity in the brain. Synchrony is strongly linked to
extinction risk, which may either be beneficial (as in epidemic burnout) or
detrimental (as for threatened species). Similarly, synchronous neural dynamics
may have large implications for human health. This work addresses several
fundamental questions in the life sciences: What are general rules that
determine patterns of synchrony in identical biological oscillators with
nearest-neighbor coupling? How do heterogeneities and system size affect the
rules governing the appearance and maintenance of synchrony in coupled
biological oscillators? How do correlations in randomly-determined effects
across space or time affect the appearance and maintenance of synchrony in
coupled biological oscillators? The project will involve junior researchers at
the undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. The investigators plan to
organize an interdisciplinary workshop that will include leading and junior
researchers in ecology and physics as well as other areas of
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to build upon previous research
demonstrating that the transitions in the two-dimensional Ising model of
theoretical physics map onto models of spatial population dynamics on a lattice
and can be used to explain data for the yield of individual trees across space
and time in a pistachio orchard. The goal of the project is to elucidate a
detail-independent explanation for the synchrony across space that is prevalent
at many scales of biological systems. However, real biological systems have
significant heterogeneities, so this work aims both to build on extensions and
modifications of the Ising model as well as to investigate other models. The
work will depend on extensive simulations and analysis of models from
statistical physics. The overall goal of finding detail-independent universal
explanations of large-scale synchronous dynamics will advance understanding of
ecological systems as well as a range of other biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.