* 1840510
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Human, Machine, and Network Functional, Symbiotic Integration On Neural Systems (Human Fusions)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Christian Zorman, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 05/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.

This project will develop the foundational plan of an Engineering Research
Center (ERC) to form a unique, transformative, and transdisciplinary team that
will create, define, understand, and teach the science, technology, ethics,
regulatory framework, entrepreneurship methodologies, and societal impact of the
rapidly evolving integration of humans and technology. Communication and
technology revolutions, such as radio, television, and the internet, have
resulted in profound societal changes. The human, however, has basically
remained external to the system with technology serving only as a tool. We
propose that a conceptual shift toward symbiotic integration of the human with
technology will bring the next societal transformation leading to a more
connected, global society with new operational models of work, anthropocentric
technology, and human-human interaction. We envision a tech-plus,
transdisciplinary team of scholars, entrepreneurs, ethicists, and members from
partnering institutions (including companies) that will perform convergent
research at a new frontier of human incorporation of technology into a sense of
self, i.e. a symbiosis between humans and technology. The core is a shift from
the current techno-centric approach, where human and technology are separate, to
a human-centric technology development paradigm. We seek to shift the societal
dialogue from that of a battle between humans and technology (such as artificial
intelligence and robotics) to a more productive dialogue of merging the best of
humans and technology for the mutual benefit of both. Symbiotic incorporation of
technology requires new interfaces to the human that add multiple sensory
connections beyond current audio and visual inputs. This symbiotic relationship
will augment human capability with those of technology and networked systems.
New, symbiotic technology will radically change the future of work, human
learning, human-human interaction, human networks, human health, human
capability, and society overall for a safer, more prosperous future. The overall
goal is to refine the model sufficiently to be compelling for a sustained
research and development effort in an ERC for merging Humans, Machines, and
Networks through Functional, Symbiotic, Integration On Neural Systems or an ERC
for Human Fusions. Prior significant research shows that the core need of
incorporation of technology into a human's sense of self, requires 1) a sense of
agency over technology and 2) multi-sensory synchrony with technology.

Strictly, this project is a planning grant to develop the ERC structure and
processes that will rationally evolve the relationship between humans and
technology. Methods from the Science of Team Science (SciTS) will be employed to
establish relationships between committed, energized stakeholders in this new,
transdisciplinary effort in human-technology symbiosis and a strategic plan to
grow and establish sustainable research capacity. The objectives of the project
are to 1) assemble the expertise to define the transdisciplinary, tech-plus
framework; 2) develop a process and the collaborative tools for the sustained,
focused development and study of the new human-technology paradigm, and; 3)
establish a central point of engagement for stakeholders and external
communities. This project will foster a new dialogue regarding the evolution of
the human-technology relationship. Tangible outcomes from the planning process
will include social media networking platforms, a central collaboration and
dissemination website, and surveys to gauge stakeholder commitment to and
refinement of the symbiotic model of human-technology evolution. Successful
realization of a symbiotic human-technology paradigm requires a
transdisciplinary approach to address significant scientific, technical,
ethical, and social challenges. The transdisciplinary model of the ERC for Human
Fusions has a technical core addressing anthropocentric technology, multisensory
human interfaces, and connection infrastructure. Expanding around this are
disciplines to address ethical questions of symbiotic technology, regulatory
frameworks to support the ethical principles, entrepreneurial models to
introduce new technology, and sociology to understand how symbiotic technologies
impact society. These are highly integrated such that each is integral to the
development and understanding of the other. The potential ERC will provide
leadership, intellectual resources, the establishment of world-class facilities
for responsible and effective scientific discovery, technological innovation,
and resources in the new symbiotic sciences for education, research and
development and translation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.