* 1840320
* RoL: FELS: RAISE:  Balancing demands of Minimal Cell
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,184,449.00

Establishing the core requirements and principles of cellular life is a
fundamental challenge of biology and biological physics. This project addresses
the Rules of Life question of the minimum biochemical functions that are
necessary for a cell to grow and replicate. The project specifically involves
the development of a simplified metabolic model for a minimal cell. The major
contribution of this work is understanding interactions between the fundamental
metabolic processes and large-scale economy of energy exchange among cellular
processes in a given constrained environment. This model reveals the minimal
chemical interacting processes between cellular events necessary for the growth
of bacterial colonies over the time scale of cell cycles. While being derived
for the simplest viable cell, this model encompasses processes essential to all
forms of cellular life and hence yields insights applicable to cellular life as
a whole. The simplicity of the developed model makes the principles of cellular
life more accessible to a broad audience of researchers and non-scientists.
Undergraduate students in the San Diego area are involved in the project through
an arrangement with the J. Craig Venter Institute. According to this arrangement
students perform essential lab work to use gene editing genetic tools to
eliminate genes linking the metabolic networks in engineered bacterial
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves use of the model system JCVI-
syn3A, a minimal bacterial cell that was developed in conjunction with the
Synthetic Biology group at the J. Craig Venter Institute. The approach used a
bottom-up design method. This model displayed a highly reduced coupling between
metabolic subsystems. Further simplification of JCVI-syn3A yields a cellular
system where fundamental processes are not only well defined but also nearly
isolated. These circumstances provide the foundation to study the basics of life
and how specific cellular behaviors emerge from the output of individual
processes. The plan is to construct a semi-analytical kinetic model of JCVI-
syn3A coarse-grained at the level of representative metabolites and nutrients,
metabolic enzymes, transporter proteins, genetic information processing
proteins, DNA and RNA. Single-molecule experiments at single-cell resolution are
performed to quantify the number of labeled transporter proteins in JCVI-syn3A
to vary initial conditions for the models. The kinetic model is used to guide
the minimization of the coupling between the metabolic subsystems which are
validated through genetic modifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
co-funded by the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Physics of Living Systems program in
the Division of Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.