* 1840443
* CAREER: "Crime Victimization Patterns in American Cities"
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Andrew Papachristos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 09/30/2018
* USD 67,543.00

SES-1151449&lt;br/&gt;Andrew Papachristos&lt;br/&gt;Yale
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CAREER: Crime
Victimization Patterns in American Cities&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
explores the importance of social networks for individual victimization by
analyzing the ways social networks and an individual's position within social
networks influence the probability of being a victim of homicide or violent
crime. The project is based on a comparative case study of violent crime
patterns in four U.S. cities: Chicago, Boston, Cincinnati, and San Francisco.
Particular attention is directed towards understanding how the topology of
social networks influences the spread of crime and violence within a population,
maintaining that this diffusion of crime and violence can be more fully
explained by the structure of social networks than by individual or neighborhood
attributes. To that end, the project is divided into two inter-related studies.
The first phase focuses on individual networks at the core of inter-personal
violence. By analyzing the social networks of individuals in these four cities
it examines (a) how an individual's position within a social network influence
his likelihood of being shot or the victim of violent crime, (b) whether or not
certain types of networks are more conducive to the diffusion of violence than
others, and (c) the extent to which certain network positions are more
susceptible to victimization than others. The second phase focuses on how three
specific ecological contexts (the city, the neighborhood, the gang) may foster
or constrain particular types of social relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to inform
policy and violence prevention efforts by determining strategic points of
intervention. Findings regarding the role of different types of networks and the
precise patterns of violence might help identify individuals and groups most at
risk of victimization. Findings might be of interest to the law enforcement
community, social service agencies, urban planners, policy makers, and the
general public.