* 1840857
* RI: Medium: Collaborative Research: Next-Generation Statistical Optimization Methods for Big Data Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2020
* Han Liu, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 12/31/2020
* USD 237,718.00

This project develops a new generation of optimization methods to address data
mining and knowledge discovery challenges in large-scale scientific data
analysis. The project is constructed in the context that modern computing
architectures are enabling us to fit complex statistical models (Big Models) on
large and complex datasets (Big Data). However, despite significant progress in
each subfield of Big Data, Big Model, and modern computing architecture, we are
still lacking powerful optimization techniques to effectively integrate these
key components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One important bottleneck is that many
general-purpose optimization methods are not specifically designed for
statistical learning problems. Even some of them are tailored to utilize
specific problem structures, they have not actually incorporated sophisticated
statistical thinking into algorithm design and analysis. To tackle this
bottleneck, the project extends traditional theory to open new possibilities for
nontraditional optimization problems, such as nonconvex and infinite-dimensional
examples. The project develops deeper theoretical understanding of several
challenging issues in optimization (such as nonconvexity), develops new
algorithms that will lead to better practical methods in the big data era, and
demonstrates the new methods on challenging bio-informatics
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is closely related to NSF's mission
to promote Big Data research, and will have broad impacts. In the Big Data era,
we see an urgent need for powerful optimization methods to handle the increasing
complexity of modern datasets. However, we still lack adequate methods, theory,
and computational techniques. By simultaneously addressing these aspects, this
project will deliver novel and useful statistical optimization methods that
benefit all relevant scientific areas. The project will deliver easy-to-use
software packages which directly help scientists to explore and analyze complex
datasets. Both PIs will also design and develop new classes to teach modern
techniques in handling big data optimization problems. All the course materials
- including lecture notes, problem sets, source code, solutions and working
examples - will be freely accessed online. Moreover, both PIs will write
tutorial papers and disseminate the results of this research through the
internet, academic conferences, workshops, and journals. Through senior theses
and potentially the REU (Research Experiences for Undergraduates) program, the
proposed project will also actively include undergraduates and engage under-
represented minority groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these goals, this
project develops (i) a new research area named statistical optimization, which
incorporates sophisticated statistical thinking into modern optimization, and
will effectively bridge machine learning, statistics, optimization, and
stochastic analysis; (ii) new theoretical frameworks and computational methods
for nonconvex and infinite-dimensional optimization, which will motivate
effective optimization methods with theoretical guarantees that are applicable
to a wide variety of prominent statistical models; (iii) new scalable
optimization methods, which aim at fully harnessing the horsepower of modern
large-scale distributed computing infrastructure. The project will shed new
theoretical light on large-scale optimization, advance practice through novel
algorithms and software, and demonstrate the methods on challenging bio-
informatics problems.