* 1840687
* Defining the Roles of Autophagy in Nutrient Recycling, Stress Protection, and Seed Development in Maize by Omics and Multi-scale Approaches
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Richard Vierstra, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 03/31/2024
* USD 2,407,869.00

This project undertakes a comprehensive molecular analysis to understand how
plants mobilize nutrients through a cellular process called autophagy (self-
eating) and to understand what compensatory mechanisms are activated when
autophagy fails. With this knowledge, it should be possible to re-engineer crops
that more efficiently use carbon fixed through photosynthesis and nutrients
acquired from the soil. Plants that better remobilize nutrients to areas of new
growth, storage, and ripening fruits would provide for better yields under
normal and stressful conditions. The participating investigators will provide
training to students and postdoctoral fellows in modern biological approaches to
study crop physiology. At University of Wisconsin-Madison the datasets generated
during this project are incorporated into undergraduate courses and new
laboratory classes with a strong component in outreach directed towards K-12
students. The three participating laboratories also organize workshops during
scientific meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autophagy is a central regulator of
the cellular, developmental, and physiological responses that underlie key
agricultural traits, such as fertilizer-use efficiency and nutrient
remobilization, fixed carbon allocation, seed quality and germination, yield,
and tolerance to environmental stress. However, current understanding of the
organization, regulation, and selectivity of autophagy in crops is in its
infancy. The objectives of this proposal are to: (1) Expand the collection of
autophagy and related mutants by Mu- and CRISPR/Cas9-related methods; (2) Use
the full suite of omics approaches to define how autophagy impacts the
transcriptome, proteome, metabolome, and phenome of maize; (3) Describe the
suite of ATG8-binding autophagy receptors that select specific maize cargo; and
(4) Identify autophagic cargo under normal and stressful conditions.
Collectively, this work will provide the first systems view of autophagy in a
crop plant and its roles in growth, nutrient allocation, stress tolerance, and
kernel development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.