* 1840458
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Safe and Secure Artificial Intelligence Solutions (SAIS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Hongyi Wu, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
planning grant enables the principal investigators (PIs) to work with a full
spectrum of stakeholders to prepare the groundwork for establishing an
Engineering Research Center (ERC) for Safe and Secure Artificial Intelligence
Solutions (SAIS). The proposed center focuses on development of fundamental,
theoretically-grounded, and systematic approaches to enable safe and secure AI
and establishment of an interdisciplinary community that engages all
stakeholders. Scholars from multiple disciplines and practitioners from multiple
fields will work together to fully understand the problems and explore the
design space. The success of this endeavor can potentially lead to enabling
technologies for secure machine learning systems, thereby accelerating their
development and widening their adoption in different application domains.
Regional educators and government/industrial employers will be engaged to train
cybersecurity workforce. Overall the proposed ERC SAIS contributes significantly
to the protection of future cyber and physical world and safeguarding the human
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will identify and engage the SAIS
stakeholder community, including partners and participants from academics,
government and military agencies, research centers, and various industries. The
interdisciplinary team will plan a long-term vision and direction for SAIS and
identify key research and development thrusts, based on the inputs from all
stakeholders. The team will develop marketing plan, future member recruiting
plan, and cooperative membership agreement (including membership eligibility,
commitment, and intellectual property ownership). The team will decide the
center's administration structure and management policies and guidelines. The
team also will identify a set of research, education, workforce development, and
outreach projects to be carried out during the first two years should the center
be established. Finally, the team will create plans to work with university
admission and K-12 educators to inspire and improve the participation of
underrepresented groups in the proposed ERC SIAS and introduce cybersecurity to
school counselors, teachers, students, and parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.