* 1840200
* Salish Kootenai College Indigenous Research Center
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2027
* Steven Dupuis, Salish Kootenai College
* Continuing Grant
* Jody Chase
* 09/30/2027
* USD 2,106,551.00

The TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers) strand allows TCUP
institutions to capitalize on their investments in STEM instruction and
research. A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to
increase the intellectual leadership of TCUP institutions so that they can
address scientific or engineering needs or interests, specifically for their
tribes or communities, or broadly for the Nation. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will impact the research capabilities and therefore
the economic strength of many Indigenous communities. This project reflects the
support of the Centers for Research Excellence in Science and Technology
(CREST).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Salish Kootenai College (SKC) Indigenous
Research Center Feasibility Study and the SKC Faculty Research Group formed the
impetus of the creation of the Salish Kootenai College Indigenous Research
Center (SKCIRC). The Center visions to advance an understanding and establish an
importance of an Indigenous worldviews for STEM research and to coalesce an
Indigenous research structure from within an Indigenous community by Indigenous
scholars. The mission of the Center is to realize a framework for Indigenous
research methodologies (IRM) built upon by the current state of knowledge of IRM
from multiple Indigenous scholars and community perspectives for the betterment
of tribal, local and national science understanding. To move toward meeting this
mission and in the spirit of the vision, the Center will engage American Indian
TCU faculty, students and community members in a collaborative environment to
meet the goal of advancing, through use and research, IRM to produce new
knowledge and application of methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SKCIRC will further
its aims through: collaboratively exploring theories and methods in IRM from
unique Indigenous worldviews; advancing the use and awareness of IRM; and
building institutional capacity for the advancement of IRM. Notable activities
planned include: a visiting Indigenous TCU scholars program; an Indigenous
Research colloquium; sponsored cross-disciplinary STEM research; IRM education
and training services; an annual IRM symposium; and a library of relevant IRM
documents and supporting materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.