* 1840953
* E3: Excellence in Engineering Education - A Workshops Series for School Administrators
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Monica Fernandez-Bugallo, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 12/31/2021
* USD 99,781.00

This innovative project, E3: Excellence in Engineering Education-A Workshops
Series for School Administrators, carried out by Stony Brook University (SBU)
will broaden participation in engineering and facilitate implementation of the
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS) in K-12 school districts in New York
City and on Long Island, with a focus on grades 6-12 and on high needs settings.
The project team will create, implement, investigate and evaluate a workshops
series for school administrators that will increase passion, competence and
engagement for engineering, a profession that contributes to social and economic
mobility. The proposed E3 workshops will engage district administrators in
building awareness and knowledge in engineering to support the unique needs of
pre-college students, particularly those from populations traditionally
underrepresented. E3 will offer a total of eight workshops that will span two
academic years. The primary mechanism will be a series of annual professional
development workshops, two for school district leadership
(superintendents/assistant superintendents and principals), and two for
district/school science directors; each type of workshop will be held on both
Long Island and in New York City to maximize participation. The workshops series
is unique and innovative because it focuses on two documented weaknesses in the
engineering education gateway: 1) the lack of engineering instruction in pre-
college education, and 2) chronic socioeconomic disparities in engineering
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed E3 workshops series will
advance knowledge in engineering education, facilitating the implementation of
the NGSS as the project team organizes, provides, and evaluates professional
development for school leaders in grade 6-12 settings, particularly those in
high needs schools. The workshops are unique as they will include strategies for
NGSS adoption for administrators, whose acquired skills and knowledge will
impact students, counselors, and teachers. A rigorous research plan and
evaluation will measure outcomes, providing data related to the participants as
well as school-level practices. E3 will result into a replicable and scalable
model to promote engineering and NGSS implementation in regional
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.