* 1840381
* Woods Hole Center for Oceans and Human Health
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Mindy Richlen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2024
* USD 4,175,410.00

The mission of the Woods Hole Center for Oceans and Human Health is to protect
the public health through enhanced understanding of how oceanic and
environmental processes including climatic variation affect the population
dynamics of toxin producing organisms, and the risks from exposure to their
potent neurotoxins. Factors affecting the distribution, survival, proliferation,
and toxicity of harmful algal bloom (HAB) species still are poorly known,
despite their enormous consequences for human health. Three research projects
and two cores comprise the Center. The Center structure will facilitate the
integration among projects, and the integration of research with education and
community engagement activities. The Center will engage stakeholders, facilitate
education on HAB science at many academic levels, and strengthen public
knowledge about HAB blooms and their impacts. The Center is jointly supported by
NSF and by the National Institute for Environmental Health Sciences
(NIEHS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities of the Center will focus
on two key HAB taxa: Alexandrium fundyense that produces the saxitoxins
responsible for paralytic shellfish poisoning (PSP), and Pseudo-nitzschia spp.
that produce domoic acid responsible for the amnesic shellfish poisoning (ASP)
syndrome. Novel, targeted, efficient, and data-rich sampling approaches
developed by the applicants and applied in situ have revealed that critical
aspects of A. fundyense dynamics in natural settings differ dramatically from
those inferred from laboratory studies, indicating plasticity in response to
climate. The research proposed will build on these new and fundamental insights
into what regulates blooms, and on the Center's established strengths in ocean
observation technologies and modeling, to predict how environmental variables
may influence population dynamics of known and emerging HAB threats. Hindcast
simulations compared with climate data records in the Gulf of Maine will assess
model performance and uncertainty. Forecasts run for a range of potential
climate scenarios can help quantify future public health risks. Similarly,
specific cells have been identified in the developing brain that are targets of
HAB toxins, findings giving insights into developmental toxicological
mechanisms. These will guide studies to address the scope of toxin effect in the
developing central nervous system, potentially linking developmental exposures
to adult consequences. Studies of new mechanisms of toxin action will include
determination of the effects of combined or repeated exposure to sub-lethal
levels of saxitoxin and domoic acid, and possible silent neurotoxicity, at
different life stages in the zebrafish model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.