* 1840917
* SBIR Phase I: Online Platform to Host Intra-District, Game-Based Math Competition
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Timothy Kelley, Interstellar Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

Nontechnical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project presents an
opportunity to develop and test an educational platform designed to improve
motivation levels in students with respect to the STEM disciplines, especially
Mathematics. The core activity of the proposed platform consists of live
academic competition, students answering questions in a game-based, online
arena. The platform will, in essence, borrow the features and structures found
in popular athletic sports, from points, scoreboards and rankings to leagues,
tournaments and championships, and reproduce them online so that students can
compete academically in the classroom just like they compete athletically on the
sports field, with similar performance gains and improvements to peer dynamics
expected to follow. Leveraging classic game mechanics in an exciting online
format, the platform has the potential to motivate students across the skill and
demographic spectrums where offline academic competitions have historically
failed. In past attempts to improve learning outcomes and close the achievement
gap, the U.S. has focused on inputs, e.g., class-size, book counts, etc., and
more recently, outputs, e.g., standardized test scores. This project offers the
chance to approach learning improvement from a new angle or perspective. By
focusing directly on student motivation with a structure only recently made
possible by the advent of the internet age, this project leverages the power of
competition in an effort to advance the stated NSF missions of developing a
globally competitive STEM workforce and increasing economic competitiveness in
the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical paragraph:&lt;br/&gt;This project
entails the development of a web and mobile platform with the ability to host
and engage every student across the U.S. in robust, online competition activity.
As such, the proposed activity is expansive in its breadth and scope and
therefore presents an immense challenge, both from a technical and a design
perspective. In the U.S., the vast majority of students are educated in a school
district setting. Therefore, the platform must be designed in such a way as to
fit neatly within the parameters of school district scheduling, processes and
structures. It must be comprehensive in its design, seamlessly blending together
the experiences of very different users. Three distinct roles are imagined: an
administrator of the platform will have the ability to create leagues,
tournaments, and championships, team-based and individual-based, for students
across the school district/network; a teacher on the platform will be able to
arrange matches for a team/class of students by dividing them into multiple
teams that play against each other or challenging another team in the same
school district/network to a match; a student on the platform will be able to
arrange individual-based matches with other students in the same school
district/network or play against a personal best avatar. Bringing all such
activity together into a single platform, one that can be integrated with
existing online education platforms and replicated from school district to
school district across the U.S., satisfies NSF?s objective of supporting
projects of high technical risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.