* 1840636
* Planning Grant:  Engineering Research Center for Auditory Bioengineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Ellis Meng, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 06/30/2021
* USD 98,227.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sense of hearing is a critically important ability that enables an individual to
relate to the external world. Loss of hearing affects an individual?s health,
function, quality of life and mortality. Current estimates are that hearing loss
results in excess medical costs ranging from $3.3 to $12.8B in the United
States, and over $750B worldwide. A recent report from the National Academies
highlighted the need to recognize hearing loss as a major public health concern.
This planning grant brings together a diverse team of researchers from Rice
University, Baylor College of Medicine, the University of Southern California
and Oregon Health Science University. This team will have complementary
expertise in auditory neuroscience, cochlear implants, speech perception and
devices that connect directly to neurons. This team will engage in a series of
meeting and activities that will lay the foundation for an Engineering Research
Center in Auditory Bioengineering. The proposed Center will work to develop new
technologies, expand the engineering workforce and foster a culture of diversity
and inclusion by supporting the deaf and hard of hearing, especially members of
underserved populations. At the scientific level, the engineering advances in
technologies for precise electrical stimulation of neurons will be broadly
applicable to devices such as retinal implants, auditory implants and deep brain
stimulators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recognizing the limitations of hearing aids
and cochlear implants, the planning team will seek to revolutionize current
hearing rehabilitative technology through transformative engineering enabled by
a convergent approach involving several engineering disciplines. The major
scientific goal will be to develop a next generation auditory implant that more
intimately connects to spiral ganglion cells, more faithfully encodes sound, is
smaller and easier to use, and is more economical. During the course of this
grant, the planning team will critically evaluate the potential of recent
technological advances to improve hearing health care and identify additional
participants to perform center-scale research. This will be accomplished through
a series of meetings held in in Houston, TX, Los Angeles, CA and Portland, OR.
The team will engage stakeholders - including individuals with cochlear
implants, hearing health care professionals, policy makers in hearing health
care, and low-income individuals whose hearing health care needs are currently
unmet. The team will used evidence-based strategies to recruit and develop the
center leadership team. The team will also engage major cochlear implant
manufacturers and identify other industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
focus of this proposal will reside in a critical evaluation of the potential for
the following thrust areas to serve as a foundation for convergent research in
Auditory Bioengineering. Thrust 1: Enabling Technologies for Next Generation
Auditory Implants. In this thrust, recent advances in engineering technologies
such as carbon nanofiber electrodes for neural interfacing will be integrated
into biomedical microsystems to produce an innovative design for a next
generation auditory implant. Thrust 2: Speech Perception for Auditory
Bioengineering. In this thrust, recent advances the cognitive aspects of speech
perception will be harnessed to determine the relevant information that needs to
be passed to auditory implants and how best to provide that information based on
what is known about the neural code, with consideration that different languages
are tuned to different acoustic features. Thrust 3: Global Health and
Disparities Research in Auditory Rehabilitation. This thrust will seek to
investigate and evaluate ways to expand access to auditory rehabilitation with
hearing aids and cochlear implants, especially for underserved
population.&lt;br/&gt;The goal will be to develop an ERC in Auditory
Bioengineering that will serve a national resource for auditory researchers,
neuroengineers, audiologists and clinicians. With a central location in Houston,
TX, the center will have national outreach and serve as a way to pool patient
populations for studies on outcomes and disparities in auditory rehabilitation.
This proposal will fill a key need in workforce development in training more
students at the interface of hearing and speech research, who are prepared to
employ modern engineering approaches for auditory
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.