* 1840716
* A Study on Creating the MGI Workforce
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2018,11/30/2019
* George Spanos, Minerals Metals & Materials Society
* Standard Grant
* John Schlueter
* 11/30/2019
* USD 156,075.00

Non-technical description: Now in its seventh year, the Materials Genome
Initiative (MGI) represents a multi-agency partnership aimed at getting
materials to market twice as fast and at a fraction of the cost of what would be
possible through traditional research methods. This will be accomplished through
the development of a materials innovation infrastructure that involves a tight
coupling among computational tools, experimental tools, and digital data. The
MGI Strategic Plan highlights four goals, one of which is to create a world-
class materials-science and engineering workforce that is trained for careers in
academia or industry. This study will engage a team of high-profile subject
matter experts including representatives from across academia, industry, and
government to evaluate the current status of this objective and develop
actionable guidance for creating this workforce. The final report, which will be
made readily available to the community, will serve as a roadmap for the
development of both the near-term and future MGI workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: The Materials Genome Initiative
(MGI) represents a multi-agency partnership aimed at accelerating the
progression of materials research along the materials development continuum in
order to get materials to market in half the time and at a fraction of the cost
of what would be possible through traditional research methods. This will be
accomplished through the development of a materials innovation infrastructure
that involves a tight iterative feedback loop among computational tools,
experimental tools, and digital data. The MGI Strategic Plan highlights four
goals, one of which is to create a world-class materials-science and engineering
workforce that is trained for careers in academia or industry. This study will
engage a team of high-profile subject matter experts including representatives
from across academia, industry, and government to discuss key gaps and needs and
develop recommendations for creating this workforce. The final output of the
study will be a report that addresses three study objectives: 1) assess the
current state of the academic curriculum and training approaches of the United
States workforce to accomplish MGI goals, 2) identify the key MGI skill
requirements and needs for individuals entering the workforce, and 3) outline
curricula development and training guidelines to improve readiness of current
students and the existing professional workforce, through a series of detailed,
actionable recommendations. The final report will serve as a roadmap for the
development of both the near-term and future MGI workforce. The Minerals,
Metals, and Materials Society will leverage and build upon its communications
infrastructure to provide sustained coverage of this project including broad
dissemination of the final report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.