* 1840933
* A Workshop for Connecting Computational Thinking with Synthetic Biology Applications in K-16 Education
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Yasmin Kafai, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 11/30/2021
* USD 99,855.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project is supported by the STEM+C program and will advance its mission by
convening a capacity-building workshop to examine the relationships between
computational thinking and the rapidly developing field of synthetic biology.
The workshop and associated convenings will bring together key researchers,
educators, curriculum developers, and education policy makers to discuss
educational issues and priorities related to the interdisciplinary field of
synthetic biology at the K-16 level. The project will pursue the following
outcomes: (1) Identification of key issues relating to the teaching and learning
of synthetic biology and computational thinking in K-16 education; (2)
Examination of the potential ethical issues associated with synthetic biology;
and (3) Development of a framework that will allow researchers to articulate
possible interactions between biodesign in their future research, and
applications. It is expected that these outcomes will provide a framework for
student learning and teaching of biodesign, the design of learning tools and lab
spaces, and discussion points around ethics. The project will also host a
conference panel that will be streamed online for public dissemination during
and after the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together
for the first time science educators, learning scientists, computer science
educators, biodesigners and artists, and science center and community laboratory
directors who have expertise in biology, design, computing, and K-16 education
to articulate key issues and topics that take into account the complex ways
these different areas intersect. Based on recent commercial developments, it is
clear that design and biology can be integrated and computational thinking can
play a central role in linking them. So far, researchers and educators in
computational thinking and synthetic biology have conducted research and
development in isolation from one another, often publishing in different
journals without the benefit of knowing how their work intersects. Likewise,
biology education researchers have been subdivided into those focusing on
synthetic biology applications and those focusing on attitudes about
bioengineering in science education. This workshop will bridge the divides and
promote discussions among these groups in order to determine how biology,
design, and computational design can intersect in synthetic biology. The
workshop is intended to promote a greater understanding of opportunities and
challenges associated with computational thinking, synthetic biology and
biodesign that will prepare student audiences for a world in which biology-based
design solutions to problems in health, energy, and the environment will be a
part of their 21st-century STEM education. Among the issues to be discussed are
the following: 1. Learning: What do we need to know about student prior
understanding about biology and computational thinking at different age levels?
What are promising instructional approaches? What tools could be used for
assessment? How much do students need to know about biology and computational
thinking before engaging with synthetic biology? 2. Teaching: What are
appropriate activities that are accessible and feasible for K-16 students? What
is the best way to engage teachers to broaden their participation in
implementing synthetic biology education? What prior knowledge is needed for
teachers to feel ready to teach synthetic biology? How can teachers connect with
one another to share best practices? What are the main differences between a
computational and synthetic approach to biology and traditional life sciences
education? 3. Tools: What kind of laboratory, synthesis, analysis and simulation
frameworks do we need to design to support synthetic biology activities? How
much training or exposure to the tools is required for a teacher to feel
empowered to use them in the classroom? How easy are the tools to access and
use? What can be learned from the design of interfaces and coding environments
to support computational thinking in synthetic biology? How can we lower tool
costs so that more students can engage with synthetic biology? 4. Spaces: Where
are the types of environments that can host learning opportunities for
biodesign, whether classrooms, community labs or competitions? How can we create
better connections between these learning spaces? What new spaces can be
cultivated for synthetic biology activities that are not being considered now?
5. Ethics: What are the pressing critical issues in biodesign? How do these
issues affect society, specific populations, and the environment? What are the
best ways to engage students in these discussions? How can discourse around
these topics be sustained? 6. Safety and Security: What are main safety and
security concerns in biodesign, and what concerns can we expect to emerge over
time? How best to engage students in discussions? What best practices need to be
followed in the classroom to keep students and teachers safe? Are students
empowered to be safety advocates after completing the activities? What kind of
considerations are necessary when computational designs (i.e., DNA constructs,
genetic circuits) move from software to wetware and realized with lab
activities?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.