* 1840419
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Additive Food Manufacturing Technologies (CAFMT).
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Jeyamkondan Subbiah, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. The proposed Center for
Additive Food Manufacturing Technologies (CAFMT) is a comprehensive, pre-
competitive, public-private partnership that will create fundamental
technologies for the 21st-century food manufacturing industry. New technologies
will enable America's food manufacturing industry to transition from its
outdated centralized food manufacturing model to a more futuristic
decentralized, localized manufacturing network (DLFM) model. DLFM is an emerging
food manufacturing network model favored by emerging consumers as it is based on
localized food manufacturing with very short distribution chains taking
advantage of local sourcing and providing highly desirable fresh foods.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed ERC will create the new food manufacturing
model through the convergence of the advantages of additive manufacturing (3D
"printing") of foodstuff with natural structures and texture, automation and
robotics, micro/nanotechnologies, (bio)sensing, biomaterials, data integration
platforms and internet based processes. New breakthroughs established under
CAFMT will utilize raw materials more efficiently, reduce food waste by
shortening the long distribution chains and provide nutritious food all
consumers, even those in current urban food deserts. Ultimately, the CAFMT
approach will advance American manufacturing competitiveness, reduce water and
energy demands, and feed a growing global population using local food materials.
The broader impact of the ERC will be increasing science literacy and engagement
among the consuming public with the planning process used to identify
education/intervention activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.