* 1840284
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Advanced Films and Smart Packaging Systems Project Summary
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Gary Wnek, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 02/29/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.

Global plastics demand is expected to reach 335 million tons by 2020. A
significant fraction of plastics--about 42% of non-fiber materials--are used in
packaging applications with many of these in the form of films, and demand is
likely to increase further. While the global packaging industry is projected to
have an economic impact of at least $1 Trillion by 2020, we are witnessing
tensions in the packaging area. These challenges set the stage for creating a
most appropriate and timely Engineering Research Center theme: the increasing
materials performance expectations such as anti-counterfeiting detection and
light-weighting on the one hand, and a global plastic waste crisis for which
packaging materials are the major contributor on the other. Hence there is an
immediate and urgent need for new approaches that melds deep fundamental
knowledge of polymeric materials with an innovation mindset. This innovation
mindset will have an appreciation of multiple technical and societal, and
environmental considerations that will drive new developments in packaging
design and utilization. This is the bold vision of a proposed ERC, and the focus
of the planning grant.

Four research focus areas have been identified with the benefit of four industry
forums (nineteen companies represented) held at CWRU between April 2017 and May
2018. Sector-specific (e.g., food and beverage, pharma) themes were considered
but discarded in favor of broad thrusts that transcend multiple sector needs.
The research focus areas are 1) Security and Safety, 2) Surfaces and Interfaces,
3) Selective Transport/Barrier Properties, and 4) Sustainability. Each is rich
with the opportunity for fundamental understanding coupled with the potential
for significant positive societal impact. Examples include (1) the prevention of
microbial contamination of foods and the authentication of pharmaceutical
compounds that travel a complex supply chain are two pressing issues in need of
creative solutions; (2) tactile sensing and the connection between measurable
surface properties (roughness, tack, stiction) and human emotive responses; (3)
novel processing approaches coupled with judicious choice of materials and
significantly reduce diffusivity of water and oxygen for improved barrier
properties of packaging films; and (4) sustainable materials such as bioplastics
with attention to high value add that can strongly drive adoption. The planning
grant will significantly accelerate the pace and impact of the research
activities through interactions with multiple industry partners and with several
university partners. The Ohio State University, Michigan State University, The
Cleveland Institute of Art bring strengths in packaging design and food
innovation to compliment and leverage the deep polymer expertise at Case Western
Research University. Importantly, the multi-institutional team will collectively
educate the next generation of researchers who will be deployed to address the
many exciting challenges and opportunities in the packaging area over the coming
decades.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.