* 1840489
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for translating and evolving nanoscale assembly for society (TENAS)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Sanat Kumar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 12/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.

This project will explore approaches for the organization of a large engineering
center focused on next-generation energy storage and harvesting, advanced
structural materials, and improved water filtration membranes. The work is
organized around two workshops, the first of which will invite stakeholders from
industry, nonprofit organizations and charities, and venture capital firms to
establish a value-proposition for the potential Center. This will help establish
skills and knowledge that are needed to maximize the efficiency of the Center.
Potential team members will then be identified with a focus on individuals with
established records in needed areas. A special emphasis will be assigned to
individuals whose expertise include multiple areas as potential "bridge-
builders" to create an interconnected expertise network. A second workshop will
then focus on team-building exercises that promote education of team
capabilities, align goals and expectations, and identify any remaining skill or
knowledge gaps. Assessment efforts will focus on addressing the hypothesis that
a value-centered strategy and team analytic approaches will promote alignment of
team and individual goals and expectations.

Recent breakthroughs in the self-assembly of polymers and composites provide an
opportunity to address many of today's grand challenges. Self-assembled
materials may lead to next-generation devices for energy storage and harvesting,
structural materials with multifunctionality and enhanced mechanical properties,
and improved water filtration membranes. A new approach to simultaneously sinter
ceramics and organics near 100 C termed cold sintering provides opportunities
for new compositions and control of microstructure not previously possible.
Translating these scientific advances to products that impact society will
require a deep integration of expertise from different disciplines. As such,
developing a "convergent" approach for an Engineering Research Center is crucial
to accelerate the implementation of scientific discoveries for the benefit of
society. By documenting and assessing efforts, the community will be informed of
best practices and project outcomes, and thereby this project will help address
the need for research on teams that make up large engineering centers.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.