* 1840478
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Naturally Inspired Resilient, Sustainable and Adaptable Infrastructure
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Andrea Surovek, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 300 Billion dollars in damages were incurred
in 2017 due to extreme weather in the U.S., a new record in terms of both direct
and indirect losses. In addition to losses from weather-related events, extreme
geologic and human-caused disasters can cause staggering financial burdens to
the economy. The need for understanding what makes communities resilient whereby
they can adapt and recover quickly from these events is fundamental to the
survival of the nation. We propose that a key to understanding how to
effectively and efficiently recovery from these extreme events is to examine
natural systems that inherently resist, adapt, and evolve to ever-evolving
stressors. Ecological resilience examines the ability of a natural system to
respond to disturbances and measures the system's ability to return to a
functioning state. While humans seek resiliency and sustainability through
simplification and order, the diversity and complexity of natural systems is
what makes them resilient &amp; sustainable. Therefore, understanding the
attributes that make a system resilient requires an understanding of both the
individual components of the system and the interdependencies of these
components. The uniqueness of this potential Engineering Research Center (ERC)
is our hypothesis in that it is not the study of individual organisms that is
the key to resilience, but the study of the systems that these organisms inhabit
and enable. Nature has provided an avenue for developing analysis methods,
models and systems that provide resilience to extreme events and conditions. The
mission of this planning grant is to develop the team and structure of
transdisciplinary research that examines the attributes of resilient natural
systems, create collaborations between innovative researchers, and construct an
infrastructure that allows for collaborative research leading to economic
development through tech transfer. A successful grant would provide research
leading to substantially improved national defense facilities and networks, the
next generation of resilient and efficient infrastructure, and adaptable
community planning. The knowledge gained would inform community leaders,
planners, engineers and the public on mitigating the impact of and recovering
from extreme events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of knowledge,
disciplines and methods that span science and engineering required to provide
comprehensive approaches to infrastructure and community resilience is found in
natural systems. By considering multi-scale research from the organism to system
levels, we anticipate dramatic increases to the state of the art in a)
adaptable, sustainable and efficient materials and forms for use in
infrastructure, b) leveraging the interdependencies in systems to improve human
community resilience, c) developing algorithms for optimization, integration and
adaptability of built infrastructure based on natural processes, and d) improved
pedagogical approaches for development of innovative designers and community
leaders. This planning grant will take a novel approach to developing
transdisciplinary research teams that embrace both creativity and diversity, and
that provide mechanisms for inclusion across institutional classifications. The
model for the center will itself model natural systems by recognizing that
interdependencies between researchers are as important as the expertise of the
individual researchers. The research team recognizes that not all ERC planning
grants will lead to successfully funded ERCs. However, the planning process will
still provide significant broader impacts including development of 1) Multi-
scale, transdisciplinary teams to appropriately tackle biomimicry for resilient
and sustainable structures 2) Industrial partnerships for tech transfer,
innovation and economic development in the area of biomimicry 3) Organizational
structures that promote shared resources, engaged teaming and broad diversity,
4) An identified network of researchers capable of creative synthesis across
disciplinary boundaries and 5) Recognition of diverse teaming beyond the limits
of "visually identifiable" demographic diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.