* 1840197
* CICI: SSC: Horizon: Secure Large-Scale Scientific Cloud Computing
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Gene Tsudik, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,031,925.00

Over the last decade, public and private clouds emerged as de facto platforms
for computationally intensive scientific tasks. Today, huge volumes of many
types of scientific data are routinely uploaded to the cloud. A large fraction
of this data is privacy and/or security sensitive. Unfortunately, despite
numerous advances in network and enterprise security, modern clouds remain
inherently insecure. Recent experience shows that well-funded, targeted attacks
manage to breach network perimeters of both public and private clouds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Horizon is a novel cloud architecture aimed at providing
data and computation security within a scientific cloud. Horizon builds upon
three premises: (1) strong isolation on end-hosts, (2) fine-grained isolation in
the cloud network, and (3) cloud-wide information flow control. To protect the
end-hosts, Horizon develops a new layered hypervisor, and disaggregated
virtualization stack with key features of: language safety, software fault
isolation, and integrated software verification. To provide secure cloud network
environment, Horizon relies on a new network architecture and implements a
distributed network firewall, where all network communication and exchange of
rights are mediated and controlled by the rules of the object capability system.
To protect the cloud data, Horizon develops a set of abstractions and mechanisms
to enforce cloud-wide information flow control. In Horizon all data is labeled.
The hypervisor mediates all communication of each virtual machine and enforces
propagation of labels and security checks for each cloud
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Horizon aims to provide a practical foundation
for developing secure cloud infrastructure suitable for large-scale research
workflows that require both speed and security. Horizon will be developed using
entirely open-source components, and will be openly available to a broad
community of scientists in academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.