* 1840724
* Novel Pathways to CS Research Careers: Broadening Target Populations and Scaling Outreach Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Erik Russell, Computing Research Association
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,986,702.00

The Computing Research Association (CRA, on behalf of its Subcommittee on the
Status of Women in Computing Research (CRA-W), proposes a project to increase
and sustain participation in computer science (CS) research by encouraging
members of the underrepresented groups in computing (URGs) to earn advanced
degrees in computing and engineering in order to pursue research careers in
academia, industry or national laboratories. The project builds on CRA-W's
previous successes by reshaping and expanding existing programs, both those done
on its own and those done in partnerships with others. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work will expand CRA-W's work in three ways:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Broader Diversity and Improved Scaffolding for Intersectionality. Many CRA-W
programs have already broadened beyond their original focus on women to include
minorities and persons with disabilities. With this proposal, CRA-W commits to
broadening its program portfolio further to partner with orgranizations focused
on support for underpresented minorities and persons with disabilities, and to
include other diversity demographics such as veterans and LGBTQ people. To
support these more diverse constituencies, CRA-W will adapt its mentoring
programs to directly address intersectionality concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2.
Support for Multiple and Unique Pathways into a Research Career. In recent
years, the notion of career pathway has become insufficient for describing the
many rich and unique pathways by which computing professionals navigate their
careers. With this effort, CRA-W plans to adapt its mentoring programs to
support entry and re-entry to CS from other disciplines and to support moves
between industry development or start-ups and graduate school or
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3. Implementation at Scale. A fundamental
challenge in improving diversity lies in finding enough human and technical
infrastructure to support the efforts at scale, in terms of both program
operation and in terms rigorous program evaluation. CRA-W will work to bring its
expertise in mentoring to scale, identifying features that are critical to
success so that its most successful programs can be adopted throughout the
computing research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.