* 1840213
* I-Corps: Composite Materials Enabling Batteries with High Energy Density
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Lorenzo Mangolini, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is in the
identification of the most effective strategy for the deployment of novel and
improved materials for lithium-ion batteries. Our society is already
experiencing the pressing need for better electrochemical energy storage
technologies. These would be beneficial not only for consumer electronics
devices and electric vehicles, but would also aid the transition towards
renewable energy sources, bringing enormous benefits in terms of public health
and reduced environmental hazards. The successful commercialization of more
energy dense lithium-ion batteries represents a crucial and fundamental
requirement for this vision to be realized. Unfortunately the graphite-based
battery anode, while being the most widely utilized technology, is already
approaching its theoretical limit. The technology at the center of this proposal
overcomes the limitations of graphite while enabling a straightforward
integration in the current battery production scheme. Participation in the
I-Corps program will allow establishing the most effective pathway towards the
commercialization of this new technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on a novel material that increase the storage capacity of
commercial lithium-ion batteries by roughly 30%. The compound, a silicon-
graphite composite powder, displays a storage capacity six times higher (1800 mA
g-1) than graphite (365 mA g-1), the current anode material of choice in
commercial lithium ion batteries, and is produced with an innovative proprietary
fabrication method suitable for large-scale production. The composite can be
used as an additive to commercial lithium-ion batteries to partially or
completely substitute graphite and boost the battery performance in terms of
both gravimetric and volumetric energy density. Notably, the compound it is
fully compatible with the current lithium-ion battery industrial production
processes, allowing for a cost-effective introduction into the manufacturing
process without additional capital investments. To enable the breakthrough of
this concept into the market, the current efforts are focused on the customer
discovery process through the I-Corps program with the goal of identifying an
ideal first customer segment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.