* 1840824
* Graduate Student Travel Support for APSIPA ASC 2018. To Be Held in Honolulu,  Hawaii Convention Center, November 12-15, 2018.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Yih-Fang Huang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

The Asia Pacific Signal and Information Processing Association (APSIPA) was
founded in 2009 to promote research and education in all aspects of signal
processing, information technology, and communications. It is a forum for
researchers and practitioners to exchange their ideas and collaborate on
technical issues relevant to theoretical foundations and advances, algorithms,
implementations, and applications in the general areas of signal and information
processing. Over the past ten years, its annual summit and conference (APSIPA-
ASC) has been a fertile ground to foster collaborations. The 10th APSIPA-ASC
will be held at the Hawaii Convention Center in Honolulu, Hawaii, November
12-15, 2018. About 450 to 500 attendees are expected to attend this conference.
To support the training of the next-generation scientists and engineers working
on signal and information processing, this NSF grant will provide travel support
for 20 graduate students to present their research papers at the conference and
learn the cutting-edge research and development in signal and information
processing. The travel grants will be awarded competitively to graduate students
from US universities who will be presenting their accepted papers at the
conference. The awardees will be selected by a committee of the conference and
the paper quality will be considered in the selection process. The proposed
travel support will have long-term and broad impacts on the participating
students' career developments and the advancements in the field of signal and
information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.