* 1840956
* EAGER Electrically Driving the Microbial Conversion of Nitrogen Gas into Ammonia
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Michael Hyman, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2020
* USD 133,481.00

Ammonia is a critical resource for farming and industrial activities. The
majority of ammonia is generated through an industrial process called the Haber-
Bosch process. This paradigm changing method was a significant factor driving
the agricultural green revolution and helped ammonia become one of the most
produced chemicals in the world. This success has come at a high cost in terms
of dollars and environmental impact. Requiring extremely high temperature and
pressure conditions to produce the ammonia, the process consumes 1-2% of global
energy and generates 2.5% of all carbon dioxide emissions annually. There is,
therefore, a critical need to find sustainable and low-cost alternatives to the
Haber-Bosch process. Naturally occurring microorganisms can convert atmospheric
nitrogen gas into ammonia and can do so at ambient temperature and pressure.
Challenges preventing industrial-scale microbial ammonia production include the
sensitivity of the nitrogen-converting enzyme to oxygen, the inability to drive
high ammonia production rates, and ammonia recovery from the microorganisms.
Accordingly, this project will combine the fields of electrochemistry and
microbiology to characterize and optimize an electrically-driven ammonia
production biotechnology. The research team will use model electricity-
generating bacteria to understand the response of their nitrogen conversion
pathways to an electrical driving force and then use that information to
engineer highly efficient ammonia-generating bacteria. The results will expand
our knowledge of microbial nitrogen conversion processes and lead to the
foundation of an ammonia production technology that can be scaled in size for
small farms to large, industrial-scale processes. The team will also engage
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students in the research by
leveraging the established Research Internship Summer Experience (RISE) program
at their institution. These students will have a unique opportunity to conduct
research spanning electrochemistry, microbiology, and engineering.

Several emerging ammonia production technologies utilize electrochemical and
microbial methods separately. They have had limited success and face inherent
scalability challenges. These limitations may be overcome by combining
electrochemical and biological processes, rather than treating them separately.
Research in electromicrobiology has demonstrated that microbial metabolisms can
be electrically driven with inputs of less than one volt of electricity. Several
electricity-generating bacteria, known as exoelectrogens, are also vigorous
nitrogen-fixing microorganisms. By exploiting and optimizing their unique
physiology, microbial electrochemical technologies (METs) may be developed to
electrically drive nitrogen fixation into ammonia. The overall objective of this
project is to identify nitrogen fixation regulatory changes in response to
electrical driving forces and to use that information to optimize ammonia-
generating strains. This work has three main tasks: (1) determine the impact of
MET operational variables on the completeness and rates of nitrogen fixation;
(2) identify regulatory changes in nitrogen fixation and ammonia generation
pathways during MET operation using whole transcriptome RNA sequencing; and (3)
engineer new exoelectrogenic strains that excrete ammonia using Clustered
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) genome editing tools.
It is expected that this work will yield new insight into nitrogen fixation
pathways that will be relevant to an array of biotechnological platforms.
Modulating CRISPR in exoelectrogenic microorganisms will also provide a new tool
for applications ranging from wastewater treatment to bioelectrosynthetic
chemical production.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.