* 1840446
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Augmentation Systems and Intelligent Support Technologies for Aging (ASISTa-ERC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Elizabeth Mynatt, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this planning grant is to further develop the goals and
organization of the proposed ASISTa-ERC. The ASISTa-ERC will explore the use of
technology to enhance the lives of the growing population of older adults and
their caregivers. To do so, it will leverage advances in artificial
intelligence, robotics, human-computer interaction, and mobile sensing and
computing to create intelligent environments that augment cognitive ability,
support physical activities, and amplify social and emotional support for aging
individuals, their support network, and their caregivers. These environments
will be designed to track individuals over time and adapt to changes in their
daily life and their evolving healthcare needs. By enhancing and supporting the
growing population of older adults and their caregivers, the work of the ASISTa-
ERC will create significant economic and social benefits for older adults and
their families. It will also create a new platform to support a rapidly growing
workforce devoted to care for aging adults, and a unified framework for new
commercial innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning activities will refine
the research, workforce development, culture of inclusion, and innovation
programs of the ASISTa-ERC through a series of three meetings. These meetings
will explore three cross-cutting themes: physical support, cognitive support,
and social support. They will develop a strategy for creating systems addressing
these opportunities that have three key properties: intelligence, interactivity,
and individualization (I3). Intelligent systems employ models that can classify
and anticipate patterns of activity, and respond to those patterns in ways that
most enhance the quality of life of the individual. Interactive systems exploit
advanced sensing and human-computer interaction to observe, engage and respond
in an appropriate manner. Individualized systems adapt the blend of cognitive,
social, and physical support to each unique life situation, and evolve that
blend of support as the individual ages and life circumstances change. All
development efforts will be user-centered and user-informed to increase
acceptance and adoption by the target populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.