* 1840860
* CIF: EAGER: Statistical Inference and Decision-Making With Sequential Samples
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Gauri Joshi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 100,527.00

The modern world is rich with diverse sources of data that provide invaluable
insights into underlying random phenomena. The data, however, generally provide
only indirect or imprecise information about the latent phenomena due to
measurement limitations or privacy protections. This project develops efficient
algorithms to use sequential samples to infer a hidden random phenomenon and use
this knowledge to make decisions. Outcomes of the project will improve the
efficiency and accuracy of data-driven decision-making and inference in a wide
range of applications such as marketing and recommendation systems, cloud
computing, manufacturing, and health care. The investigators will publish the
research outcomes to broad academic and professional audiences and incorporate
them into teaching curricula via graduate and undergraduate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The framework studied in this project consists of
a hidden random variable (or, a random vector) that can be indirectly sampled by
choosing one of several measurement mechanisms (referred to as arms). Upon
choosing one of the arms, an arbitrary function of a realization of the hidden
random variable is observed, instead of a direct sample. Within this framework,
the investigators pursue problems including i) maximizing the reward obtained by
sampling different arms in a correlated multi-armed bandit setting; and ii)
estimating the probability distribution of the hidden random variable using
minimum number of samples. These research thrusts will be studied with three
main goals: 1) understanding the fundamental limits of the problem via bounds on
the cumulative regret, and the error in the estimated distribution; 2) designing
efficient sampling algorithms that meet the fundamental limits; and 3)
validating the proposed algorithms on real-world datasets. The project deviates
from the classic multi-armed bandit framework due to the correlation between
arms and from the classic statistical inference due to the sequential and multi-
fidelity nature of the data generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.