* 1840332
* I-Corps: Novel Biodegradable Metals and Biomimetic Interfaces with Enhanced Strength and Bioactivity
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Huinan Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 12/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project on healthcare,
quality of life, and the medical device industry is tremendous. The novel
technology and advancement of biodegradable metals and biomimetic interfaces
will lead to next-generation medical devices and implants that promote tissue
healing and eliminate secondary surgeries for implant removal. This will improve
quality of life for patients who need medical implants to support bones and
tissue damaged by disease or trauma, and reduce overall healthcare costs. The
project will build the foundation for commercializing biodegradable metallic
implants and devices, which, in turn, will increase the competitiveness of U.S.
companies in the medical device industry. The products resulting from this
project will reduce pain and complications, eliminate secondary surgeries, and
accelerate healing and recovery for patients who need medical implants due to
trauma or disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will advance
technology that eliminates the drawbacks of the non-degradable medical alloys on
the market today. Magnesium (Mg) based alloys are a novel class of biodegradable
metallic materials that have attractive mechanical and biological properties for
a wide range of medical implant applications, such as orthopedic, spinal,
dental, and craniofacial implants. The key challenge in commercializing Mg-based
alloys for medical implant applications lies in controlling the degradation
rate. NSF support has contributed to a novel class of biocompatible Mg alloys
along with biomimetic surface treatment to provide tunable degradation rates,
desirable bioactivity, and excellent mechanical strength for supporting faster
healing and regeneration of damaged tissues. This novel solution contains non-
toxic natural elements that induce healing and reduce inflammation, departed
from traditional alloy design. The I-Corps project will transform this
technology to commercially viable products that will benefit the customers in
need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.