* 1840243
* RoL: FELS: RAISE:  Collaborative Research:  Watershed Rules of Life
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Peter Raymond, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,031,144.00

Rivers are the circulatory systems of the continents, delivering land-derived
water, pollutants and elements to the ocean. They are also sites with unique
organisms, food webs, and microbial communities that can transform these
materials during transport to the ocean. Microbes are the engines for these
transformations, with considerable capacity to remove or alter important
elements (e.g., carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, mercury, arsenic), produce
greenhouse gasses, and support food webs. However, due to large changes in water
flow from day to day, and the big differences in the types of streams and rivers
across the landscape, understanding how riverine microbes impact the chemistry
of rivers is difficult. This project will research a set of "Watershed Rules of
Life" that govern the establishment of riverine water column microbial
communities that are critical to understanding rivers as circulatory systems.
The researchers have proposed a set of hypotheses that adds microbial ecology
into the scaffolding of hydrology and geomorphology in order to research these
Watershed Rules of Life. The hypothesis will be tested by field work and
modeling in a diverse set of watersheds throughout the United States. The
knowledge gained by these studies will allow for a broader understanding of
rivers in both the U.S. and other temperate regions of the world. The
investigators will interact with the Yale New Haven Promise Internship program,
which provides internships for students from New Haven interested in STEM.
Professor Raymond will also interact with students at the Crested Butte
Community School. This project will train graduate and undergraduate students at
UMass, OSU and Yale. Findings will be incorporated into courses taught by the
investigators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The researchers will target the emergent
property of microbial functional trait distributions across the physical
templates of watersheds and in response to hydrologic variability. The project
will sample the Connecticut, Deschutes, Gunnison and Willamette watersheds,
which are similar in size but differ in climate and geomorphology. Within each
watershed, sampling will focus on streams of different sizes, the impact of
reservoirs and hydrologic variability. The proposed research will develop
mathematical expressions that relate multiple indices for the development and
activity of planktonic microbial communities to stream order, stream hydraulics
(e.g., velocity and depth), flow variability, and temperature. These indices
will be based on metagenomics for genomic diversity, metatranscriptomics for
gene expression, and microbial 16S rRNA gene amplicon sequencing for
phylogenetic diversity in riverine samples. Microbial indices will be compared
to modeled estimates of the time scale for water column microbial community
development (i.e., residence time) and microbial transformation rates (e.g.,
denitrification). It is hypothesized that geomorphology (e.g., depth, velocity),
discharge variability, and temperature are the main determinants of when and
where distinct planktonic microbial riverine communities emerge in the water
column of river networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.