* 1840138
* NTU Center for Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Harold Halliday, Navajo Technical University
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 09/30/2023
* USD 4,199,999.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
intellectual leadership of TCUP institutions so that they can address scientific
or engineering needs or interests, specifically for their tribes or communities,
or broadly for the Nation. The TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers)
strand allows TCUP institutions to capitalize on their investments in STEM
instruction and research. This project aligns directly with that goal, and
moreover will impact the economic strength of the Navajo Nation by fostering new
STEM industrial growth and providing the high-skilled workforce required by such
industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Navajo Technical University (NTU) will
establish the Advanced Manufacturing Center (NTUAMC) with the aim to further
pursue additive manufacturing technology through education, research and
economic development on the Navajo Nation. Project objectives are to: 1. provide
a hands-on, culturally relevant learning environment that results in an educated
and highly skilled workforce to support the advanced manufacturing industry; 2.
conduct and support leading-edge advanced manufacturing research; 3. provide an
ecosystem of services to support the advanced manufacturing industry,
specifically, additive manufacturing; and 4. support the Navajo Nation's
advanced manufacturing economic development focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NTUAMC
will develop four new degree and certificate training programs in advanced
manufacturing technology, including a bachelor's degree in mechanical
engineering; an associate's degree in metal additive manufacturing technician
II; and certificates in quality control inspection and metal additive
manufacturing technician I. NTUAMC will provide the infrastructure to establish
the additive manufacturing ecosystem, specifically polymer and metal 3-D
printing, as the common educational platform for teaching students enrolled in
engineering and advanced manufacturing programs. The ecosystem education method
comprehensively trains students to enter the workforce, as will the high quality
research and internship opportunities accompanying this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.