* 1840567
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Carbon Dioxide Utilization (CarbonUSE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. This planning grant will
develop well-formulated plans for a future Engineering Research Center for
Carbon Dioxide Utilization by: (a) enabling face? to-face interactions among
diverse academic experts and industry leaders at planning workshops, (b)
building industrial alliances, and (c) achieving deeper and more closely
integrated convergence across disciplines. The in-person workshops will
establish cohesive/coordinated interactions among team members, both at a
personal and professional level, thereby enabling organic collaborations within
and across disciplinary domains to fulfill a unified vision and goals. The
provision of dedicated planning resources will create momentum within the team,
helping to create an ascending and compelling agenda. This will cohere and
motivate the team to develop grand solutions to the grand challenges of C02
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has the potential to advance
knowledge in (a) molecular-level interactions of CO2 with sorbents, membranes,
and catalysts to exploit attributes such as defects, disorder, interfaces, and
heterogeneity to control and enhance reaction rates, and (b) how cooperative
phenomena (e.g., based on structural transitions) can reduce the extrinsic
energy needs of CO2 capture and conversion processes, thereby improving process
efficiencies. These advances will allow exploitation of complex electronic and
atomic correlations to design and control materials, and the fabrication of
hierarchical structures toward a common goal: the cost-effective capture and
conversion of CO2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will allow for upcycling
(beneficial utilization) of CO2 emissions at the gigaton scale and will position
the U.S. as the world leader in this emerging domain. The institution of such
disruptive offtake pathways for CO2 is a prerequisite for empowering the
creation and success of the carbon-to-value economy and retarding the rate at
which the climate is changing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.