* 1840433
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Infrastructure Finance through Intelligent Design and Operations (InFinIDO)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Debra Reinhart, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Public infrastructure investment in the US is
woefully inadequate, not only to maintain existing demands, but more importantly
to meet the needs of an increasingly data-driven economy. The transition to a
data-driven economy depends on so-called ?smart cities? which monitor
information on city utilities and operations and can respond to changing
situations. Smart infrastructure systems are in an early development stage with
rapidly developing applications across water, energy, transportation and
buildings. Increasingly, the data analysis skills needed for engineering smart
cities, are the same skills needed for many financial models and transactions.
Evidence suggests that the very data smart cities collect can lead to new
financing models that help fund their development. The planning grant team will
bring together experts in these areas, as well as policy and law. The goal is to
integrate engineering design and financial models in a decision framework that
seeks to overcome technical and legal barriers for deployment of intelligent
infrastructures. The societal benefits of this transition include identifying
new financial instruments and resources that impacts GDP and jobs, and improves
quality of life. Collaboration with public policy experts will explore how smart
infrastructures can provide equitable access across rich and poor communities.
Engagement with law school colleagues will address privacy and security
concerns, and the impact of data monetization on the financial system. New
educational programs such as a Masters in Engineering in Smart Infrastructure
Finance will be aimed at training new engineers in the era of artificial
intelligence. Training will help engineers engage with business and key civic
stakeholders. The described interactions between these disciplines will result
in new technologies that stimulate a vibrant innovation ecosystem and facilitate
access and use of these technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning grant
team will explore how sensor-enabled (smart) data networks provide intelligence
for the design of efficient financing mechanisms to build and operationalize
smart (adaptive, resilient) infrastructure systems. The planning grant
activities, including two workshops, will allow the team to engage with
potential academic, business and government partners. Despite the excitement,
the scalability of smart city infrastructure is hampered by limited operational
benchmarking, lack of robust economic models for valuation of information, and
pricing mechanisms that may attract public or private investment. The research
tests the hypothesis that intelligent infrastructures generate data of
sufficient scope, scale, frequency and accuracy that can be aligned with, and
tested against, financial models and specifications of emerging data markets.
Through these planning workshops, the proposed Center research activities and
strategies to collaborate with industry, investors and the public will be
further defined. The objective is to understand how physical or operational
performance measurements of smart systems not only enable performance
optimization or design iterations, but bring derivative value that can be used
or traded in data exchanges. How can intelligent infrastructures be safely
designed - and the IoT data tested - against financial or auction models for
value optimization? Data-driven efficient capital such as insurance and
derivatives (futures, options), as well as variable rate performance bonds and
smart contracts, increasingly depend on real-time IoT (Internet of Things)
information. In cooperation with industry and public partners, the ERC planning
grant team will develop, test and validate engineering models, econometric and
financial theory principles using sensor and financial data models in a
simulation environmental, and well as based on deployed pilot smart
infrastructure systems. These include smart city components such as:
(storm)water utilities, intelligent transportation (roads and bridges), energy
systems, and green buildings. The proposed ERC envisions structuring three trust
areas reflecting complementary disciplines: (i) Risk quantification and dynamic
characterization of infrastructure system data; (ii) Financial risk modeling,
pricing, and information valuation in privacy- and cyber security-constrained
data markets; (iii) Decision feedback models for infrastructure design,
resilience management, and new investment paradigms. The integration of
engineering design with information valuation and pricing, and policy is an
emerging field of inquiry and practice with implications for future designs of
smart infrastructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.