* 1840970
* Observation and Modeling of Global Propagation of Pi2 Waves
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Kazue Takahashi, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 472,475.00

Storms in the space plasma environment surrounding the Earth create ultra-low
frequency (ULF) radio waves. These waves transport energy throughout the
magnetosphere into lower levels of the atmosphere. Understanding these waves is
important to national security and commercial interests, since they contribute
to space weather effects to our satellites and space-based communications.
Additionally, a physics graduate student will be trained in research techniques
engaging with researchers from multiple scientific institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigation seeks a quantitative understanding of
processes associated with global propagation of a type of ULF waves known as Pi2
waves. The waves are excited in the nightside magnetosphere at the beginning of
magnetospheric substorms and propagate to the dayside and to the ground. How the
waves maintain their energy as they propagate over long distances within the
structured magnetosphere and through the ionosphere is not well understood. They
will tackle this problem by analysis of data from spacecraft and ground and by
conducting numerical simulation incorporating realistic magnetosphere and
ionosphere. They will use data from the Radiation Belt Storm Probes and Arase
spacecraft, which have been in concurrent operation for more than 1.5 years, to
cover different magnetic local times and magnetic latitudes. In the simulation,
we will use a dipole field linear MHD code that incorporates realistic
ionospheric boundary conditions and is capable of producing ground-level wave
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.