* 1840746
* Sharing Exemplary Admissions Practices that Promote Diversity in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Elizabeth Cady, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2023
* USD 399,812.00

All students should have the opportunity to study engineering. Despite long-
standing calls to increase the numbers of women, African-Americans, American
Indians/Alaska Natives, Hispanics of any race, students from low-income
families, and other underrepresented groups in undergraduate engineering
education, most students are white or Asian men from upper middle-class
families. Some institutions have become better at predicting student success in
engineering majors based on high school performance or personal traits such as
leadership skills or creativity, enabling students who would not normally be
admitted to engineering programs to not only enroll but succeed. This project
recognizes and promotes these effective practices and develops ideas for future
research about ways to measure success in engineering education and to improve
the system so that students from all backgrounds become interested in and enroll
in engineering education. When students from varied backgrounds engage in
engineering education, all students benefit from a variety of perspectives on
design challenges, think more about others and about ethics and social justice
issues of their engineering work, and participate in teams that look like those
they will encounter in the workforce. As these students graduate and enter
society and the workforce, they will be more likely to produce innovative
solutions to global problems that improve the quality of life for all
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because the critical task of diversifying the US
engineering workforce requires action and interventions throughout the
engineering education and workforce system, especially at important transition
points such as university admissions, the National Academy of Engineering is
engaging engineering deans and faculty, admissions staff, and researchers in
relevant areas in a collaborative process that highlights and encourages the
diffusion of effective admissions practices that improve diversity in
engineering education. The project (1) provides national recognition to
institutions that are effectively diversifying engineering education using
admissions policies, (2) provides guidance to institutions that are developing
or researching admissions policies to advance diversity but have not yet met
with success, and (3) defines directions for future research on both best
practices in engineering admissions criteria, metrics, and policies and how
those practices fit into the larger system of recruiting and retaining
engineering students from all backgrounds. The project includes a workshop where
information, expertise, mentoring, and facilitated discussions and collaboration
help attendees advance their work and develop effective plans for their own
institutions. The workshop attendees form the basis for a cohort of leaders and
agents of change across the US. In addition, broad dissemination of both the
workshop session videos and the written summary of the workshop discussion
enables deans, administrators, and others who did not attend the workshop to
learn from the presentations and discussions. Ultimately, the project will
improve the way engineering schools evaluate the potential success of and accept
applicants from all backgrounds and will disseminate best practices to support
institutions as they diversify their engineering programs, which will benefit
current and future engineers as well as the broader
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.