* 1840408
* Forging the future of ecological stoichiometry: the fourth Woodstoich workshop; August, 2019, Montana
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* James Elser, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 01/31/2020
* USD 49,989.00

New scientific advances often require synthesis of information from many
perspectives. This is particularly true in the environmental sciences. New ideas
that build on what we know are needed for a deeper understanding of human impact
on ecosystems. Training young scientists to think broadly and synthetically is
important to achieve this deeper understanding. This workshop will provide an
opportunity for twenty-four young scientists to interact with each other and
their more senior colleagues. The goal is to improve and expand ideas in ecology
and evolution by building on previous work and bringing many perspectives
together to explore new frontiers. These new ideas will be shared broadly with
the science community and the public. The outcome of the workshop will be
several high impact publications presenting some of the most exciting new ideas
in ecology and evolution. It will also set a cohort of young scientists, many
from underrepresented groups, on a pathway to success in the environmental
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ecological and biological stoichiometry
theoretical frameworks apply mass balance of energy and multiple chemical
elements to fluxes at multiple scales of biological organization and integrate
them into an evolutionary framework. The vision of the proposed product-focused
event, The Woodstoich 4 Workshop, is to empower early career scientists to
invigorate ecology by improving and expanding the use of stoichiometric theory.
The proposed workshop will stimulate innovation by encouraging open dialogue and
rigorous exchange of ideas and methods amongst diverse, early career scientists
whose ways of working are not locked into place by tradition, long-standing
habits, or professional obligation. Key concepts in the product-focused workshop
framework include selection of a few, early-career post-doctoral researchers or
first-year assistant professors with an innovative stoichiometric vision that
lead working groups composed of other early career researchers to clarify that
vision in the form of a manuscript that is rapidly but rigorously peer-reviewed
for publication. Participants will apply and be selected based not only on their
disciplinary focus and accomplishments but also to incorporate diversity that is
essential to the creative effectiveness of groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.