* 1840399
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Technology-Empowered Communities of Recovery (TECOR)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Thomas Carr, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Substance Use Disorders (SUDs) have significant
negative consequences for the affected individuals, their families and
communities, as well as society due to the significant public health and
economic burden. While the opioid epidemic currently ravaging communities
throughout the US has garnered national attention, SUDs are a long-standing
challenge, involve a variety of substances, and are expected to be of societal
concern for the foreseeable future. In recent years, there has been a marked
shift towards a solution-oriented recovery paradigm for addressing SUDs that
emphasizes non-clinical alternatives to treatment, early identification of at-
risk behavior, post-treatment monitoring and relapse prevention, and sustaining
long-term recovery through strengthening community networks. In such a paradigm,
engineering approaches can address important gaps in knowledge and build
capacity for preventing relapse and maintaining recovery. In this planning
grant, George Mason University and our partners seek to conduct the planning
activities necessary to create a powerful and impactful Engineering Research
Center (ERC) focused on empowering communities of recovery around individuals
with SUDs using engineered systems to achieve measurable improvements in long-
term health and wellness. The proposed planning activities will engage students
from diverse backgrounds, such as neuroscience, psychology, nursing, computer
science, electrical engineering and bioengineering to work together using a
convergence approach to tackle a significant societal
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this ERC planning grant are
to: (1) strengthen relationships between academic partners and SUDs stakeholder
communities, (2) form a diverse, multidisciplinary ERC team, a high-performing
executive leadership team, and a robust, community-engaged governance structure
to guide implementation of the ERC programmatic activities across all four
foundational elements (Research, Workforce Development, Culture of Inclusion,
Innovation Ecosystem) and (3) develop a comprehensive strategic framework,
building around a collective vision for supporting technology-empowered
communities of recovery. The planning grant team will formulate a number of
hypotheses about current barriers and gaps in research knowledge, and
engineering approaches that can be used to address these gaps. We will then
iteratively update these hypotheses and solutions based on analysis of collected
evidence from stakeholders and develop a framing paper. We will organize a
strategic planning retreat with key stakeholders to develop a research agenda.
Based on the identified research agenda, we will identify an appropriate ERC
leadership team and organize a national symposium to refine the motivating
vision and critical needs. The anticipated benefits of the planning grant will
include a coordination of efforts across different communities, identification
of stakeholder needs and priorities with long-, mid- and near-term impact,
documentation of best practices and development of a convergent multi-system
framework for addressing the underlying challenges using an engineered system
approach at multiple scales, from individuals, family and caregivers, and
community support networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.