* 1840219
* Geometric Control for Dynamic Aerial Manipulation and Transportation
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Koushil Sreenath, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 109,356.00

There is a need for safe and reliable aerial load transport through complex
environments. In developing countries road networks may not exist or may be
inaccessible for significant parts of the year due to seasonal rain, flood, or
snow. In dense urban areas, energy and time costs of transportation are rapidly
increasing due to road congestion. Autonomous aerial vehicles have emerged as a
fast, economical alternative to delivery using traditional ground-based
infrastructure. This project will show how the cargo-carrying limitations of
single aerial vehicles may be overcome using multiple vehicles to cooperatively
transport cable-supported loads. Current control approaches impede progress in
this domain by ignoring the tight dynamical coupling between multiple aerial
robots and the shared cable-suspended load, the dynamics on manifolds, the
unilateral cable tension constraints, the collision constraints, the multiple
hybrid dynamical modes, and the physical system limits. This project will
address these issues, and furthermore show how operational flexibility
associated with redundant vehicles and the hybrid nature of cable support may be
exploited to achieve greater maneuverability of the load-carrying
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this work is to
understand the science at the intersection of geometric control and convex
optimization for achieving cooperative highly-dynamic aerial manipulation that
explicitly addresses the hybrid dynamics of the system while providing formal
guarantees of stability and safety. The transformative nature of this research
stems from its ability to generate theoretical advances in feedback control on
multiple levels, while also being firmly grounded in being demonstrated on a
physical system with stringent performance requirements and safety constraints.
This work is therefore guided by the following goals (1) Formulate constrained
geometric control for systems evolving on manifolds to enforce input and state
constraints; (2) Develop safety-critical geometric control for systems evolving
on manifolds to enforce formal collision-free dynamic motion; and (3)
Demonstrate highly dynamic multi-agent cooperative aerial manipulation and
transportation that switches between multiple hybrid dynamical modes. As a
result of these research goals, this work has the potential to enable the next
generation of aerial load transportation using teams of small unmanned aerial
robots.