* 1840763
* EAGER: Globally-Analog Locally-Digital Computing for Accelerating Scientific Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Mingoo Seok, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 359,999.00

As Moore's law relationship between computing cost versus performance gradually
plateaus, and the need for large scale computing is increases, novel computing
paradigms need to be urgently explored. In this larger scenario, this project
attempts to address the specific problem of scaling up high performance
scientific computing applications via a novel paradigm that is based on silicon
CMOS technologies. The results from this high-risk endeavor will be used in the
classroom at an advanced graduate and undergraduate levels, with the experience
gained from the project enabling these students to become the new workforce of
future computing technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional digital
computing for solving large scientific problems runs into problems of energy
efficiency and computing delays. Analog computing has the potential to solve
these problems, but has other potential drawbacks namely that of scalability to
large problems, noise susceptibility etc. This project will combine the benefits
of analog and the digital world by designing a mixed analog-digital hardware.
Solution of nonlinear stiff systems of differential equations arising in high
performance scientific computing problems will be attempted as a first target
application. The goal is to utilize analog processing to quickly get to an
approximate solution first, and subsequently refine the solution by a small
number of iterations via clock-less digital hardware. In this way, while the
scalability issue is addressed and at the same time convergence of the digital
iterations to an optimal solution is to be achieved faster and at the expense of
lower energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.