* 1840025
* FW-HTF: Collaborative Research: An Embodied Intelligent Cognitive Assistant to Enhance Cognitive Performance of Shift Workers
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Tanzeem Choudhury, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2021
* USD 589,885.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a closed-
loop embodied Intelligent Cognitive Assistant (e-ICA) to infer circadian rhythm,
alertness, and stress levels and to provide personalized feedback to enhance
users' cognitive ability and wellbeing in an unobtrusive and effortless manner.
Approximately 20% of the labor force engages in shift work, which often leads to
inadequate and poor sleep. Being out of synch with one's natural body clock, or
circadian rhythm, can lead to many complications over time, including a higher
likelihood for cardiovascular disease, cancer, obesity, and mental health
problems. In addition, there can be serious deficits in cognitive performance,
with productivity loss and more accidents in the workplace. This research
program will design and develop a novel sensor-based e-ICA that can monitor
shift workers' circadian rhythms, sleep patterns, and stress levels. The
platform will be flexible so that it can be used to study broad populations in
addition to shift workers. Given that 70 percent of the population suffers from
circadian rhythm disruption, this technology has the potential to impact a wide
range of workers and firms. In addition, the anonymized data and information
about developed hardware and software will be shared in the community. The
technology will impact the needs of a broad cross-section of stakeholders, but
will be tested initially with medical residents and other health practitioners
who typically work long shift that change every few weeks. Moreover, this
project will also allow interdisciplinary cross fertilization between science,
engineering, psychology, sleep and circadian biology, and
psychiatry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators explore ways to provide
biologically and physiologically attuned support in the areas of cognitive
ability, performance, sleep, and well-being based on the inferred individual
circadian rhythm and personalized embodied assistance by: a) passively and
continuously gathering behavioral and physiological streams through wearable,
mobile and remote devices from workers in an effortless manner; b) continuously
inferring each person's individual circadian rhythm, alertness, and stress in
daily life settings; and c) providing personalized multi-sensory feedback or
actionable behavioral suggestions to modulate circadian rhythm, alertness and
stress levels with the aim of enhancing cognitive ability, performance and
wellbeing. The investigators will test the efficacy, usability and acceptability
of the system both in a series of laboratory studies and in an in-situ work
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.