* 1840069
* CICI: RDP: SAMPRA: Scalable Analysis, Management, and Protection of Research Artifacts
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Patrick Bridges, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 598,594.00

Current computing systems that support research on sensitive data, such as
personally identifiable information, are frequently single-purpose and rely on
ad-hoc approaches to data protection and management. This project develops
system called SAMPRA: Scalable Analysis, Management, and Protection of Research
Artifacts. SAMPRA's goal is to provide a compliant research computing platform
that supports diverse, inter-disciplinary, collaborative research on protected
data. SAMPRA leverages modern virtualization technology to enable the
decentralized management of protected computing enclaves that can be customized
to the needs of each specific research project. In addition, the project trains
researchers and students on best practices for managing and analyzing protected
data, and technical staff on how to customize environments to the needs of
individual research groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SAMPRA investigates multiple
techniques to meet these goals, with the overall technical goal of understanding
the technical and administrative tradeoffs between isolating and sharing
protected research infrastructure services. First, SAMPRA systematically
virtualizes hardware, software, and network resources to provide a flexible
system architecture that supports research computing with varying analysis,
management, and protection needs. SAMPRA also provides virtual data transfer
nodes to interface protected environments with external data acquisition
systems, with the goal of supporting modern data-intensive research projects
using central institutional resources. The project develops exemplar computing,
data analysis, and data management virtual environments, and integrating these
with institutional systems for managing protected data. These exemplar systems
are also the examples used in workshops that train researchers on the use of
SAMPRA to support research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.