* 1840389
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Photonic Quantum Networks (PQN)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Saikat Guha, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. This award funds an
effort by the University of Arizona and its partner institutions Stanford
University, Harvard University, the University of Massachusetts Amherst, and
Northwestern University for a technical planning and convergent team exercise
that will engage stakeholders in academia, industry, and government
laboratories. The objective is to put elements in place that will support the
development of the first scalable photonic quantum network for secure
communications, quantum advanced sensing, and information processing, that paves
the way to the first quantum internet. The planning process will develop a plan
for an integrated research and education plan for students from k-12 through the
graduate level, with a focus on the inclusion of diverse perspectives throughout
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning grant will support a project that
will advance knowledge by developing transformational technologies for quantum
networks. A versatile quantum repeater node will support virtually any
application that requires quantum communication or entanglement as a resource,
to be seamlessly integrated with a core photonic network. Three research thrusts
will be considered: Quantum Network Architectures, Systems, and Networks,
Quantum Nanophotonic Subsystem Integration, and Quantum Materials, Subsystems,
and Devices. The planning exercise will provide early feedback to prioritize key
device metrics for system-level goals and chart out the applications-driven
design of a network. A plan to train students for industrial success,
international skills, and systems-wide experience in quantum information science
and engineering will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.