* 1840619
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Accelerated Catalytic Design and Characterization (ACDC)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Teri Odom, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 04/30/2021
* USD 97,964.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. This planning grant will
develop well-formulated plans for a future Engineering Research Center at the
International Institute for Nanotechnology at Northwestern University that
brings together a transdisciplinary team of researchers, educators, and
stakeholders focused on the invention and development of new methodologies to
dramatically accelerate materials discovery and design. Utilizing combinatorial
nanoscience implemented in mega-libraries (libraries with billions of
systematically varied particle compositions and sizes) for the rapid discovery
and development of materials, critical for hydrogen production and utilization
to create a cleaner, cheaper energy; nitrogen fixation to enhance food
production; and water purification to yield access to clean water at lower cost
and greater scale. The methodologies developed are likely to have applicability
far beyond the catalytic solutions to societal needs recognized
here.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planning activities will help develop a highly
integrated convergent team within a framework of diversity and inclusion. The
research mission will be sharpened into a crisp, singular vision for a
successful ERC that has the potential to address significant societal needs.
World leaders in the three key topical areas, water, food and energy, have been
identified and the exchange of ideas that will occur in open symposia at which
these individuals will participate will generate new ideas for exploiting the
combinatorial approach. The knowledge gained through the advancement of this
planning grant will be a benefit for all the participants, particularly the
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars who will be highly involved in the
full proposal preparation. Beyond the fields of nanoscience and catalysis, new
knowledge about how best to facilitate and enhance convergent research will be
discovered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ERC Planning Grant will enable meaningful
partnerships between academia, industry, and affiliated stakeholders to be
developed and increase the potential for productive collaborations. The proposed
planning activities will also enhance the infrastructure for future convergent
research efforts and lay a foundation for innovative educational
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.