* 1840856
* Mentor-Connect: Leadership Development and Outreach for ATE-3
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Dennis Faber, Florence-Darlington Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,783,530.00

A report from the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine,
"Building America's Skilled Technical Workforce" begins with "Skilled technical
occupations - defined as occupations that require a high level of knowledge in a
technical domain but do not require a bachelor's degree for entry - are a key
component of the U.S. economy. The United States needs a workforce with the
right mix of skills to remain competitive while fostering greater innovations
and boosting shared prosperity." The Advanced Technological Education (ATE)
program focuses on the education of the skilled technical workforce and supports
two-year institutions of higher education (IHEs) in leadership roles to support
this workforce sector. However, many two-year IHEs have not taken advantage of
the ATE program. The Mentor-Connect-3 (M-C-3) project disseminates strategies
and results that are useful to prospective grantees; provides unique resources
to guide and, effectively engages those faculty and institutions
underrepresented geographically and demographically in the ATE Program to
develop future talent for STEM/technician
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentor-Connect-3 (M-C-3) expands the successful
model that was informed by an award-winning IBM global mentoring program.
Mentoring, technical support and resources engage new two-year IHEs as ATE
grantees for the improvement of technician education. To stimulate longer-term
engagement with ATE, mentoring is provided for new grantees seeking a second,
larger grant, and second-chance mentoring encourages and supports vulnerable
community college faculty for whom a first or second proposal has been declined
by NSF. The problem-based construct of Mentor-Connect technical assistance
embeds leadership development. Peer mentoring will facilitate knowledge transfer
and help prepare the next generation of community college faculty leaders in
advanced technological education fields critical to economic development and
national security. Proactive and targeted outreach draws diverse faculty and
two-year IHEs into Mentor-Connect and the ATE Program. Florence-Darlington
Technical College, in partnership with the American Association of Community
Colleges(AACC), will implement M-C-3 with the following
deliverables:&lt;br/&gt;(1) A regenerative mentoring system that broadens the
impacts of the ATE Program through knowledge transfer and leadership
development;&lt;br/&gt;(2) An increase in engagement with and submission of
competitive first and second proposals from underserved colleges and
underrepresented populations in the NSF/ATE Program; &lt;br/&gt;(3) Technical
assistance and online resources for use by mentors, all prospective and current
PIs, and NSF Program Officers; &lt;br/&gt;(4) A cadre of new, diverse ATE
Principal Investigators with leadership skills;&lt;br/&gt;(5) Well prepared,
successful ATE PIs who serve as Mentor-Connect mentors; and, &lt;br/&gt;(6)
Publication of long and short-term impacts on the ATE Program, faculty, and
2-yr. colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.