* 1840832
* I-Corps: Smart Cement Technology
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Cumaraswamy Vipulanandan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 01/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is on
revolutionizing the real-time Structural Health Monitoring (the entire concrete
or other composites where smart cement is use as the binder becomes a 3D sensor
and there are no buried sensors) and also pre-warning of infrastructure,
building and pipeline failures, fire hazard and seismic activity. This will
reduce the loss of life, accidents and disruption of economic activity by
enhancing quality control and monitoring throughout the lifetime of the
structures. The real-time monitoring will also help maintain the critical
structures in a cost effective manner. Smart cement technology can also be used
in quality control of mixing concrete with various types of additives and also
the curing of the concrete under various environments and also predicting the
long-term properties and strength of concrete and other materials where smart
cement is used as the binder. The smart cement technology can be used with any
type of cement and has a very wide application in civil infrastructures and also
oil and gas industry for cementing wells. Also smart cement blocks can be used
in old structures and residential buildings for monitoring which will also
become a very popular commercial market for smart cement
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will commercialize the
Smart Cement which has been recently developed and proven to be a highly sensing
and sensitive material to changes in stresses, temperature, cracks
contamination, aging and degradation. The smart cement is technically known as
chemo-thermo-piezoresistive cement and behavior models have been developed to
predict the behavior of the smart cement. The monitoring parameter is the change
in electrical resistivity of the material in any direction. This technology can
be easily adopted in any type of cement, which is the largest manufactured
material in the world annually. Since less than 0.1% of additive (no nano
particles) is used in the cement, it is a very cost effective modification and
making the cement to be very sensing without changing any other properties and
also complies with all the environmental requirements. When this smart cement is
used to make the concrete (cement + aggregate) or binders in other composites
(example cement mortar and cement bricks) it will make the material to be very
sensing in 3 dimension (3D) and pick changes in any direction. The sensing
characteristics can be used from the time of mixing to the entire service life
of the structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.