* 1840713
* 2018 CPS PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Janos Sztipanovits, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 214,849.00

The purpose of this project is to plan and organize the 2018 National Science
Foundation (NSF) Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) Principal Investigator (PI)
Meeting. This meeting convenes all PIs of the NSF CPS Program for the ninth time
since the program began. The PI Meeting is to take place on November 15-16, 2018
in Alexandria, Virginia. The PI meeting is an annual opportunity for NSF-
sponsored CPS researchers, industry representatives, and Federal agency
representatives to gather and review new CPS developments, identify new and
emerging applications, and to discuss technology gaps and barriers. The program
agenda is community-driven and includes presentations (oral and poster) from
PIs, reports of past year program activities, and showcase/pitch new CPS
innovations and results. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The annual PI Meeting serves as
the only opportunity where the NSF funded CPS Principal Investigators meet to
share their research, discuss new research opportunities and challenges, and
explore new ideas and partnerships for future work. Furthermore, the PI meeting
is also an opportunity for the academic research community to interact with
industry entities and government agencies with vested interest in CPS research
and development. The PI Meeting is a forum for sharing ideas across the CPS
community. It has played a major role in growing the community across a broad
range of sectors and technologies, and performing outreach to others who have
interest in learning about the program and participating as future proposers,
transition partners, or sponsors. The 2018 PI meeting will feature lightning
talks from researchers, poster sessions, special topic workshops, demonstrations
and keynotes from leaders in the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.