* 1840051
* FW-HTF: The future of classroom work: Automated Teaching Assistants
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Kurt VanLehn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 05/31/2023
* USD 1,478,882.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim. Expert teachers effectively orchestrate the complex
flow of ideas and products in the classroom through individual, small group, and
whole class activities. In supporting the future work of teachers, this project
will facilitate the classroom orchestration process through the development of
an intelligent teaching assistant, implemented as a tablet-based dashboard. This
will allow the teacher to delegate cognitively-demanding orchestration tasks
related to classroom activities to the intelligent assistant, enabling him/her
to focus on other tasks to support student learning. Building on an existing
shared-document system for middle school mathematics teachers, the proposed
system will facilitate teachers in monitoring student work, assessing it, and
making conclusions (e.g., indicating student progress, errors, and
misconceptions) while allowing them to circulate among students who are working
individually or in small groups. Ultimately, the system will behave like an
automated teaching assistant and allow teachers to be more effective and
increase their job satisfaction by allowing them to concentrate on assisting
learners who most need help. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the team's
Formative Assessment with Computational Technologies (FACT) system, the
development of an intelligent teaching assistant will enhance teachers'
awareness of what is going on in the classroom and facilitate the cognitively-
intensive tasks of orchestrating classroom activities. In the first six-month
phase, the project will employ a knowledge engineering process to uncover the
tacit knowledge teachers use for decision-making in managing the flow of
classroom activities. In the second phase, over two and one-half years, a series
of ten comprehensive trials will be conducted to iteratively develop the
cognitive policies of the system through data collection and optimizing the flow
of work and ideas, carefully considering teacher input. This knowledge will be
encoded in a rule-based Artificial Intelligence where the intelligent teaching
assistant can perform some of the decision-making. Authorized by the teacher, it
will send messages directly to students in specific situations - some will be
feedback, some will be hints, some will be requests to visit other students and
some will just be to redirect attention to get back on task. The automated
teaching assistant will also prioritize tasks for the teacher; e.g., which
students to visit in the classroom. As part of this process, new sensors will be
added to FACT that will monitor the teacher's speech and location. The potential
broader impact includes facilitating teachers in conducting more pedagogically
complex and effective lessons and increasing teacher job satisfaction while
improving student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.