* 1840898
* RAPID: Improved Understanding of Regional Trade and Development from the Emergency Salvage of a Late Classic Site
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2018
* Brent Woodfill, Winthrop University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 11/30/2018
* USD 12,152.00

Dr. Brent Woodfill of Winthrop University will conduct an emergency salvage of a
vital archaeological site. This RAPID award supports the collection of critical
but ephemeral data where the largest figurine workshop ever encountered in the
Maya world has been just recently unearthed. This is an important discovery that
is worthy of scientific study for several reasons. Academically, this is a
little-understood region in spite of its importance to the Mexican and Central
American economy as the source of the lion's share of vibrant green quetzal
feathers that were used by Maya, Aztec, and other Mesoamerican rulers.
Ethically, the owners want to preserve this find and support scientific
advances. This emergency RAPID project will provide a solid framework upon which
to test the extent to which trade routes and trends observed by the Spaniards
were present before the Classic Maya collapse and provide for a detailed model
for Classic Maya figurine production and exchange, thereby improving the
robustness and reliability of archaeological findings related to regional trade
and development. The project improves scientific infrastructure through
international scientific collaboration. Research data and findings will further
be disseminated through a variety of means to improve scientific and
technological understanding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In May 2018, heavy machinery
on the outskirts of the city of Coban, Guatemala cut into a large earthen mound,
revealing hundreds of Classic Maya figurine molds, figurines, and incense
burners. The contractor stopped construction immediately and contacted local
authorities, who in turn brought in Dr. Brent Woodfill to assess the site's
importance. Dr. Woodfill and his team will investigate the techniques for
figurine production, which can be tested against previous models based on
limited archaeological data. By studying this workshop in a largely undisturbed
state, they will be able to relate figurine production and exchange to other
economic activities that occurred here, and the relationships the producers
maintained with local and far-flung Mesoamerican groups. There has never been a
formal archaeological project in this important region, so much of our
understanding is based on limited Spanish writings about the local Maya after
the Spanish conquest. By examining the figurines and other archaeological
materials, we can test the degree of cultural continuity before and after the
drastic changes caused by the Classic collapse and the arrival of
Europeans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.