* 1840963
* Early Career Polar Research Conference: Building Collaborative Networks and Providing Professional Training Opportunities to Facilitate Success
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Jill Sohm, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 05/31/2023
* USD 99,261.00

The newest generation of polar-focused researchers will need a strong
understanding of interdisciplinary approaches to understand the rapid changes in
polar regions. The Next Generation Polar Research Conference (NGPR-3) is
designed to train and help network early career polar researchers to position
them for interdisciplinary research careers. This week-long symposium, to be
held at the University of Southern California's Wrigley Marine Science Center,
will provide an important opportunity for newer polar scientists to understand
the benefits of interdisciplinary research approaches that can better inform
society and stakeholders and to learn more about safe and effective logistics
for research in polar regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thirty four early career
scientists (i.e., within 5 years of Ph.D.) from the fields of atmospheric
science, marine ecosystems, limnology, ice science, terrestrial ecosystems,
geospace, and policy and economics will be competitively selected to attend the
conference. The symposium will be designed to foster communication, team-
building and leadership skills with a focus on the development of
interdisciplinary research. Participants will gain important networking
opportunities while attending plenary talks, special sessions, poster sessions
and professional development training led by senior mentors from the research
subfields of social sciences, natural sciences and physical sciences. The
workshop contributes to NSF's strategic objectives to foster the growth of a
more capable and diverse research workforce and advance the scientific and
innovation skills of the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.