* 1840557
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Microscale Autonomous Device Engineering (MADE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Nan Jokerst, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2021
* USD 95,664.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers (ERC) competition was run
as a pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required
as part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams
to plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Automation has reshaped the US economy,
revolutionizing US manufacturing (production lines), management of capital
(trading), transportation (self-driving and flying vehicles), and learning
(information technologies). In a radical departure from macroscale automated
systems, a new ERC will be proposed which aims to push the frontiers of
intentional, yet complex, automated systems to the microscale, by developing and
implementing active, self-regulating microparticles, membranes and assemblies
that can react to external cues in real time. The prospect ERC aims to create
systems that operate at length scales that are well below direct human
intervention, performing tasks that, until now, have not been possible. This
planning grant will be used to hold a variety of planning activities, including
several meetings with different stakeholders for the proposed engineering
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned ERC will operate at the
convergence of physics, chemistry and biology to develop new engineering
principles for autonomous microscale assemblies that actively propel, self-
assemble, reconfigure and respond (via the systems-level integration of
structures and microcircuits that can sense, compute and actuate), enabling a
second revolution in automation that will benefit humankind. The ERC will focus
on 1) Adaptive microscale materials based on self-motile and addressable
microparticles, 2) Active membranes consisting of microscale two-dimensional
constructs that amplify signals, drive and regulate transport processes or
harness mechanical energy to reshape and control interfaces, 3) Programmable
polymeric and liquid crystal assemblies, gels and coatings that form, transform
and disassemble in response to a range of chemical and physical cues, external
fields, forces and biological stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.