* 1840424
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Offshore Wind Energy Center for Infrastructure Resilience, Control, Innovation, and Transmission (OWE-CIRCIT)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Alison Bates, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 02/28/2022
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Offshore Wind Energy (OWE) industry in Europe is booming, and has reduced
electricity generation costs to less than $0.10 per kWh. The U.S. OWE resource
is enormous, and could provide 10-20 times the national need for electricity.
The U.S. is just starting to develop this resource, does not yet have an
industrial supply chain for OWE, and there are unique U.S. challenges because of
hurricanes, complex seabed conditions, and grid integration. In order to address
these challenges, and to design resilient and cost-effective heavy OWE
infrastructure (e.g., structures, transmission system), a convergent approach is
needed. Failure for the U.S. to take this approach, to plan accordingly, to
maximize continuous learning, and to take disruption actions when needed, would
be a hugely missed opportunity for society to benefit from the breadth of U.S.
expertise and knowhow, and to make technological advancements that have broad
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This ERC planning grant project will bring
together those with relevant expertise in OWE from several engineering
disciplines, fields of science, the national laboratories, state and federal
resource management agencies, industrial stakeholders, and developers; as well
as those from affected coastal communities. This group will design a data-driven
multi-disciplinary system-level framework that identifies where advances are
needed to build a resilient infrastructure (blades, turbine, support structure,
transmission grid, standards, and models) that would enable a large and
responsible level of OWE to be harvested. The technical areas to be integrated
together in this frame will include but are not limited to metocean
characterization (wind, waves, currents), composite materials, aerodynamic
modeling, geo-engineering parameters, stability, fatigue, corrosion, inspection,
control, renewable energy integration, social acceptance of OWE development, and
impact on marine and coastal ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.