* 1840468
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Adaptive Small-systems for data Analytic Pain Management (ERC-ASAP)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Jackson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
National Academy of Medicine's Institute of Medicine (IOM) estimates that 116
million people in the United States are impacted by pain every year, at an
annual cost to the country in the hundreds of billion dollars. Chronic pain
conditions are particularly difficult to treat, since pain is a complex
experience that is not the result of a single factor. The key to better
understand the complexity of pain conditions is to identify the biological
changes it creates. The Engineering Research Center for Adaptive Small-systems
for data Analytic Pain management (ERC-ASAP) proposes to place miniaturized
autonomous sensing systems in several areas of the body. This will allow
simultaneous monitoring of biological activities across multiple organs,
providing insight into the causes of chronic pain and its onset. This grant
enables planning activities to establish the proposed Center, potentially
leading to new breakthrough technologies for diagnosis and monitoring that could
alter the national pain management landscape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
activities of the NSF ERC-ASAP Planning Grant will allow for the development of
the management structures and multi-disciplinary team formation. Planning grant
activities will also include a diverse set of stakeholder community members,
necessary for effective convergent engineering practices. The center goals are
to engage representatives from the main stakeholder community for constructive
dialogues to identify challenges and solutions. One major outcome will be to co-
develop the center mission and goals with active, continuous user community
collaboration and investment. Expert-guided stakeholder engagement workshops
will build and establish a strong partnership with institutional and industrial
collaborators, as well as medical experts, systems engineers and data
scientists, health professionals, decision and social behavior scientists, and
federal regulators. In addition, a state-wide online survey and questionnaire
will be conducted within the health service community to identify specific
challenges, delivery, treatment options, and payer models for a device-driven
engineering approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.