* 1840598
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Advanced Materials Manufacturing and Discovery for Extreme Environments (CAM2DE2)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Lynda Brinson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology advances are resulting in increasingly
complex engineering systems for energy, biomedical devices, infrastructure,
transportation, and space exploration. These advances also require materials
that can perform in extreme environments. These requirements currently exceed
the operating limits of available materials. This project envisions an ERC that
brings together experts from multiple areas and perspectives to tackle this
issue at two levels. The first level is the need to have input from the areas of
materials, process, product, and life cycle design research to tackle these
challenges. The second level looks at how advanced materials and manufacturing
modeling, data analytics, and design methodologies interact in a comprehensive
solution. The vision of this planning grant is to establish a joint industry-
academia research and innovation team to identify overarching fundamental
scientific issues that limit current material capabilities. The goal of this ERC
planning grant will be to bring these research areas and approaches together to
discover and design advanced materials that can extreme conditions. The proposed
ERC would impact society through the development of materials and infrastructure
that are durable and resilient, improving the safety and welfare of society
against extreme events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the behavior of
materials and engineered systems under extreme conditions and translating this
knowledge into the design of robust and sustainable materials requires a full
description of the multi-scale phenomena associated with the interaction between
materials and environment. The proposed ERC planning grant will provide a
fertile platform to bring stakeholders together through three regional
workshops. The scientific and technological problems identified at these
workshops will serve to enable a fundamental paradigm shift in materials and
manufacturing design for extreme environments. This shift will incorporate
computational materials/product design, machine learning, and stochastic
approaches. This ERC planning grant will enable comprehensive formulation of a
sustainable vision, focus, and ERC structure on the proposed topic. Key material
systems and testbeds will be identified, in collaboration with targeted industry
partners, professional societies, federal regulatory bodies, and end users.
Long-term plans for integrated education, entrepreneurship, technology transfer,
and broadening participation activities will be developed. Applications will
span from healthcare, transportation, and energy generation, to infrastructure
applications. These activities will engage a wide range of stakeholders, from
K-12 to professionals as well as industry partners. Established partnerships and
collaborations with minority-serving institutions will provide opportunities for
broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.