* 1840547
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Annual Conference on Quantum Information Processing (QIP)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Xiaodi Wu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The 22nd Quantum Information Processing Workshop (QIP 2019) will be co-hosted by
the University of Colorado, Boulder (UC Boulder) and the Joint Institute for
Laboratory Astrophysics (JILA) on January 12-18, 2019. This workshop is the
central event in the area of Quantum Computing and, more generally, Quantum
Information Science, bringing together over 500 of the leading researchers in
theoretical aspects of quantum information and computation, and play a role as
one of the most important venues for the groundbreaking research in theoretical
computer science. Students attending this event receive a broad exposure to the
most novel and exciting ideas and results in the field by contributed talks,
poster sessions, rump sessions, tutorial sessions, and industry sessions. In
addition, participation in this top conference is an excellent opportunity for
young researchers to develop necessary research skills in presentation and
collaborations. By enabling the attendance of students with financial difficulty
and encouraging the diversity of the participants, this travel grant potentially
has long-term benefits after QIP 2019 has concluded.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project funds the participation of US-based students in this event.
Participation at this meeting will enhance the research experiences for students
and provide increased opportunities for new collaborations. NSF support will
help broaden participation at the QIP Workshop by subsidizing the travel for up
to 16 student participants. Organizers aim at increasing the number of student
and postdoctoral participants by targeting women, undergraduates, and under-
represented groups for participation. The aim is to support young researchers
who might not otherwise be able to attend QIP 2019 due to financial difficulty
as well as to encourage the diversity of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.