* 1840839
* Frontiers of Molecular Design and Engineering - Junior Researcher Travel Scholarships
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Juan De Pablo, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2019
* USD 20,000.00

Molecular engineering is rapidly emerging as a new engineering discipline that
seeks to address some of&lt;br/&gt;humanity's grand challenges by providing
solutions that rely on a bottom-up approach, where molecular concepts form the
basis for proposed strategies. This grant will provide partial travel support
for 25 junior US-based researchers to attend the Frontiers of Molecular Design
and Engineering Symposium, that will be held on September 27-28, 2018, at the
Institute for Molecular Engineering, University of Chicago. The symposium will
address multiple themes within the broad interdisciplinary sphere of molecular
engineering. It will provide an excellent opportunity for the junior researchers
to be informed about the current state of the art of and emerging research
opportunities through scientific presentations and discussions with leading
scholars and experts from the US and abroad. The Symposium aims at attracting
~150 participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular engineering carries the
potential to deliver novel systems, materials and devices of unparalleled
efficacy and efficiency. It is an approach that is transforming almost all
traditional engineering fields and which inherently depends upon cross-
fertilization of developments in physics, chemistry, biology, and computational
sciences. Graduate programs aim at educating a new generation&lt;br/&gt;of
researchers with the appropriate skills, knowledge, and multidisciplinary
framework to tackle current and future societal challenges. The proposed
symposium will provide a forum to disseminate accomplishments to date, and to
inform the engineering and scientific communities at large of emerging
opportunities in research and education. A noteworthy feature of the symposium
is that it will specifically target undergraduate and graduate students
interested in molecular engineering and expose them to the latest developments.
The primary aim of the symposium is to disseminate the importance and relevance
of molecular engineering in the context of emerging scientific and engineering
challenges facing humanity. The format of the symposium has been conceived to
stimulate discussion and the exchange of ideas. One of the key outcomes of this
effort will be a better understanding of the areas of molecular along with a
distilled set of emerging needs and possible solution strategies. This
information will be compiled into a report to the National Science Foundation
and published in the journal Molecular Systems Design &amp; Engineering to
facilitate dissemination amongst the research community. Another, important
outcome of the symposium will be to expose engineering students from across the
country and from a variety of backgrounds and disciplines to molecular
engineering, its promise and its future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.