* 1840223
* RoL: FELS: RAISE: Does everyone's microbiome follow the same rules?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Shayn Mukherjee, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 565,000.00

Gut microbiomes are diverse microbial communities that play important roles in
mammal physiology and health. However, scientists do not yet understand the
rules that govern gut microbiome changes (such as how gut microbiomes change
over time), or whether these rules are the same or different in different
individuals. The goal of this project is to discover if gut microbiome dynamics
are "universal" - that is, the same across hosts - or if these microbial changes
are host-specific, such that each host's microbiome follows its own rules.
Discovering whether each host's microbiome follows its own rules is relevant to
human and animal health. If microbiome dynamics are universal, scientists can
use these rules to design microbiome therapies that work the same way in
different individuals. On the other hand, if these microbes are unique to each
individual, then interventions to improve human or animal health must be
designed separately for each individual. The work has benefits to broadening
participation in STEM education through training in the investigators' labs and
an educational outreach project with a public high school in Indiana. In
addition, the researchers will make all statistical methods and code available
online for use by other microbiome researchers and microbial
ecologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scientists are currently unable to test if gut
microbiome dynamics are universal because they lack both the data and the
statistical methods to analyze the data. This project overcomes these problems
in two ways. First, it will develop new statistical theory and methods to
jointly model multiple, highly multidimensional data sets such as those for
microbiomes. Second, it will leverage an exceptional, longitudinal microbiome
dataset, consisting of over 20,000 16S rRNA gene sequencing profiles on gut
microbiome composition, generated for more than 500 wild baboons over a 15-year
span. To these microbial composition data, this project will add data on the
longitudinal, functional genetic dynamics of the gut microbiome via metagenomic
sequencing. The baboons have been the subject of continuous, individual-based
studies of baboon behavior and ecology for 47 years. As a result, this project
has information on all of the covariates necessary to understand gut microbial
dynamics, including the baboons' diets, abiotic environments, social
interactions, and composition of the microbial communities themselves. The
results of this project will be directly applicable to applied research on
mammalian gut microbiomes aimed at improving gut microbiome function to improve
host health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.