* 1840352
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Edge Intelligence
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Marilyn Wolf, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sarit Bhaduri
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers (ERC) competition was run
as a pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required
as part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams
to plan for convergent, center-scale engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant will provide planning resources for a
proposed Center for Edge Intelligence. The proposed center will develop new
techniques for data science driven by Internet-of-Things (IoT) systems. IoT
systems interact with the real world: industry, health care, agriculture, etc.
IoT systems promise substantial benefits for these and other application areas
by gathering and processing data from the real world. However, new approaches
are required to harness the potential of IoT systems. IoT devices must operate
with limits on both electrical power and communication. These factors mean that
key aspects of these intelligent systems must be embodied outside of large data
centers, at the edge of the Internet, close to the points at which data are
created and used. This planning grant has three goals. The planning grant effort
will identify a full center team including member institution researchers,
diversity and inclusion coordinators, workforce development coordinators, and
entrepreneurship coordinators. The proposing team will identify a broad set of
stakeholders among researchers, industrial partners, entrepreneurs, and
educators. The full center team and stakeholders will create a strategic plan
for the Center for Edge Intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Edge Intelligence is
the convergence of three fields: data science, low-power computing, and
distributed systems. Data science and IoT systems are typically studied,
developed, and deployed by very different groups. The Center for Edge
Intelligence's mission will be to build a community of stakeholders across
industry and academia to develop and harness the capabilities of this emerging
technology. The intellectual approach of the Center will be based on several
foundations: machine learning, statistics, low-power computing, distributed
algorithms. Internet-of-Things systems are widely used in manufacturing, health
care, logistics, agriculture, and many other areas. Machine learning applied to
IoT systems can provide new levels of customization and improved system
operation. The Center for Edge Intelligence will pursue a convergent, holistic
research approach in foundations, engineering, and applications. Foundational
goals include machine learning algorithms designed for distributed computing
systems with limited bandwidth and power. Incremental learning algorithms to
customize and update systems for their particular environment. Engineering goals
include distributed systems that perform machine learning on distributed
platforms, including edge nodes, fog hubs, and the cloud. Low-power machine
learning systems. Low-power approaches to edge- and hub-based incremental
training. Applications include manufacturing, health care and wellness,
agriculture, transportation and logistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.