* 1840257
* RoL: FELS: RAISE:  Principles of Modular Organization in Resource-Limited Biological Circuits
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Domitilla Del Vecchio, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,000,000.00

Biological circuits control the way in which cells sense and respond to their
environment, from microbes to mammals. Despite the fact that these circuits
share and trade common cellular resources, they are surprisingly able to
maintain separate (highly decoupled) functionalities. How can biological
circuits be connected yet be decoupled? This project seeks to address this
puzzling question. This research will improve our current understanding of
natural systems and help create new biological circuits that control cellular
behavior for energy, environment, and medical applications. Currently, human-
engineered biological circuits are unpredictable and not sufficiently reliable
for practical use. The biological discoveries of this project may serve to
develop engineering solutions that decouple synthetic biological circuits from
each other for predictable and reliable behavior. The research conducted under
this project requires synergy between theory and experiments and between biology
and engineering. As such, a new generation of interdisciplinary researchers will
be trained, with cross-disciplinary expertise. This project will develop new
educational curricula that cross department boundaries. The researchers will
organize workshops and invited sessions at national and international
conferences on the problems addressed in this project and will present the
research at the Cambridge Science Festival and at its satellite event "Science
on the Street". Teaching materials will be further disseminated to the broader
community through MIT's OpenCourseWare and edX.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modularity
dictates that the input/output behavior of a system is practically independent
of its context, thus allowing a bottom-up compositional approach to predict the
behavior of complex systems. Today, a key challenge when creating biological
circuits is that the input/output properties of a module changes unpredictably
when the module is in a different context. While many elements contribute to
dependence of modules on context, sharing limited cellular resources such as
those required for gene expression remains a major unresolved cause of lack of
modularity. This project will elucidate general rules to predict the emergent
behavior of a circuit from the composition of intended regulatory links and
indirect retroactivity arising from resource sharing. This will lead to
formulate the breakdown of modularity as the control-theoretic problem of
attenuating indirect retroactivity, which will be addressed with a decentralized
feedback control solution inspired from nature. The experimental implementation
of this solution will elucidate how natural feedback motifs keep homeostasis
while working in orchestration and may substantially enhance our ability to
create predictable systems in synthetic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.