* 1840654
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Fire Impacts, Remediation, and Education (FIRE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Arvin Farid, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,806.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
warmer and drier climate has supplied abundant fuel (e.g., dry brush) for
wildfires, drastically increasing fire activity across much of western North
America in the past decades. Wildfires burn through forests, shrublands, and
grasslands, leaving marked societal and environmental scars. Wildfire impacts
are not limited to the burned area or the short term, instead extending beyond
the burn region and over the long term, e.g., health-related issues due to
wildfire smoke reaching across state and national borders. The targeted societal
and environmental impacts of this project range from the safety, well-being, and
physical and psychological health of society to the safety and well-being of
ecosystems at all scales, from microbial to global. The impacts can be direct
and immediate, such as fatalities and injuries, or indirect and long-term, such
as the financial burden on public and private entities and the health effect of
pollution due to widespread smoke and contamination of groundwater by acidic
rain or fire retardants. The proposed vision is to plan and establish an
engineering research center (ERC), FIRE (fire, impacts, remediation, education),
by a diverse team that will use a convergent approach and strategy to reach
objectives of: (i) identifying the complex relation between wildfires and their
broad, direct and indirect, short- and long-term impacts on the society and
environment; (ii) identifying expertise necessary to study these impacts; (iii)
identifying various stakeholders impacted by or impacting wildfires; (iv)
establishing a continuous communication channel with these stakeholders; and (v)
creating a strategic plan for the formation of a team of experts and
stakeholders to ultimately find innovative and cost-effective ways to mitigate
the problem, remediate and restore the environment after wildfires, and educate
the public to help the mitigation and ensure their safety during and after
wildfires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant activities include a kick-off meeting
at Boise State, literature review, regular meetings and interviews with
identified stakeholders to learn about impacts and other stakeholders, a major
five-part workshop, reaching out to and attracting experts to fill gaps in the
team's expertise, visiting up to a total of 12 ERCs to learn from successful ERC
leaders, a series of physical and weekly cyber team-meetings, preparing initial
drafts of an ERC proposal, two rounds of review, and revision of the ERC
proposal. As mentioned, a major activity of the project is a five-part workshop
held at Boise State where ERC leaders, national and local experts and community
leaders, representatives from state and federal agencies, members of the
insurance industry, and leading scientists and entrepreneurs will train the team
and a larger group of researchers on developing successful proposals for and
running sustainable ERCs; communication with and engaging stakeholders and
educating the public; enhancing a culture of inclusion and diversity; and the
science and various other aspects of wildfires, their impacts, and impact
mitigation. The project will also leverage the PIs' past collaboration with
diversity institutions and inclusion of an associate director for diversity into
the team to enhance the culture of inclusion, diversity, and sustainability
within the ERC team throughout the planning grant, subsequent ERC,
academic/professional communities, and society. We will work toward improved
involvement of and communication with the public and private stakeholders (i.e.,
parties impacted by or impacting wildfires, including national and state
agencies such as the Forest Services and Bureau of Land Management,
policymakers, and leaders of communities and industries at high risk of
wildfire) and prepare a well-thought proposal for a sustainable ERC that will
ultimately help mitigate wildfires' negative impacts. The strategy to make this
possible is understanding the complex fire-weather relations and impacts,
developing data-driven predictive fire characteristic models, and educating the
public to help prevent human-ignited wildfires and ensure public safety during
wildfires and avoid harm from short- and long-term impacts. There will also be a
focus on team and capacity building necessary to reach the above-mentioned goals
via the proposed strategies. To better implement these steps via planning and
developing the proposed ERC, the team will learn from prior ERCs across the
United States and leverage their experience to design a sustainable ERC better
adapted to new ERC requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.