* 1840893
* EAGER: SaTC: Post-Quantum Indifferentiability
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Dana Dachman-Soled, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 09/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Current technology for securing Internet traffic relies on cryptographic
protocols that are based on the presumed difficulty of two mathematical problems
- the factorization problem and the discrete logarithm problem. However, the
emerging technology of quantum computers - a type of computer that leverages the
laws of quantum mechanics to perform certain computations faster than classical
computers - can efficiently solve both of these problems and thus effectively
attack the respective cryptographic protocols. Anticipating the advent of
quantum computers, efforts to standardize new quantum-safe (also called "post-
quantum") cryptographic protocols are in progress. It is important to note that
quantum attacks not only render factoring and discrete-logarithm based
cryptosystems insecure, but also compromise the security of cryptosystems
employing a technique known as the "random oracle methodology." This methodology
assumes that all parties have access to an ideal object known as a random oracle
and the security of the cryptosystem is analyzed in the random oracle model.
Classical security proofs in the random oracle model fail in the quantum setting
since quantum superposition queries to the oracle allow for improved attacks.
This project will develop crucial tools for the security analysis of random
oracle based, post-quantum cryptosystems by means of a quantum analogue of the
indifferentiability framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental tool for
analyzing the security of classical cryptosystems in the random oracle model
involves proving the so-called indifferentiability of constructions. The notion
of indifferentiability formalizes the properties required of a construction to
securely replace an ideal object (such as a random oracle) in arbitrary
cryptosystems. Although often taken for granted, indifferentiability results
from the classical setting do not necessarily extend to the quantum setting.
Moreover, the quantum setting presents unique obstacles to proving
indifferentiability, leaving in doubt whether the entire indifferentiability
technique is applicable in the quantum oracle setting. This project explores the
possibility of an indifferentiability framework in the quantum oracle setting.
Specifically, the project encompasses the following technical problems: (1)
Determining whether or not broad impossibility results apply to the quantum
indifferentiability setting; (2) Developing new techniques for proving quantum
indifferentiability; (3) Defining new formal security models for the analysis of
symmetric and public key cryptosystems in the quantum oracle model; (4)
Analyzing the security of essential constructions with respect to quantum
indifferentiability or the newly introduced formal
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.