* 1840883
* EAGER: Investigating Super-Heated Urea for NOx Reduction for Low Temperature Combustion Engine Application
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Albert Ratner, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 08/31/2019
* USD 60,000.00

Nitrogen oxide (NOx) is one of the major pollutants from diesel engines and has
its own well-documented health and environmental impacts. Serious efforts have
been devoted to reducing them through exhaust clean-up and combustion
optimization. Interestingly, there are often trade-offs between efficiency and
pollution. This project will develop and demonstrate a greatly improved exhaust
after-treatment methodology for NOx reduction, particularly for engines
operating at low-temperature combustion regimes. The specific focus will be on
developing and testing a novel system for low-cost NOx reduction by super-
heating the diesel exhaust fluid (DEF) currently used on diesel engines. The
project will not only open up new areas of research, but also directly impact
engine combustion and energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOx has become an
important problem because the increased focus on fuel economy has driven engines
to burn less fuel and consequently operate at a lower temperature condition.
Such low-temperature operations have led to colder exhaust, with hybrid systems
that turn the engine on and off only exacerbating this problem. Additionally,
the inability to mitigate high levels of NOx has limited the operational window
for diesel engines. This project will investigate non-equilibrium NOx reduction
through injection of super-heated urea into an engine exhaust stream. Central to
this idea is the steep rise of NOx reduction capacities of commercial diesel
exhaust fluid (DEF), urea with water, with rising temperature because of higher
chemical reaction rates. The new system uses microwave heating of the urea (to
1200 K) prior to injection to make it much more reactive, with experimentally
proven NOx reduction of up to 96% for such temperatures in commercial boilers.
Experimental testing will be used to measure the exhaust composition for various
urea injection cases while computer modeling will be employed to extract the
chemical reaction rates that correspond to experimentally observed
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.