* 1840420
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Ubiquitous and Unique Embedded Security
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Tilman Wolf, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research. This award funds
planning efforts to create the ubiquitous use of information technology with
inherent security and controllable privacy, through development of a novel
hardware and software ecosystem, where components are physically unique and
security properties are based on this deeply embedded, physically unchangeable
identity. The trustworthiness of components will be evaluated across a wide
variety of embedded systems and potential threats. The best ways to develop open
hardware and software to allow broad analysis and a competitive ecosystem will
be considered. This award will be used to organize and run several planning
meetings with potential participants and stakeholders. An education and outreach
program is also planned for this effort, ranging from new graduate and
undergraduate courses to summer engineering institutes for high school students.
The team will include students in the planning meeting to offer novel insights
on educational opportunities.

The research problems that will be tackled by the planning team will span from
low-level integrated circuit design (e.g., development and use of physically
unclonable functions and lattice-based cryptography) to system-level hardware
and software problems (e.g., using physical chip characteristics to achieve
security properties for program execution and data) to inter-device
communication (e.g. secure network connections). The economics of open
architectures, threats of reverse engineering and legal issues add human and
societal dimensions that must be considered. The driving applications for this
work aim to address society-scale challenges: secure processing and chain of
trust for electronic voting systems, controllable dissemination of private data
in healthcare systems, verifiable execution in embedded systems for defense,
infrastructure and transportation applications. A plan for new course work at
the graduate, undergraduate, and high school levels will be developed, as well
as a plan for a summer institute targeting high school students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.