* 1840209
* RoL:FELS:RAISE: Design principles of evolved transportation networks in leaf veins
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Benjamin Blonder, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2020
* USD 831,496.00

Many biological systems contain spatial networks that transport resources.
Examples include the branches of trees and the circulatory systems of animals.
These networks vary widely in their form. Some only branch, while others form
loops. Some have multiple levels of hierarchy, while others do not. This
variation may reflect evolved solutions for solving diverse environmental and
structural challenges. This project will study key network functions in plants,
including transport efficiency, resistance to damage, and mechanical strength.
There is little theory linking network form to these functions, or for
predicting tradeoffs among these functions. Moreover, very few networks have
been fully characterized for structure or function due to the difficulty of
collecting the data and describing network architecture. Better understanding
the rules underlying network architecture will provide insights into the
evolution of diverse organismal forms. The principles identified in this
research could one day guide the engineering of artificial networks such as
solar cells or synthetic organs that could benefit society. The project will
also support career development undergraduate researchers via a comprehensive
mentoring program aimed at inclusion of underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use leaf venation networks are
a model empirical system. Leaves are central to plant performance via their
roles in carbon gain and water loss, processes mediated by resource transport
through their venation networks. These networks have high diversity of form and
function and are tractable to phenotyping and functional characterization. This
project will 1) quantify network architecture in a phylogenetically broad set of
500 species from temperate forests, desert, and lowland/montane tropical
forests, 2) determine how network architecture and functions/costs are linked,
3) develop and test theories for these functions/costs of networks based on
multi-scale network statistics, and 4) identify macro-evolutionary drivers of
network architecture. Network functionality will be measured in the field with
ecophysiology methods. Machine learning methods will be used to extract network
architecture from images. The project also will support interdisciplinary
training for one postdoctoral researcher and two graduate students, who will
gain international fieldwork and collaboration
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.