* 1840493
* Planning Grant: Engineering Research Center for Sharing economy - Humans, Automation, Resilience and Engineering: SHARE
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Haris Koutsopoulos, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,423.00

The Planning Grants for Engineering Research Centers competition was run as a
pilot solicitation within the ERC program. Planning grants are not required as
part of the full ERC competition, but intended to build capacity among teams to
plan for convergent, center-scale engineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
sharing economy can be characterized as a system of dynamic decentralized
networks that enables the increased utilization of assets by directly and nimbly
matching supply and demand. It is forecasted to grow from $14 billion in 2014 to
$335 billion by 2025. Technology has enabled these new platforms to flourish,
disrupting traditional businesses and transforming the future of transportation,
lodging, computing, energy, and other services. The estimated impact of sharing
economy practices on society is striking, directly affecting the lives of more
than a quarter of the adults living in the USA. However, the rapid pace of
change of new sharing economy technology and practices has resulted in limited
understanding of the dynamic interactions of these platforms with the society.
The lag in understanding is dangerous as disruptive changes continue to
accelerate. Further, while new technology alters the dynamic interactions in how
services are provided and distributed, fair and appropriate regulations of the
multiple emerging new ways of providing services has not kept up and adapted.
SHARE's Vision is a world in which sharing economy platforms are intentionally
engineered for socially desirable outcomes considering their long-term
sustainability, cyber-security, resource usage efficiency, impact on the
environment, workforce and community relations, interactions with public
services, and value-creation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SHARE multidisciplinary team
of researchers will take the first step toward enabling this convergent vision
of a future economy; together with stakeholders, they will not only define the
research challenges that will eventually underlie a unified framework for the
sharing economy, but also develop the educational programming that must
accompany the research to ensure the workforce is in place now and going forward
in this key area. SHARE?s Mission is to maximize the positive impact of the
sharing economy through integrated comprehensive, trans-disciplinary research
that will document and explore changing dynamics, develop new technologies and
algorithms for optimizing design, operation, incentives, and security, and
identify and compare regulatory and data sharing practices that influence the
real-world implementation of sharing economy platforms. We will organize a
multi-disciplinary workshop to start what we believe is one of the first
convergent dialogues on the sharing economy, to ultimately build a trans-
disciplinary research team and a diverse stakeholder community that can
synthesize the outcomes of the workshop into meaningful applied focus areas with
significant societal impact and sound fundamental research thrusts. The proposed
workshop will be formally documented via a report, which will serve as a roadmap
for future efforts in this area by the investigators and other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.