* 1841319
* Phase I IUCRC at University of Georgia:  Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2)
* ENG,EEC
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2022
* Jason Locklin, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 10/31/2022
* USD 332,000.00

The Phase 1 award supports the establishment of a new Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) site at the University of Georgia to the
existing Center for Bioplastics and Biocomposites (CB2). CB2 currently includes
Iowa State University, Washington State University, industry and government
partners in the field. The University of Georgia site will provide additional
capabilities for the center in the areas of new biodegradable polymers and
additives, advanced fibers, and durable coatings and finishes based on biobased
feedstocks. Current members of CB2 will benefit from UGA faculty expertise and
the research tools and infrastructure at UGA. Likewise, the Site at UGA will
increase the opportunities to leverage research expertise and facilities at ISU
and WSU, both of which have strong programs in sustainability, bioproducts, and
bioplastics. Bringing a new synergistic industry sector to CB2 will benefit both
incoming and current members by facilitating new industrial interactions
spanning the bioproducts supply chain and enable CB2 members to lead their
sectors in replacing existing plastic and packaging materials with biodegradable
alternatives. Students will be educated and exposed to cutting edge research and
outreach opportunities to enter the workforce immediately, with the ability to
contribute and have positive impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2014, global
plastic production reached 299 million metric tons (MMTs), with 5 to 12 MMTs
estimated to reach our oceans annually due to mismanaged waste (waste that is
littered or not handled in an organized system like a landfill). With increasing
population, plastic consumption, and waste generation, a cumulative input of up
to 250 MMTs into our oceans is predicted by 2025. Of all the plastics
manufactured today, about 40% are used in packaging, material that will be
immediately thrown away after use. The packaging industry employs over 5 million
people worldwide and has estimated sales of $1 trillion in 2018. The
opportunities to replace persistent plastic materials with those that are
compostable and or biodegradable are gaining market share in a variety of
industry sectors. The UGA site addition to CB2 is centered around replacing
existing plastic and packaging materials with alternative, biodegradable or
compostable plastics used in the packaging industry, including coatings, foams,
nonwoven fibers, and novel thermoplastics with excellent barrier properties for
films, sheet goods, and filtration media. As a Site addition to CB2, UGA will
promote the IUCRC Center goals, including innovation in academia that is driven
by industrial need. Plastics in the ocean is now recognized as a global issue,
and industry is extremely interested in making changes in the design and
production level to address the unintended consequences of non-biodegradable
plastic. The work in this IUCRC will allow industry to innovate and collaborate
at a critical time when scaling technologies is crucial to their success.
Students will be educated and exposed to cutting edge research and outreach
opportunities to enter the workforce immediately ready to contribute and have
positive impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.