* 1841539
* EAGER: Optical Molecular Imaging of Opioid Distribution and its Metabolic Effects in the Brain
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Stephen Boppart, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop and demonstrate a unique live-tissue imaging platform
that can detect the presence of opioids in live brain slices from mice, and
image their effects on the cellular metabolism and coupled neural brain
activity. This platform will allow the first visualization of how the presence
of opioids affects the metabolism of neurons and astrocytes, and the subsequent
neural spontaneous depolarization activity. The establishment and demonstration
of this imaging platform will enable future comparative studies using morphine
(the prototypical opioid), caffeine, and dopamine to elucidate how opioids
differ from non-addictive compounds (e.g. caffeine and anesthetics) and
prevalent neurotransmitters (e.g. dopamine) to modulate the cellular metabolism
of the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will impact opioid addiction and
related neuroscience and impact the broader research of drug development
involving different diseases, organs, and preclinical models. The proposed
imaging platform will be generally applicable to drug screening and discovery
through preclinical imaging when the opioid is replaced by the drug of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;The results of this project will be shared amongst the
scientific/engineering and pharmaceutical&lt;br/&gt;communities, and across wide
segments of society in outreach activities. The new imaging
and&lt;br/&gt;visualization capabilities will inspire K-12 students to think
about how technology can be used to benefit scientific investigations. Outreach
activities will include demonstrations of this imaging platform to community
groups through annual Engineering Open House events, as well as integration of
these technological methods in Prof. Boppart's undergraduate Biophotonics and
Biomedical Imaging courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.