* 1841853
* RAPID: Fabrication of Bioinspired Plasmonic Nanoarrays for Biosensing and Trace Chemical Detection
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Marco De Jesus, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 07/31/2023
* USD 150,237.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and the Biosensors and the Biological &amp; Environmental
Interactions of Nanoscale Materials Programs in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, Dr. Marco De Jesus and his
group at the University of Puerto Rico - Mayaguez are mimicking nature to create
a new generation of advanced, high performance, materials which interact with
light in unusual and potentially useful ways. In collaboration with the Center
for Nanophase Materials Sciences (CNMS) at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, the
team is assessing the impact of detailed design on the performance of particle
arrays for faster and more reproducible analysis of samples such as
antimicrobials, emerging pollutants, and bioactive agents of biomedical and
environmental significance. Results of these studies may impact areas of
national interest including the construction of solar cells, advanced optical
sensors, and molecular probes. The project is providing interdisciplinary
training and research opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and
graduate students in nanotechnology, chemical sensing, and bioanalytical
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to improve our current
understanding of how nanomaterials interact with bioactive agents at the
liquid/solid interface. Specifically, in collaboration with ORNL-CNMS, Dr. De
Jesus and his team assess the efficiency of plasmonic responses on metallic
surfaces as a function of nanoparticle morphology, interparticle spacing, and
spatial resolution. They are particularly interested in the impact of these
properties on the loading capacity and quantitative working range of these
materials for chemical sensing applications. Using competitive binding
experiments and multivariate Raman analysis, they seek to identify the
structural dependence of surface interactions of mixed chemical agents to
elucidate surface selectivity and trends for practical quantitation of mixtures.
The successful completion of this project may provide new advances toward the
rational design of nanomaterials with tailored properties for trace chemical
analysis. The work provides research and training opportunities for a diverse
group of UPRM undergraduate and graduate students in nanotechnology applied to
chemical systems, with direct exposure of the graduate students to state-of-the-
art facilities at CNMS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.