* 1841131
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a novel graft to provide safe and reliable vascular access for hemodialysis patients
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Joseph Knight, INNAVASC MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,975.00

This SBIR Phase I project will advance the development of a novel arteriovenous
graft that will minimize injury and decrease the probability of serious
complications for chronic hemodialysis patients. Hemodialysis is a life-
sustaining therapy for patients suffering from kidney failure; it requires that
blood be withdrawn and cycled through a dialysis machine that performs the
function of the failed kidneys. This process must be performed at regular
intervals and requires access to the blood with large bore needles. Graft
failure complications, many directly attributable to needle injury, cost the
healthcare system billions of dollars per year and lead to significant morbidity
and even mortality for patients. There are nearly 2.5 million patients with
kidney failure who receive dialysis worldwide, and this population is growing at
a rate of 8% per year. Currently, no technology on the market addresses dialysis
graft needle injury or graft material degradation due to needle trauma. InnAVasc
Medical's novel graft design has the potential to reduce complications
associated with aggressive graft compression and inadvertent punctures, thus
reducing adverse events and dramatically improving patient outcomes and quality
of life while significantly reducing health care costs related to chronic
dialysis graft injury. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will substantially
advance the development of an innovative device that will simultaneously allow
for immediate cannulation following graft implantation (typical is to allow 4
weeks to heal prior to cannulation) and eliminate complications associated with
repeated cannulation during maintenance hemodialysis. The ultimate goal of this
proposal is to identify and engineer a suitable biocompatible material that will
provide the desired mechanical strength to withstand passage of the dialysis
needle into undesirable areas, while being sufficiently flexible to allow for
optimal blood flow through the device and adequate conformity for patients of
all shapes, sizes, and skin integrity. The first technical objective will focus
on identifying candidate materials and testing their strength, flexibility and
durability. The second objective will take promising candidate materials and
develop prototype devices to assess manufacturability and performance. These
aims will identify a suitable material that will enable the InnAVasc graft to be
marketable to the broadest patient population. Successful completion of this
project will provide a prototype device constructed of materials that will
simultaneously optimize the desired ratio of mechanical strength to
flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.