* 1841320
* Collaborative Research: A Workshop Proposal for Shared Teaching Materials for Advanced Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Gul Kremer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 02/28/2021
* USD 59,817.00

The manufacturing of three&amp;#8208;dimensional products from
computer&amp;#8208;driven digital models has found extensive applications in
several fields. These additive manufacturing technologies offer the possibility
to fabricate products at affordable prices and have been employed to make
customized, complex items. North Carolina State University in collaboration with
Iowa State University is requesting funding for a collaborative workshop
proposal titled "A Workshop Proposal for Shared Teaching Materials for Advanced
Manufacturing ". The goal of the proposal is to run a series of well organized,
impactful workshops to catalyze the creation of a central repository for state-
of-the-art curricular materials that will facilitate authoring, evaluating and
disseminating materials for advanced manufacturing education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs have previously developed customizable teaching
materials and shared them with colleagues. These materials will be used as the
basis for the repository. The plan for each workshop is to assemble groups of
engineers, technologists and faculty involved in manufacturing to discuss the
use and adoption of these materials. The workshops are intended to 1) critique
the proposed "organic materials" concept; 2) obtain buy-in from the
manufacturing community; and 3) identify early adopters and developers to help
develop a future collaborative IUSE proposal. The duration of each workshop, one
of which will be co-located with a professional manufacturing meeting, will be
approximately half a day.The project focus on the development of state-of-the-
art curricular materials aligns well with the goals of the IUSE E&amp;D program
in the Engaged Student Learning track.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.