* 1841954
* EAGER: Redistricting Design via Clustering in Euclidean and Planar-Graph Metrics
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Philip Klein, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The award deals with the design and analysis of algorithms for geographical
problems, and algorithms for computational problems involving forming clusters
of input datapoints. As an example, the project will involve investigation of a
particular approach to electoral redistricting by computer, an approach that
builds on clustering techniques and concepts. The goals of the project are to
design and assess redistricting methods that will yield compact, contiguous
districts that are population-balanced to within a difference of one person, to
quantitatively evaluate the compactness of the districts, to seek faster
algorithms to compute the districts, and to study the degree to which the method
is resistant to gerrymandering. One potential impact of this activity is to help
inform the ongoing societal discussion of redistricting by demonstrating the
availability of a transparent redistricting methods that achieve high-quality
fair districting plans. Another potential impact is in the training of new
computer scientists. Because research on redistricting addresses a perceived
problem in society, it attracts and engages many people, especially those
motivated by a desire for positive societal impact. The project will support
training both directly and indirectly. First, students, particularly women and
members of historically underrepresented groups, will be recruited to assist in
performing this research and in disseminating the results. Second, the
disseminated results will inspire and encourage people to study computer
science. This project will serve as an example of how algorithms can be used for
social good.

The research draws on the study of the following optimization problem: given an
integer k and a set of points in a metric space, find a partitioning of the
given points into 'k' clusters so as to minimize the sum of squared intra-
cluster distances subject to each cluster being assigned a '1/k' fraction of the
locations. Although this problem is computationally intractable, even a locally-
optimal solution has desirable characteristics; for example, if the metric space
is the Euclidean plane, the clusters can be represented by convex polygons with
few sides on average. There are several obstacles to using this approach in
practical redistricting, such as: (1) exact locations of people are not
available; (2) finding a locally optimal solution can be time-consuming; (3) the
Euclidean metric does not take into account geographical barriers. The project
will explore ways of overcoming these obstacles. In addition, the project will
investigate other questions, such as how well does local search approximate the
minimum sum of squared distances, and how easy or difficult is it to find local
solutions that give one group a significant political advantage.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.