* 1841100
* Collaborative Research: Intercomparison of 3D MHD Simulations of the Solar Photosphere and Observations: A Case Study in Preparation for the DKIST Era
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Mark Rast, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 08/31/2023
* USD 278,350.00

One of the most pressing problems in understanding Earth?s climate is solar
irradiance: the amount of light emitted by the Sun. Solar irradiance is the sole
source of heating on Earth. If we want to understand our climate, we must
understand the source of the sunlight that warms our planet. The proposed work
will examine two different high-resolution magnetohydrodynamic models of the Sun
in an effort to understand how magnetic variability at small scales (down to
tens of kilometers) can affect irradiance. The team will compare the results of
the two different models to high-resolution measurements of the Sun from the
NSF?s Dunn Solar Telescope and from NASA?s Solar Dynamics Observatory. The
result of this work will be a greater understanding of solar irradiance
variability, which will lead to a better understanding of the external
influences on the Earth?s climate. This work will form the basis of a graduate
student?s PhD thesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is to examine the
results of two different three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic simulations of
the solar photosphere for solar irradiance at small (~10 km) scales. Simulated
spectra will be generated by BAERI?s StellarBox code and from NCAR/HAO?s MURaM
code and compared to observations of the Sun from the Dunn Solar Telescope and
from the Solar Dynamics Observatory spacecraft. The team will assess the
contribution to solar irradiance in certain spectral ranges from magnetic
features too small to be resolved in moderate-resolution imaging. They will also
examine the effects of different numerical schemes and approximations used in
the two different MHD codes to predicted overall irradiance. The overall
objective will be to identify the most suitable numerical contributions for
advancing irradiance reconstruction and stellar atmosphere
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.