* 1841559
* Interactions between Tropospheric Water Vapor and Potential Vorticity in Tropical Disturbances
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Richard Rood, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 534,785.00

Understanding the physical processes that drive atmospheric motions in the
tropical latitudes (30 degrees South-30 degrees North) has proven to be one of
the great challenges of atmospheric sciences. This challenge arises in part due
to the central role that clouds and precipitation processes play in the tropical
circulation. While there is much that remains to be learned about the processes
that drive tropical rainfall, numerous advancements have been made in recent
decades. For example, research has found that the concentration of water vapor
in the atmosphere plays a central role in the regulation of tropical rainfall.
In spite of this breakthrough, our understanding of how water vapor,
precipitation and large-scale atmospheric motions in the tropics occur remains
limited. This study seeks to understand such interactions on perturbations in
the atmospheric flow that are known as tropical disturbances. These include
disturbances whose horizontal flow is largely rotational such as easterly waves,
equatorial Rossby waves and monsoon low-pressure systems. These systems play an
important role in the hydrologic cycle of multiple regions in the tropics, such
as the Caribbean, and often develop into tropical cyclones, and have far-
reaching impacts in the extratropics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
provide important insights on the organization of precipitation in the tropics,
which will lead to improvements in the representation of these processes in
models. Furthermore, because these disturbances sometimes develop into tropical
cyclones, insights provided by this study may be of interest to the forecasting
of tropical cyclogenesis. Results from the project have great potential to form
a new general theoretical framework for tropical motions, which may be included
in a course in tropical meteorology. A graduate student and a postdoc will be
supported through this award. The knowledge gained from the research project
will also be used for public outreach and general education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel statistical techniques will be used to analyze the
interactions among water vapor, precipitation and circulation. The team will
examine observational data and simulations from numerical models to obtain a
lucid, clear picture of how circulations in these "rotational tropical
disturbances" modulate the distribution of water vapor and precipitation
processes. The study will elucidate the ways in which water vapor modifies
precipitation, and how this change in rainfall affects circulations of these
disturbances. The role that thermodynamic processes such as radiation and
condensation play in this interplay will also be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.