* 1841980
* Accelerated Learning and Assessment in Engineering Mechanics
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* David Dillard, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 02/29/2024
* USD 298,535.00

Repeated deliberate practice in problem-solving can increase students'
understanding of difficult engineering concepts. In addition, students who
receive frequent formative feedback are better able to identify and correct
problems with their reasoning. Unfortunately, few undergraduate engineering
courses provide students with such opportunities for repeated practice, targeted
feedback, and focused tutoring. This project aims to enable these opportunities
by developing an automated educational intervention tool for learning
engineering mechanics. This open-access, problem-solving interface will provide
engineering students with feedback and tutoring, based on their performance on
practice exercises. Since all developed materials will be open-source and open-
access, the project can also inform and support the work of students and
teachers beyond the local institution. By focusing on developing strong
analytical problem-solving skills, this project directly responds to industry
and the federal government priorities for developing an engineering workforce
that is capable of innovative problem solving. Thus, this project has the
potential to contribute to the ability of the U.S. to maintain its economic
competitiveness and position as a global leader in innovation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will: 1) develop an innovative problem
delivery and assessment system and evaluate its effectiveness in meeting
specific learning and assessment goals in engineering mechanics; 2)
systematically study how this technology-rich problem-solving interface can
enhance the learning, teaching, and assessment of complex knowledge through an
education research study; and 3) critically evaluate opportunities and barriers
to scaling and transferring the innovation across educational contexts. This
study should contribute to understanding how technological solutions, such as
automated tutoring systems, can enhance learning and assessment of complex
knowledge and skills. As a result, this project is likely to have relevance for
teaching and learning of other engineering topics, as well as topics in other
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.