* 1841535
* Planning IUCRC at Oklahoma State University:  Center for Sustainably Integrated Buildings and Sites (SIBS)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Daniel Fisher, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 14,999.00

Mitigation of severe negative impacts on the climate will require an 80%
reduction in total carbon emissions by 2050. Commercial and residential
buildings are responsible for 40% of greenhouse gas emissions in developed
countries. Therefore, it is not possible to achieve the required reduction in
global emissions without substantive reductions from buildings. Despite this
need, current buildings commonly consume significantly higher amounts of energy
and emit more pollutants than predicted during the building design process.
Prediction inaccuracies persist partly because engineers and archi-tects seldom
receive any feedback as to actual energy performance and partly because there is
a lack of deeply integrated knowledge regarding building equipment, operation
and grid/environmental in-teractions in a way that a designer can utilize. The
center for Sustainably Integrated Buildings and Sites (SIBS) plans to address
the lack of integration and feedback with a convergence of multidisci-plinary
research expertise to address inaccuracies in building energy predictions with
the vision of developing a scientifically rigorous transformation to the
building design process. The activities will also support an increase in
scientific literacy, U.S. competitiveness, and industry collaborations by
disseminating center outcomes to relevant professional societies, educating
high-volumes of students in this field and construction of high-value research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many next-generation buildings to not
achieve optimal efficiency and minimal environmental impact as a result of a
lack of feedback from the occupied building and a lack of deeply integrated
knowledge between building equipment and operation that the designer can
utilize. Conflating the aforementioned challenge is the omnipresent shift in
regulatory environment that is currently requir-ing all equipment manufacturers
to re-design their equipment to include working fluids with less en-vironmental
impact. To address these challenges requires a paradigm shift in the approach to
building science research that includes a deeper integration of the various
disciplines and stakeholders and converges the outcomes to advance the state-of-
the-art in building sciences. To support this, SIBS-OSU has a mission to develop
integrated solutions within three major topical areas; (1) transition of
building heating and cooling equipment to low-Global Warming Potential (GWP)
refrigerants, (2) deployment of physical/cyber-physical building systems in grid
and internet-connected environments (3) sustainable minimization of the
environmental impact of building systems. To support the global SIBS mission,
these areas will leverage the long-standing legacy in building thermal systems
and equipment research to facilitate research collaborations between the
building equipment manufactur-ers with the engineers and practitioners that
design, build, and operate the buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.