* 1841694
* Exploring Introduction of High Performance Computing and Big Data in High Schools
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Yumei Huo, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 07/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

Many high schools across the nation offer programs in science, technology,
mathematics, and engineering (STEM), and a lot of high school students pursue
related majors in the post-secondary study. To meet the urgent workforce need,
early exposure to high performance computing and big data in high schools can
help attract more students to choose related majors in colleges. This requires
the stakeholders including academia, industry, high school administration, and
instructors to work together to address the concerns. This project has the
experts from academia provide training support to high school instructors in
high performance computing and big data, and the professionals from industry
helping bring the cutting-edge technologies and real life examples and
experience to high school administration and instructors. High school
instructors are expected to develop and offer high performance computing and big
data courses in their schools after the training. By inviting all the
stakeholders and training high school instructors, the workshop aims to collect
feedback about contents of materials, training effectiveness, and covered topics
for developing a complete training model for high school instructors. This
project, thus, aligns with NSF's mission to promote the progress of science by
exploring scientific workforce development pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop invites high school administration and instructors from New York
Metropolitan Area in an effort to provide exposure of high performance computing
and big data, especially instructors from science, technology, mathematics, and
engineering, through carefully designed tutorials. In addition to improving the
awareness via tutorials and invited talks, the workshop also aims to prepare for
developing an informal and cross-training model for high school instructors and
designing the related advanced placement or elective courses for high school
students. By convening three parties including academia, industry, and high
schools and looking at the problem from different perspectives, the organizers
aim to gain new insight into the education of high performance computing and big
data at high school level and obtain crucial evidences to design and implement
the cross-training model. The trained high school teachers are expected to
infuse the training materials into their computer science related courses and/or
develop new advanced placement or elective high performance computing and big
data courses. The findings from the workshop are broadly disseminated in the
research and educational communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.