* 1841011
* CubeSat: Climatology of Anthropogenic and Natural VLF wave Activity in Space (CANVAS)
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Scott Palo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mangala Sharma
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,401,193.00

The goal of this 4-year project is to develop the Climatology of Anthropogenic
and Natural Very Low Frequency (VLF) wave Activity in Space (CANVAS) Cubesat
which will measure VLF wave energy that originates from lightning and ground-
based transmitters and propagates to the outer reaches of Earth's magnetic field
(the magnetosphere). Previous research has shown that VLF waves from these
sources play a significant role in the dynamics of Earths radiation environment.
This project will focus on quantifying how much VLF energy from sources on the
Earth's surface and in the atmosphere propagates through the charged layers of
Earth's upper atmosphere and into the magnetosphere. This is important for
understanding the extent to which ground based electromagnetic sources can
impact the near-Earth space environment. The project is led by two early career
scientists, engages graduate students through class participation, and provides
funding for undergraduate and postdoctoral research experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CANVAS consists of a three-axis magnetic search coil
deployed on the end of a 1-meter carbon fiber boom; together with a two-axis
dipole antenna. Together, these five wave components will be used to determine
the wave power spectral density at 1 second time resolution using real-time Fast
Fourier Transforms calculated in onboard Field Programmable Gate Arrays. Data
will be sent to the ground to determine the full set of wave parameters,
including polarization, planarity, and k-vector direction. The CANVAS CubeSat
will employ the Blue Canyon Attitude Determination and Control System to provide
sub-degree pointing accuracy, together with heritage spacecraft subsystems from
the previous successful missions at CU Boulder. An S-band transceiver and dual
antennas will communicate with a new ground station in Boulder to downlink all
of the science data. The cubesat will take continuous measurements in low Earth
orbit to address the following science questions: i) What is the average
electromagnetic energy input into the space environment by lightning? ii) What
is the spectrum of VLF wave energy above the ionosphere in the 0.3-50 kHz
frequency range? iii) What is the transmission transfer function of the
ionosphere for VLF energy, and how does it vary in space and
time?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.