* 1841189
* Integrating Computational Thinking into the Insights Elementary Science Curriculum
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Marian Pasquale, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2024
* USD 2,990,802.00

The STEM+C Program supports research and development of interdisciplinary and
transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of computing within science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teaching and learning for
preK-12 students in both formal and informal settings. There is a pressing need
for elementary science curriculum materials that integrate computational
thinking; however, scientifically rigorous, coherent, and developmentally
appropriate materials are scarce. This project, Integrating Computational
Thinking into the Insights Elementary Science Curriculum, supported by the
STEM+C program, will develop such materials by adapting instructional modules
from Insights, an elementary science curriculum that promotes students' science
sense-making through inquiry, discourse, and reflection. Specifically, four
modules in the Insights curriculum, two for grade 1 and two for grade 4, will be
developed and pilot tested. Each module is designed for 6-8 weeks of
instructional time. This work is important because it creates anchoring points
for articulating a developmentally appropriate progression for CT-science
integration. Lessons learned during development will generate knowledge about
productive ways to integrate CT with science and will identify limitations to
effective integration. The project address elementary teachers' lack of
preparation to teach CT by providing professional development. Resources,
including annotated artifacts of student work and videos of classrooms in which
students are engaged in CT-enriched science inquiry, will be integrated into an
interactive teacher guide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development and pilot testing
of the CT-integrated modules and associated teacher supports will involve
iterative design-test-revise cycles in three grade 1 and three grade 4
classrooms. Field testing will expand to 18 classrooms per grade. Teachers and
school administrators are involved in the design-test-revise process. To achieve
its aims, the project team will take four steps: (1) conduct a crosswalk of the
21 Insights elementary science modules with Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS) to produce a provisional scope and sequence for NGSS alignment and CT-
science integration; (2) develop and test four revised, NGSS-aligned Insights
modules that integrate CT concepts and practices consistent with NGSS and the
Computer Science Teachers Association standards; (3) develop teacher supports
for implementing the revised Insights modules; and (4) conduct a small
comparison study to investigate the impact of the revised Insights modules on
student CT and science learning. Results of the comparison study will be used to
strengthen CT integration for the revised field test version, support the
development of teacher materials, and provide preliminary information about the
promise of the revised modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.