* 1841606
* EAGER SitS: Sensors and Materials for In-field Soil  Analysis of Nitrate and Other Oxoanions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Darren Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The development of tools to properly manage the nitrogen and phosphorous cycles
is critical to the responsible and sustainable use of natural resources. Human
activity, especially agriculture, has increased the amount of potentially
harmful forms of phosphorous and nitrogen, such as phosphate and nitrate, in the
environment. Application of nitrate and phosphate as fertilizers has improved
food production efficiency and alleviated starvation in many areas of the world.
However, consequences of the corresponding nitrate and phosphate imbalances
include contributions to the greenhouse effect and contamination and disruption
of ecosystems, including drinking water sources downstream from agricultural
activity. A significant barrier to understanding the movement of nutrients
through the environment is the lack of robust, rapid, and portable methods for
nutrient measurement. This project seeks to develop a small, portable, research-
grade tool for in-field nutrient measurements that would overcome this barrier,
allowing researchers to make frequent enough measurements to follow nutrient
changes. This sensing capability will enable long-term development and
refinement of models to inform efficient nutrient management. If successful,
this project could lead to better strategies to protect the Nation's natural
resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving the goal of in-field nutrient
measurement is limited by a lack of fundamental chemistries available for
selective, robust, field-ready sensor devices. This project will meet the
challenges of rapid and accurate nitrate and phosphate measurement by improving
the chemistry and materials integration of current anion-sensing technologies.
These technologies are based on chemically-sensitive field effect transistors
(ChemFET) architectures and molecular recognition agents developed in the
Johnson and Haley labs at the University of Oregon. This will focus on two
complementary aims. Aim 1 seeks to improve the current library of
chemically?]selective materials by covalently attaching receptor molecules to
device substrates. This aim will develop modified versions of the current
library of receptors, adding functional groups to these receptors which can be
used to link receptors directly to sensor device substrates. Aim 2 seeks to i)
develop and improve the interfacial chemistries needed to support the receptors
from Aim 1; ii) improve the integration of these receptors in sensing devices,
and; iii) evaluate the resultant devices. Broader impacts on this project
include long-term economic benefits resulting from efficient management of
environmental nitrogen and phosphorous arising from reduced and targeted
nutrient input, the reduced contamination of ecosystems, and reduced cleanup and
mitigation efforts. These environmental benefits are aligned with the economic
benefits of improved management of the nitrogen cycle. Additionally, industrial
collaboration and professional development in innovation expand the student
training impacts of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.