* 1841811
* Greater Caribbean Center for Ciguatera Research
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Robert Sobol, Florida Gulf Coast University
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 08/31/2023
* USD 3,547,455.00

The Greater Caribbean Center for Ciguatera Research (GCCCR) is a five-year,
multi-institutional effort aimed at understanding Ciguatera fish poisoning (CFP)
and environmental factors influencing its occurrence and expansion. Ciguatera
fish poisoning is the most common form of phycotoxin-borne seafood illness
across the globe, affecting tens of thousands of people annually. CFP is caused
by the consumption of seafood (primarily reef fish) contaminated with
ciguatoxins (CTX). When people subsequently consume the contaminated fish, they
are exposed to the toxins, thereby experiencing CFP. Historically, CFP outbreaks
have been linked with warm water temperatures and coral reef impacts, both of
which are expected to increase in coming years and in geographic distribution.
For example, although CFP is endemic to the Caribbean, the Florida Keys, and
South Florida, CFP appears to be expanding northwards into the Gulf of Mexico,
highlighted by the recent identification of toxic fish in the Flower Garden
Marine Sanctuary off of the Texas/Louisiana coast. The GCCCR brings together a
team of researchers from across the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean region to study
CFP. The Center will include an extensive public engagement component. The
Center is jointly supported by NSF and by the National Institute for
Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gambiertoxins,
precursors of ciguatoxins produced by the (sub)tropical benthic dinoflagellate
genus Gambierdiscus, enter reef food webs when herbivores and detritivores
consume Gambierdiscus directly or indirectly by grazing on macroalgae. These
precursor molecules are transferred to higher trophic levels by bioaccumulation,
bioconversion and biomagnification until they reach predatory finfish species
that are targeted in many commercial and recreational fisheries. The GCCCR will
support three interrelated research projects to 1) examine the role climate
change may play in the geographic and temporal expansion of CFP into more
temperate latitudes; 2) obtain a better understanding of the toxic metabolites
produced by certain Gambierdiscus strains, and the subsequent transfer and
biotransformation of these compounds into coastal/reef food webs; and 3) study
the genotoxicity and impacts on cellular metabolism caused by these toxins upon
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.