* 1841531
* Virtual Data Set Services Enabling New Science at NSF Facilities
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ian Foster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2021
* USD 1,500,000.00

Scientific facilities supported by the National Science Foundation such as the
Daniel K. Inouye Solar Telescope (DKIST), National Center for Atmospheric
Research (NCAR), and National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) collect
enormous quantities of valuable data about the world in which we live. These
data can be used for scientific and societal benefit: to make breakthrough
discoveries about sun's behavior and magnetic field, and our changing
environment; to improve the speed and accuracy of forecasting of severe storms
and destructive wildfires; to predict disruptions to electrical systems from
solar flares; and many other purposes. Before such vital scientific data can be
used effectively, they must be delivered rapidly, efficiently, and reliably to
the people who need them. Researchers need interactive community access to hard-
to-obtain data located in large data archives. Because the NCAR, DKIST, and NEON
data archives cannot feasibly provide the computing resources needed for all
analyses, end-user scientists need to be able to define, navigate, download, and
analyze data subsets. Current web-based tools are not up to these tasks. The
Virtual Data Set Services Enabling New Science at NSF Facilities project will
tackle this challenge by developing new methods for organizing, packaging, and
rapidly transporting data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key innovation will be the
development of methods for defining, sharing, and manipulating "virtual data
sets," data collections extracted "on the fly" from the vast holdings of
scientific facilities for a specific purpose. A researcher may define a virtual
data set much as a shopper assembles products in an online "shopping cart." Once
defined, a virtual data set can then be transferred to a remote computer for
analysis, shared with colleagues, or extended for future projects. We will
develop new services to (a) enable definition of, navigation over, and selective
access to virtual data sets from petascale data archives of the scientific
facilities, and (b) ensure reliable, automated, efficient, and secure
replication and access of entire data sets or data subsets between a petascale
data archive and other locations, to include both end user computers and remote
mirrors intended to accelerate data access by community members. These new
services will be constructed on top of the Globus platform, already heavily used
within NCAR's Research Data Archive (RDA) and many other research data centers.
The ultimate aim is to integrate the new services into operational systems in
collaboration with DKIST, NEON, and NCAR/RDA. The results will be evaluated in
the context of demanding science applications in partnership with solar physics,
atmospheric science, and ecology researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate
for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.