* 1841293
* Building a Pipeline to Increase American Indian Access to the Geosciences
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Lucy Fenzl, College of the Menominee Nation
* Standard Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,177,939.00

The mission of the NSF Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to
support efforts to strengthen education and research capacity in science,
technology, engineering and math (STEM) in the nation's Native-serving colleges
and universities. The project titled "Building a Pipeline to Increase American
Indian Access to the Geosciences" aligns directly with the mission of the TCUP
through its goals to 1) develop an Associate of Science (AS) degree in
geoscience at the College of the Menominee Nation (CMN), and 2) design a pathway
that enables the seamless transfer of CMN's geoscience graduates to the
University of Wisconsin-Madison (UWM) to complete a geoscience baccalaureate.
The project partners science and Native Studies faculty members from CMN and UWM
with STEM professionals and Menominee cultural experts in the design of the
degree and pathway. To further its goals, the project focuses on generating
student outreach, recruitment and support strategies to attract and retain
students, and to enhance their potential for successfully completing their
geoscience degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In building CMN's STEM education
capacity, this project utilizes innovative strategies in the design of a new
two-year geoscience degree at CMN that graduates students well prepared to
transition to a four-year degree at UWM, and to create a customized pathway that
supports CMN students' ready transition to that institution. The collaboration
between key stakeholders from CMN, UWM and tribal communities assists the
development of a robust and culturally appropriate AS degree. Place-based
environmental justice issues relevant to the Menominee nation are essential
frames for the AS curriculum, serving to contextualize learning and improving
student engagement. Substantive field and research experiences, hallmarks of
UWM's geoscience curriculum, are integral to the newly developed degree. A
comprehensive program of student support strategies particularly targeted at
critical transition point on students' academic journeys, such as faculty
mentoring, are integral aspects of the project. The establishment of an
articulation agreement ensures the transfer of CMN credits to any of the 27
University of Wisconsin campuses, giving students a major step toward their
four-year degree completion. CMN's instructional capacity is further
strengthened by the establishment of a geoscience laboratory at the college and
the hiring of a geoscience instructor. The natural resource management
priorities of the Menominee Nation provide potential employment for the
geoscience graduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.