* 1841732
* SBIR Phase I:  Highly Potent Nanozeolite-based Silver Antimicrobials
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Bo Wang, ZeoVation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2020
* USD 249,985.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is providing a high potent antimicrobial
solution for textiles, coatings, polymers, and wound care and bandages. There is
considerable proliferation of antibiotic resistant bacteria, and, antimicrobials
that do not develop resistance is of significant societal interest. Silver-based
antimicrobials are filling this need, and are being used in a variety of
medical, consumer and food-related applications. Silver is a broad-spectrum
antimicrobial, effective against gram positive, gram negative bacteria
(including methicillin-and vancomycin resistant bacteria) as well as fungi,
viruses, and biofilms. This has led health care, consumer and food industries to
use silver antimicrobial products. The global market for silver-based powder
antimicrobial coatings is currently valued at $910 million and expected to grow
at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 13.1% until 2020. Concerns however,
are increasing about the release of silver and the resulting influence on the
environment. Development of high potency silver products using the minimum
amount of silver can significantly broaden its use. The benefits of this
versatile antimicrobial platform include: 1000-fold increased potency, decreased
cost, invisibility and compatibility with
formulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop and test a highly potent silver-based
antimicrobial product. Higher potency is due to control of size of ligand-free
AgNP (1-3 nm) anchored to the surface of ~30 nm nanozeolite (NZ), and fast
release of Ag+ within the zeolite. The bactericidal activity of AgNP-NZ has been
examined with E. coli (gram negative) and antibiotic resistant MRSA (gram
positive), with significant improvement. The potency is further enhanced by
modifying the NZ support to introduce multiple features: increased antimicrobial
activity via NZ ion-exchanged Zn2+, and surface modification of NZ to enhance
interactions with bacteria, including penetration within the bacteria. At the
conclusion of this SBIR Phase I project, the product will be ready for further
commercialization and marketing by (1) demonstrating the scalability of the
synthesis procedure so that there is enough supply of product in the product
development process; (2) optimizing synthesis procedure of antimicrobial
material according to antimicrobial property, including Ag+ and Zn2+ loading and
surface modifications; (3) obtaining third party test reports on optimized
samples as objective evidence for marketing and (4) studying the toxicity of the
product toward mammalian cells to address toxicity
concerns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.