* 1841545
* Phase II IUCRC CRSS: Center for Research in Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Darrell Long, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The Center for Research in Storage Systems (CRSS) conducts research to improve
the performance, security, reliability, efficiency, and usability of data
storage. A system composed of thousands or even millions of storage devices must
provide these characteristics, though individual devices may lack them. Finding
and using data in such large, complex systems is challenging, yet it must be
made simple and efficient for end users. Complex systems are also subject both
to hardware and software failures as well as directed attacks to steal or
destroy data, so storage systems must guard against both security breaches and
data loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRSS is concerned with adapting systems to
better utilize new storage technologies such as byte-addressable non-volatile
memory (BNVM), shingled disk, and glass. Operating systems and file systems must
adapt to these new technologies to provide higher performance and better
usability for BNVM, and improved security, efficiency, and long-term reliability
for archival storage. Cross-cutting issues such as improved security and the
usage of machine learning to optimize storage systems are relevant for all types
of storage systems, yet there remain many open questions in how to address these
issues, particularly given the large scale in both time and size that CRSS is
exploring. Improving storage systems for large-scale data science is also a
significant challenge that CRSS is addressing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data storage
is the foundation of our digital society: the vast majority of our knowledge and
information is stored digitally. The research done at CRSS will allow society as
a whole to better keep and utilize the flood of information our world is
gathering. CRSS research will help cloud providers provide more reliable and
usable large-scale storage, and will help reduce the risk of security breaches.
CRSS research will also help organizations store and access the massive amounts
of data generated by the Internet of Things, further aiding a wide range of
societal issues such as climate, transportation, and
housing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRSS will maintain a Web-accessible project
repository at https://www.crss.ucsc.edu/repository.html, which will have links
to publications, data, and code developed by all CRSS sites. Code will be hosted
on either gitlab.soe.ucsc.edu or bitbucket.org. Traces will be hosted locally or
donated to the repository operated by the Storage Networking Industry
Association's Input/Output Traces, Tools, and Analysis (IOTTA) Technical Work
Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.