* 1841273
* Collaborative Research: The Southern San Andreas Fault Zone Experiment
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,10/31/2023
* Frank Vernon, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 10/31/2023
* USD 361,286.00

The San Andreas Fault (SAF) in California is a mature plate boundary fault
capable of great (magnitude 8 or greater) earthquakes. The southern section of
the SAF has not produced a major earthquake in historic times (over the last 300
years), and is currently believed to pose the largest seismic risk in
California. This project will use new seismic and geodetic observations to
investigate the sub-surface structure and geometry of the Southern San Andreas
Fault (SSAF). In particular, the project will test a hypothesis that the SSAF
may not be vertical and may substantial dip to the East. If confirmed, a non-
vertical fault dip would have important implications for the mechanics and the
long-term tectonic evolution of the SSAF. Better knowledge of the sub-surface
geometry of the SSAF will also improve predictions of seismic radiation patterns
and the intensity of ground shaking due to future large earthquakes on the SSAF.
The broader impacts of this work will be refined estimates of seismic hazard in
densely populated areas in Southern California and Mexico as well as support for
the education of two graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers
from this joint project between the University of California San Diego, Scripps
Institution of Oceanography and the University of Southern California, will
investigate the fault attitude at depth by imaging a low-rigidity damage zone
and/or a bi-material interface associated with the SSAF in the upper crust. This
will be accomplished by deploying a dense seismic array spanning the SSAF. Data
from the deployed seismic array and regional seismic networks will be used to
generate high-resolution tomographic images of the fault zone throughout the
seismogenic layer. Seismic data will be combined with high-resolution geodetic
observations, including Interferometric Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) and
Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS). A joint analysis of seismic and
geodetic data will provide new insights into the spatial extent and degree of
damage around a mature plate boundary fault and enable comparisons with
observations from other faults in California and elsewhere to examine how the
distribution and amount of damage might depend on the fault age, seismic
potential, and geometric complexity. The deployment of co-located dense seismic
and geodetic arrays will establish a baseline for future measurements of
possible time-dependent variations in mechanical properties of rocks comprising
the fault zone due to external stress perturbations, which may help constrain
the magnitude of absolute stress at seismogenic depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.