* 1841005
* SBIR Phase I:  Handheld Device for Detection of Otitis Media
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2019
* John Weidling, CACTUS MEDICAL,LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project advances a novel medical optical spectroscopy device
to facilitate accurate diagnosis of middle ear infections. The device uses a
custom multi-LED microchip and photodetectors to illuminate the middle ear and
collect reflected light in a familiar otoscope form-factor. Reflected light
signatures are analyzed to determine the presence or absence of middle ear fluid
- a hallmark of middle ear infection. The focus is to optimize product design
and algorithm to enable gold standard accuracy across thousands of mass
manufactured devices and millions of patients. The device will be a cost
effective means to achieving improved ear infection diagnosis in primary care
where it is most needed. Roughly 90% of children experience at least one ear
infection before age 5 and misdiagnosis of suspected ear infection is the
leading cause of unnecessary pediatric antibiotic use in the US. Collectively,
ear infection results in at least $5B direct healthcare costs annually in the US
and billions more in lost parent productivity. Improving ear infection diagnosis
has the potential to eliminate millions of unnecessary antibiotic prescriptions
- a crucial step in mitigating development of resistant microorganisms.
Addressing this challenge requires a product that is cost-effective and
consistently accurate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the first
commercially available optical spectroscopy product for middle ear effusion and
the only known method capable of accurately assessing ear health in very waxy
ears. Although optical spectroscopy as a scientific method is widely practiced,
comparatively few commercial medical products exist. High-cost, bulky
spectrometer units are a primary limitation restricting development of products
tailored to primary care and other low margin medical specialties where there is
great need. The proposed work enables cost-effective manufacture and deployment
of the proposed device for ear infection and will be a platform for other next-
generation, LED-based optical spectroscopy medical devices. The investigators
will develop an algorithmic scheme to correct variability in mass manufactured
LED and photodiode components and design and construct test systems to
automatically apply corrections to each completed medical device assembly. The
resultant methods and systems will enable deployment of medical optical
spectroscopy systems at up to 100X lower unit cost as compared to spectrometer
based systems. The resultant device for ear infection will enable clinicians to
more easily adhere to American Academy of Pediatrics and American Academy of
Family Physicians guidelines for treating ear infections in primary care where
there is greatest need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.