* 1841603
* Student Travel for Programming Languages Mentoring Workshop at ACM SIGACT-SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages, 2019 (PLMW@POPL)
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Stephan Zdancewic, Association Computing Machinery
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

A Programming Languages Mentoring Workshop (PLMW) is being organized as part of
the 47th ACM SIGPLAN-SIGACT Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages
(POPL), the premier conference on the foundations of programming languages. The
conference will be held in Lisbon, Portugal. This award specifically supports
students from underrepresented groups and gives priority to US citizens and
permanent residents to attend the mentoring workshop in addition to the POPL
conference. The impact of the award relates to broadening participation in
computing, providing opportunities for students to receive mentoring from
leading researchers, and building the next generation of researchers and
knowledgeable practitioners in all aspects of programming languages and
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mentoring workshop program comprises a number
of talks and panels in several areas of programming language theory, such as
type systems, verification, program analysis, model checking, logic and language
design. The intention of these talks is to provide an introduction to the topics
covered by the POPL conference and to the breadth of the programming languages
research community. Additionally, the workshop will include mentoring panels
that will cover practical topics about starting a research career, the job
search process, and different careers that are available post-PhD. The purpose
of these panels is both to provide useful advice that will benefit the
participants as well as to demonstrate the day-to-day components of a research
career. Speakers will be a mix of junior and senior researchers, who are leaders
in their respective research areas and known for their mentorship
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.