* 1841357
* EAGER: Flame-Assisted Chemical Vapor Deposition for Energy Storage Electrode Fabrication
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Joaquin Camacho, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 06/30/2021
* USD 121,579.00

Steady baseload power, based on renewable energy, requires widespread
implementation of energy storage technology. This project is to develop a flame
synthesis process for producing energy storage electrodes. Such flame-based
fabrication can reduce production steps and improve sustainability. Rapid
synthesis and dry production are key strengths of flame synthesis. The control
and selectivity of flame synthesis will allow for fabrication of high-performing
energy storage electrodes. It is anticipated that the flame-based method
developed in this project will have the potential to produce energy storage
electrodes on an industrial scale. This project will also lead to the creation
of a course, "Scalable Manufacturing of Emerging Technologies", which will
expose students to manufacturing methods relevant to emerging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on flame synthesis of
manganese oxide and carbon nano-materials in a process that combines deposition
into functional films. Relevant to energy storage electrodes, this work involves
various fundamental studies, including a) thermodynamics and kinetics of
manganese oxide and carbon nanoparticle flame synthesis, b) relationship between
nano-material structure / film-morphology and electrochemical performance, and
c) aerosol dynamics governing fabrication of multi-component films for energy
storage electrodes. A new thermodynamic analysis for the surface energy effect
at flame conditions will be applied and kinetics of Mn oxidation and carbon sp2
formation will be studied. Reacting flow simulations of flame synthesis in
stagnation flow will be connected to aerosol dynamics of porous film deposition.
A dual-flame CVD process for fabrication of Mn oxide / carbon films will be
developed for energy storage electrodes having maximum ionic and electronic
conductivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.