* 1841558
* EAGER SitS: Autonomous Soil Nutrient Sensing System
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Ziqian Dong, New York Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 02/28/2023
* USD 299,998.00

Population growth, aggressive farming practices, and climate change have put
significant stress on the food production system for sustainable growth.
Agricultural runoff from over-fertilization and waste from large farms into
natural water sources can cause algae outbreaks, reduce the dissolved oxygen in
water, resulting in ecosystem disturbance and decline in fish populations.
Precision agriculture with data-backed decision-making such as fine-grained
spatiotemporal soil properties (moisture, temperature, pH, nutrients, organic
matter, etc.) has potential to improve the efficiency of the farming practices
by increasing crop growth and reducing agricultural runoff that contaminates
surface and groundwater along with other negative environmental impacts. Current
practice of soil property measurement relies heavily on taking samples for
laboratory testing, which is costly and time consuming for implementation over
large areas. This project will investigate a low-cost autonomous soil nutrient
sensing system to support precision agriculture by integrating
microelectromechanical system sensors, ground penetrating radar, as well as
autonomous unmanned aerial vehicle-enabled wireless sensor
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes the development of a passive,
low cost, pervasive, maintenance-free sensor that can be interrogated wirelessly
and provide measurement of soil water content, temperature, pH, and nutrient
concentration. The project focuses on detecting and evaluating nitrate and heavy
metal ions concentration in the soil, which are indicators of agricultural
runoffs and environmental contaminants. For this purpose, surface acoustic wave
sensors that consist of surface acoustic wave delay lines and conductive
polymer-based impedance sensors connected to a reflector will be considered as
the main sensing modules. The sensors can be placed in the soil for in-situ
measurement. The specific research objectives of this project are to: 1)
identify specific polymers for nitrate and heavy metal ion detection, 2) design,
fabricate and validate the surface acoustic wave sensors, 3) design and select
proper antenna and ground penetrating radar for wireless measurement of the
passive sensors, and 4) integrate the data analysis and communication system.
The project team has a collective research expertise in biochemistry, radar and
antenna design, microelectromechanical sensors, and communication networks in
the field of electrical, computer, and mechanical engineering as well as life
sciences. The success of this project can lead to significant improvement in the
autonomous devices with novel antenna, communication system and nutrient sensor
designs to measure signals in the soil at a reasonable cost and are scalable for
deployment on a larger scale. The resulting integration of knowledge and
expertise from multiple domains, and the generation of new methodologies and
data, will provide the means to address pressing societal challenges in
sustainable agriculture from a holistic design point of view. The project has
potential to forge important new directions for several scholarly and
professional disciplines that are oriented toward improving community resilience
and train a cohort of undergraduate and graduate students from multiple
disciplines to engage in scientific research and create usable scientific tools
for stakeholders for a sustainable future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.