* 1841574
* EAGER SitS: Active Self-Boring Robots that Enable Next Generation Dynamic Underground Wireless Sensing Networks: Fusion of Fast Prototyping, Modeling and Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Junliang Tao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 12/31/2020
* USD 316,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Signals in the Soil
(SitS) award funds a high risk/high return bio-inspired research project needed
for the development of self-boring sensor probes in the ground. Distributed
sensing is essential for realizing intelligent assessment or management of the
natural and built environment based on rich spatial and temporal data. A
wireless sensing network (WSN) is particularly attractive since it eliminates
costly and cumbersome wire connections. However, there are tremendous challenges
involved in the application of WSN in harsh environments such as the near-
surface underground region, mainly due to the fact that soil is opaque,
heterogeneous, dissipative and hard to penetrate/excavate. This EAGER project
explores a bioinspired platform technology known as active self-boring robots,
which will enable next generation dynamic underground WSN (DUWSN). In such a
network, the sensor nodes are integrated into a robot, mimicking burrowing
animals, that deploys itself autonomously with minimal disturbance to the soil
and minimal human intervention. Thanks to its motility, each robot would be able
to return to the surface for service purposes. More importantly, these robotic
nodes would be able to locomote underground and change their sensing locations
as needed. In this way, a dynamic reconfigurable rather than a static wireless
sensing network can be established to improve spatial coverage and the
resolution of the data as well as the reliability of the data transmission. The
proposed research is potentially transformative since small, agile underground
robots can be deployed for a wide range of direct applications. Examples include
precision agriculture, contaminant monitoring and prediction, and health
monitoring for infrastructure such as levees, dams and foundations. This
platform technology can also be used for surveillance, reconnaissance and
exploration purposes. This award allows the research team to actively reach out
to researchers in related fields and explore broader collaborations, as well as
to seek industrial partners to expedite the development and application of the
proposed technology. Outreach and educational activities are planned to engage
underrepresented first-generation undergraduate and high school students, in
collaboration with the NSF Engineering Research Center for Biomediated and
Bioinspired Geotechnics at Arizona State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will advance our understanding of underground locomotion via a robotic,
self-boring platform purpose-built to explore soil/agent interactions. It will
answer exploratory questions such as: 1) What are the mechanical requirements
for a penetrating agent to achieve motility? 2) How do we mimic the self-boring
mechanisms adopted by various burrowing animals? 3) To mimic a certain boring
mechanism, which actuating and control strategy is best? and 4) Which self-
boring mechanism is optimal for a certain type of soil such as sand, silt and
clay? The search of solutions will start by examining a wide array of biological
exemplars. An array of robot prototypes based on different self-boring
mechanisms and actuating strategies will be designed. A fast prototyping
strategy will be established to systematically design and fabricate the robots
and will be informed by analytical and numerical modeling. The penetration
performance of the robots with controlled kinematics and soil conditions will be
characterized using an experimental testbed. And finally, relationships will be
established to correlate control input, robot kinematics, soil properties and
penetration performance, possibly aided by machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.