* 1841848
* Career:  Nanoparticle-Antibody Conjugates in Medical Imaging and Environmental Sensing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Nicole Steinmetz, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 03/31/2020
* USD 201,048.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award funded by the Biomaterials program in
the Division of Materials Research to Case Western Reserve University will
pioneer novel antibody-nanoparticle conjugates. Antibodies and their conjugates
find applications across scientific disciplines; the combination of antibodies
with nanoparticles provides a means for multiplexed, miniaturized devices with
enhanced detection capabilities. A biology-inspired nanofabrication technology
will be implemented for the design of protein-based diagnostics for health and
environment monitoring. This work promises to advance the scientific knowledge
underlying nanoparticle design rules for improved disease and pollutant
detection. With respect to future and potential biomedical applications, the
proposed biomaterials hold great potential for detection and sub-typing of
tumors, or combined with therapeutic molecules for drug- and gene-delivery.
Furthermore, the proposed nanoparticle-antibody arrays could find applications
as sensors to detect and/or purify various pesticides, steroids, and other
pollutants. Advanced medical imaging and environment sensing devices is the key
to maintain healthy living environments and societies. An important further
benefit is the training and education of students in an interdisciplinary
environment fostering team sciences, bridging bioengineering, synthetic biology,
biomedicine, and environmental sensing. K-12 and public engagement will be
promoted through the established 'The Nanoman' multimedia outreach
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This award is to synthesize
and study novel immunosensors, and to educate the public and next-generation
leaders in biomolecular research and industry. Nanoparticle-antibody conjugates
will be produced from nucleoprotein assemblies with integrated antibody-binding
domains formed by the components of the tobacco mosaic virus. The aspect ratio
(length:width) of the soft matter immunoconjugates will be tightly controlled;
therefore providing a unique platform to investigate nanoparticle aspect ratio
as a design parameter for enhanced medical imaging and environmental sensing.
The proposed nanoparticle-antibody conjugates hold great potential for
applications in biomedicine, including cancer detection, sub-typing of tumors,
as well as drug- and gene-delivery. Furthermore, the biology-programmed
nanofabrication technique will be extended to produce spatial arrays of
nanoparticle-antibody conjugates on surfaces for sensing of pollutants in water
sources. Screening and detection of diseases as well as environment monitoring
are critical to maintain healthy living environments and societies. As part of
the outreach activities, the multimedia educational program 'The Nanoman' will
serve as a platform to peak interest in STEM research through video and gaming.
Graduate and undergraduate student training will focus on synthetic biology and
biomolecular engineering with emphasis on collaborative and interdisciplinary
research.