* 1841479
* Collaborative Research: Data Infrastructure for Open Science in Support of LIGO and IceCube
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,11/30/2020
* David Schultz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 11/30/2020
* USD 197,221.00

In 2015, the NSF-funded LIGO Observatory made the first-ever detection of
gravitational waves, from the collision of two black holes, a discovery that was
recognized by the 2017 Nobel Prize in Physics. In 2017, LIGO and its sister
observatory Virgo in Italy made the first detection of gravitational waves from
another extreme event in the Universe - the collision of two neutron stars.
Gamma rays from the same neutron star collision were also simultaneously
detected by NASA's Fermi space telescope. Meanwhile, the NSF-funded IceCube
facility, located at the U.S. South Pole Station, has made the first detection
of high-energy neutrinos from beyond our galaxy, giving us unobstructed views of
other extreme objects in Universe such as supermassive black holes and supernova
remnants. The revolutionary ability to observe gravitational waves, neutrinos,
and optical and radio waves from the same celestial events has launched the era
of "Multi-Messenger Astrophysics," an exciting new field supported by one of
NSF's ten Big Ideas, "Windows on the Universe".

The success of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics depends on building new data
infrastructure to seamlessly share, integrate, and analyze data from many large
observing instruments. The investigators propose a cohesive, federated,
national-scale research data infrastructure for large instruments, focused
initially on LIGO and IceCube, to address the need to access, share, and combine
science data, and make the entire data processing life cycle more robust. The
novel working model of the project is a multi-institutional collaboration
comprising the LIGO and IceCube observatories, Internet2, and platform
integration experts. The investigators will conduct a fast-track two-year effort
that draws heavily on prior and concurrent NSF investments in software,
computing and data infrastructure, and international software developments
including at CERN. Internet2 will establish data caches inside the national
network backbone to optimize the LIGO data analysis. The goal is to achieve a
data infrastructure platform that addresses the production needs of LIGO and
IceCube while serving as an exemplar for the entire scope of Multi-messenger
Astrophysics and beyond. In the process, the investigators are prototyping a
redefinition of the role the academic internet plays in supporting science.

This project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.