* 1841616
* NSF Showcase for DUE Projects at the ACM SIGCSE Symposium
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Aaron Bloomfield, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 68,322.00

The Association for Computing Machinery's Special Interest Group on Computer
Science Education (ACM SIGCSE) Symposium is the largest annual gathering of
computer science educators, with over 1500 attendees in recent years. Although
the SIGCSE Symposium is an excellent venue for educators to disseminate their
findings after a project has been completed, faculty who are currently working
on projects often need to find collaborators to further their research. Still
other faculty have a research idea but are unsure where to start or how to best
apply for funding from the National Science Foundation. The NSF Showcase at the
SIGCSE Symposium will provide a venue for current NSF grant recipients to
present their work in progress, receive feedback, and recruit collaborators. The
NSF Showcase will help NSF program officers provide information and guidance to
help new researchers identify appropriate funding opportunities. Over the past
decade, hundreds of faculty members have presented at NSF Showcases, reaching
thousands of computer science educators. It is expected that this experience has
helped them move their projects forward and disseminate their
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core purpose of the NSF Showcase is to provide
an opportunity for grant recipients from the National Science Foundation's
Division of Undergraduate Education to present their projects at other times and
in different ways than when final results are ready. The NSF Showcase is a
cooperative effort between NSF and SIGCSE. NSF drives the project by providing a
list of potential presenters, while SIGCSE ensures that the NSF Showcase has a
prominent position at the SIGCSE Symposium. The NSF Showcase is designed to
allow grant recipients to circulate their ideas as interactive presentations and
demonstrations. Each project included in the showcase will be offered a
presentation-ready mini-booth to use for a 90-minute session. Through informal
interactions, principal investigators will be able to solicit feedback from
peers and program officers as well as recruit collaborators and adopters. The
NSF Showcase will also set space aside for program officer "office hours"
throughout the symposium. The office hours are intended to provide occasions for
potential grant writers and current PIs to consult with program officers early
in the project cycle, and gain crucial insights that can improve the likelihood
of the projects succeeding and findings being disseminated. The NSF Showcase has
become a staple in the computer science education community over the years that
it has been running at the SIGCSE Symposium. Participants in the NSF Showcase
routinely report that the Showcase had a significant impact on their work and
helped them move their research forward. Attendees of the Showcase see firsthand
the work currently supported by NSF DUE. The Showcase strives to continue to
provide a valuable service to the computer science education community and the
SIGCSE Symposium through these opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.