* 1841615
* EAGER SitS: Signaling the Health Of Tree-pit Soil (SHOTS)
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ioannis Kymissis, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 09/30/2021
* USD 275,881.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Signals in the Soil
(SitS) award is a high risk/high return research project that could provide
essential data for the modeling of rainwater infiltration in urban areas needed
in the design and operation of green infrastructure for storm water management.
As a result of high land surface coverage by buildings, pavement, parking lots,
and other impervious surfaces, a typical city block generates five times as much
stormwater runoff during wet-weather flow than a woodland area of the same size.
This runoff, which contains pollutants including oils, heavy metals,
particulates and nutrients, is responsible for the impairment of urban water
bodies throughout the world. In the United States, stormwater runoff is the
leading source of coastal zone pollution, and the third largest source of lake
and inland water body pollution. Urban soils can soak up rain that falls within
city boundaries, and thus help mitigate the adverse impacts of stormwater
runoff. Nonetheless, the ability of urban soils to infiltrate rainwater is
dependent on soil ecosystem health. Prior investigations into factors
influencing urban soil ecosystem health have primarily involved manual sampling
of soils followed by laboratory analysis. This has made it difficult to amass
the number of observations needed, over both space and time, to fully understand
the complexities of urban soil ecosystems. Without a better understanding of
soil ecosystem behavior, it is difficult to develop strategies for managing
urban soils in ways that maximize their capacity to reduce urban stormwater
runoff. This project is an interdisciplinary collaboration between an expert in
unconventional and advanced electronics (Kymissis) and an expert in geo-
environmental engineering and urban sustainability (Culligan) to enable proof of
concept for a wireless, low-power, in situ soil sensing system that has
significant potential for soil ecosystem monitoring across a wide-range of
settings. The new soil sensing system will be field-tested in urban soils
located in New York City.

The in situ sensors comprise of miniature, low-powered, wireless sensors under
development in the Kymissis lab. These low-cost systems use the circuit board as
an integral mechanical element, and incorporate capacitance sensing for non-
contact moisture monitoring, temperature monitoring, advanced power management,
and Bluetooth wireless communication for relaying information back to a readout
computer. The next generation system to be developed by this project will also
add pH and dissolved oxygen (DO) measurements, enabling the sensors to measure
indicators of the physical, chemical and biological health of soils. The sensing
system will be used to monitor soils located in 40 urban tree pits within the
Morningside Heights neighborhood of New York City. Culligan has prior, manually
collected, data on relationships between the water infiltration capacity of
these soils and tree pit design and management features. The data gathered from
the sensors will be compared to this prior data to validate the performance of
the new sensing system. Sensor data will also be used to advance understanding
of the factors influencing urban soil ecosystem services. The research program
is ideally suitable for involvement of local communities in citizen science
activities which directly relate to stormwater management in their neighborhood.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.