* 1841188
* EAGER: Closed-loop Silicon-biomolecular Systems with Integrated Synthesis-fluidics-nanopore Interfaces
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Jeffrey Nivala, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2020
* USD 230,028.00

Given the slowing down of cost-performance gains from Moore's law and the
scalability limits of digital storage technology, biomolecules are attractive
alternatives for information storage and processing -- DNA data storage in
particular is especially interesting due to its density, durability, and path to
feasibility. At the same time, electronics will likely continue to be an
integral part of computing systems, due to its high performance and the ability
to be engineered. Hence, it is natural to consider hybrid biomolecular-
electronic systems. Towards this end, this project is focused on building a
fully integrated, closed-loop system that includes DNA synthesis, molecular
sensors (nanopore), and fluidics for novel applications in biomolecular
information processing. If successful, the scientific community will be provided
with new and easy-to-use methods to accelerate molecular data storage-
processing-computing and synthetic biology experimentation. This will make
molecular computing and synthetic biology applications more accessible to the
broader community. Integrating in-vivo and in-vitro biomolecular components with
silicon systems can lead to innovations in a range of areas from health
diagnostics and therapies, new materials, food, to information
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will engineer a toolbox of
new molecular parts that can be used to store and transmit information in the
form of nanopore-addressable molecular barcoding of synthetic DNA and proteins.
A digital fluidics system will employ computer vision techniques for reliable
control of droplet movements. The investigators will develop machine learning
techniques to analyze raw nanopore sensor data for low-cost and high-throughput
identification of molecular outputs. Demonstration of these components within
the integrated system to be developed as part of this project will show proof-
of-principle applications that advance molecular information processing
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.