* 1841097
* Community-Building Workshop on Programmable System Security in a Software-Defined World
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Kun Sun, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 07/31/2020
* USD 48,500.00

We increasingly live in a software-defined world where systems that were once
implemented as rigid control systems or fixed-function hardware systems are now
highly programmable through software interfaces that decouple underlying
hardware details and offer remote control and centralized management. Early
examples of software-defined systems (SD-X) include multi-tenant clouds,
software-defined networking (SDN), network functions virtualization (NFV),
software-defined infrastructure (SDI), and software-defined radios (SDR). While
SD-X technologies have rapidly proliferated within industry and received
considerable systems research attention, the paradigm has not been fully
exploited in approaching a wide array of important security challenges. The
objective of this workshop is to identify those research challenges and
opportunities to exploit SD-X approaches in making system security more
programmable, agile, orchestrated, and intelligent. This workshop creates a
much-needed opportunity for a cross-cutting group of researchers to fill out the
vision of what programmable security based on SD-X could be, including research
challenges, long-term visions, and key issues. In the process, this workshop
will promote a more focused community and vision where traditionally disparate
communities previously worked in isolation and without a more ambitious system
security vision within the context of complex software-defined infrastructures.
The workshop report will be made available to the public via the workshop
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad directions to be considered by the workshop
attendees include, but are not limited to: (1) new abstractions for data/control
planes aimed specifically at security, (2) new architectures that integrate
diverse SD-X domains (networking, processing, storage, etc.) for a more powerful
and comprehensive security framework, (3) new programming and language paradigms
for programmable security, (4) a better understanding of attack surfaces and
adversarial methods within modern software-defined infrastructures, (5) new
formal and experimental methodologies for reasoning about software-defined
security, (6) the integration of emerging Artificial Intelligence/Machine
Learning and data-driven capabilities into programmable system security, (7) new
applications paradigms that exploit programmable paradigms in innovative ways,
and (8) the application of programmable security approaches to emerging
platforms and infrastructure domains. Overall, workshop participants will help
to build community and define the vision of a new generation of security
technologies in the rapidly expanding world of software-defined infrastructures
and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.