* 1841458
* EAGER SitS: A Multi-Sensor Probe Network for Continuous Monitoring of the Soil Health
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Jaehoon Lee, University of Tennessee Institute of Agriculture
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 09/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

Understanding the micro-organism community within soil is extremely important
for managing the growth, health, and productivity of plants in managed and
unmanaged fields. Existing sensors used to monitor the soil are not capable of
measuring the micro-organism activity in a low-cost, continuous, and spatially
dense manner. This project will address this issue by initiating collaborative,
exploratory research between three academic institutions (Tennessee Tech
University, SUNY at Buffalo, and the University of Tennessee Knoxville) on a
network of multi-sensor probes that are placed across fields in multiple
locations and wirelessly powered by a novel electromagnetic technology. The
project will provide for continuous and uninterrupted monitoring of soil
parameters at many places in the field that indicate soil microbial activity and
how it changes over time. This research will produce new knowledge and
engineering techniques that will enhance farmers' abilities to make better
decisions about precision management of crops that could reduce amounts and
costs of inputs and apply only what is needed by crops and soil to maintain soil
health. This impact alone will reduce waste, improve crop yield, reduce
environmental contamination, and ultimately generate greater economic income for
the Nation and its farmers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project
is to conduct research toward developing the next-generation of in situ,
networked, multi-sensor measurement systems for continuously and uninterrupted
monitoring of soil variables over wide outdoor expanses and time periods.
Contemporary low-cost soil monitoring systems are discrete and are incapable of
detecting soil chemical variables beyond pH. The first project goal, conducted
by the State University of New York at Buffalo (SUNY at Buffalo), addresses this
issue by developing a sensor system that analyzes the volatile organic compounds
(VOC) produced by biological processes that characterize soil health. The sensor
system utilizes an array of micro electro-mechanical system (MEMS) cantilevers
as an extremely small and selective spectroscopic transducer for detecting trace
gas concentrations in the mid-IR optical region. These chemically specific,
extremely sensitive, and highly compact sensors will be integrated with
conventional soil sensing systems that detect moisture, temperature, pH, and
conductivity to create a multi-sensing probe. The second project goal, conducted
by Tennessee Tech University (TTU), addresses the issue of powering the sensor
probe's electronics by continuing research on a wireless power transmission
technique capable of transferring energy from an electrical power source to a
plurality of multi-sensing probes over wide outdoor areas. The aim is to provide
the sensor systems with a stable, uninterruptable source of power to achieve a
continuous sensor operation that does not require maintenance or is susceptible
to interferences. The wireless transmission will be accomplished by the
excitation of a non-radiating Transverse Magnetic (TM) propagation mode at radio
frequencies that allow the soil/air interface to act as a waveguide. The TTU
researchers will explore an original concept where a dual above/below ground
excitation method is utilized in order to maximize the waveguide effect. The
third project goal, conducted by the University of Tennessee Knoxville (UTK), is
to analyze the data from the wirelessly powered, multi-sensor probe network in
order to build predictive algorithms needed to characterize soil health and make
critical growing decisions. Together, the research goals of this project will be
transformative in broadening our understanding of soil health; leading to better
environmental practices and enhanced agricultural production. Beyond soil
health, the wireless power transmission research will achieve two very important
scientific and engineering outcomes: (1) Demonstration of a completely new
method of wireless electrical power transmission over a large area. Such an
engineering achievement will not only have a transformative impact in soil
science and agriculture, but in other fields including renewable energy, power
distribution, national security, etc. (2) Advancement of our understanding of
electromagnetic (EM) propagation physics by experimentally confirming the
existence of the Zenneck Surface Wave over a natural earth
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.