* 1841374
* EAGER: Social Dynamics of Organizational Behavior in Temporary Virtual Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Brian Keegan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2021
* USD 199,864.00

This research leverages the large-scale, detailed, international, and
unobtrusive data logged by online electronic sports (e-sports) to understand the
organizational behavior of temporary virtual teams. Teamwork and collaboration
are essential for success in contemporary organizations, and as teams become
increasingly distributed, virtual, self-assembled, cross-functional, and
temporary, existing frameworks for supporting effective teamwork need to be
revised. Multiplayer online e-sports are models for developing new and more
effective frameworks for technologically-mediated teamwork: clear and consistent
performance metrics, detailed and public behavioral data for quantitative
analysis, a large and international user base, and extensive randomization,
repeated observations, and matching for making strong causal inferences. The
inferences made from detailed behavioral records of high-tempo, naturalistic
decision making can be extended to many other settings such as disaster response
or breaking news. The findings from this research could provide the empirical
basis for identifying under-utilized expertise in noisy social systems,
optimizing team assembly algorithms to improve performance, improving decision
making in temporary virtual teams, and using online e-sports as diagnostic tools
for existing teams. The findings from this project will also inform the design
and governance of e-sports that already attract tens of millions of users around
the world.

The project pursues two initiatives to understand how to improve the performance
of temporary virtual teams. The first initiative examines how team assembly
decision-making in high-tempo contexts influences team performance. The second
initiative examines how software and database patches disrupt mental models and
decision-making. This research will triangulate between (1) existing
organizational theories and constructs about team processes, (2) quantitative
methods from data mining, machine learning, and econometrics for analyzing
unobtrusive observational data about user behavior, and (3) the unique
affordances of several popular e-sports to examine the variables and mechanisms
that influence team performance in a naturalistic setting. The results of this
research project will (1) provide comparative empirical insights into a rapidly
growing cultural and economic phenomenon; (2) develop frameworks and models to
increase engagement in sociotechnical systems; and (3) provide generalizable
recommendations for improving the performance of temporary virtual teams. This
project will create free software libraries, data collections, and supporting
tutorials and documentation enabling other researchers to develop and evaluate
organizational theories using data drawn from e-sports.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.