* 1841420
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Factors Influencing the Development of Monumental Architecture
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Terry Hunt, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2020
* USD 24,923.00

The construction of large and elaborate monumental architecture, such as mounds,
pyramids, tombs, and statues, were important factors in the emergence of
socially complex societies, as they are seen as archaeological evidence for the
rise of organized religion, social stratification, competition between social
groups, and large-scale cooperation within them. How these processes relate to
environmental and ecological factors, however, is poorly understood and this
limits understanding of societal evolution. This project seeks to shed insight
into the socio-ecological factors underlying the emergence of monument
construction.These processes will be investigated through archaeological and
environmental investigations on the island of Rapa Nui (Easter Island), famous
for its elaborate religious monumental architecture. The famous monuments of
Rapa Nui are at great risk of being destroyed by erosion, storm surges, and
development. This research will result in the creation of high-resolution 3D
models to be used as digital documentation and preservation tools to help
conserve Rapa Nui's monument sites. This is an urgent need and a goal that will
be achieved through an on-going collaborative partnership with Rapanui
archaeologists and stakeholders. This project also involves several education,
training, and outreach initiatives, including training of American and Rapanui
students in archaeological survey and geospatial field techniques, training and
dissertation completion for Co-PI DiNapoli, and dissemination of results in both
academic and public media. These initiatives will directly contribute to
enhancing collaborative relationships, training for underrepresented groups, and
public engagement in archaeological science.

This project will test predictions of an evolutionary ecology model known as
costly-signaling theory for the origins of monument construction using Rapa Nui
as a case study. Given Rapa Nui's small size, isolation, and plethora of
religious monuments, it offers an ideal model system to investigate the
evolutionary ecology of monument construction. The central hypothesis is that,
in addition to their well-known religious roles, monuments functioned within
Rapa Nui society as conspicuous displays (i.e., costly signals) of communities'
competitive ability to control and defend their limited critical resources,
which resulted in limited violent conflict or interaction between groups. This
hypothesis will be tested through archaeological and environmental
investigations of: 1) the energetic costs of building monuments; 2) their
visibility on the landscape; 3) relationships between the costs of building
monuments, their visibility, and contested subsistence resources; and 4) the
degree of interaction between prehistoric communities. These objectives will be
approached through a series of geospatial field techniques, quantitative
analyses, and geochemical sampling. All data and analyses will be made fully
open-access, which is crucial for reproducible research in archaeological
science. This project has the potential to advance anthropological theory and a
broader understanding of societal change by illuminating the social and
ecological influences behind why cooperation, competition, and religiosity were
so frequently manifested as monumental architecture in the human past.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.