* 1841666
* I-Corps: Controlled-Trajectory Rapid Compression and Expansion Machine
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Zongxuan Sun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to enable
clean energy solutions for combustion systems and renewable fuels by providing a
powerful and high throughput experimental instrument for combustion and fuel
characterization, especially for the transportation sector. In the U.S alone,
the transportation sector, which is dominated by internal combustion engines,
accounts for about 28% of total energy consumption, 70% of the total petroleum
consumption and 27% of the total greenhouse emissions. The key to higher energy
efficiency and lower emissions for this sector lies in a better understanding of
physical and chemical characteristics of combustion processes leading to the
development of advanced engines as well as alternative fuels, especially from
renewable sources. The controlled trajectory rapid compression and expansion
machine (CT-RCEM) addresses this pressing need of the combustion community by
offering significant improvements over the conventional rapid compression
machines (RCM). The CT-RCEM has the potential to transform the RCM market and
bring unique benefits to end users that include universities, government
research laboratories, automotive industry and oil and gas industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project uses a precise motion controller with
a high speed large force electrohydraulic actuator to mitigate the most
fundamental limitation of the conventional RCM, an inherently rigid actuation
system. The typical operation of an RCM involves, as the name suggests, rapid
compression of air-fuel mixture by high speed motion of a piston in combustion
chamber, leading to the ignition of the fuel. The associated data provides
valuable insight into the combustion characteristics. However, the piston
trajectory during this compression process is highly facility dependent and any
changes in the operating parameters require hardware intervention and subsequent
recalibration, leading to repeatability and reproducibility issues as well as a
long turnaround time between experiments. The controlled trajectory rapid
compression and expansion machine alleviates this limitation with its precisely
controllable actuation system. The piston motion profile can be changed by
digitally changing the piston reference trajectory assigned to the motion
controller. This ability to tailor the piston trajectory allows the CT-RCEM to
provide significant advantages and new capabilities over the conventional
RCM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.