* 1841589
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Fundamentals of Acousto-Plasticity and Tribology in Ultrasonically Enhanced Incremental Sheet Forming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Xun Liu, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2020
* USD 85,214.00

Today's fast-moving and competitive markets increase the frequency of product
updates and rapidly expand demands for customized parts. Accordingly, high
quality, low-cost prototyping and low volume manufacturing processes are
desirable. No proven additive manufacturing or rapid prototyping approaches
exist for sheet metals or large, thin parts - conventional additive
manufacturing has too small of a build space and warps too much to produce parts
such as automotive body panels. Incremental sheet forming (ISF), which utilizes
a small tool to induce local deformation as it translates over the metal sheet,
is a manufacturing approach that has been investigated recently because of its
die-less setup, universal tooling and high flexibility. However, achieving
dimensional and geometric accuracy as well as surface finish of the current ISF
formed parts are a challenge, but the main drawback is the limited formability
in the approach, leading to very high scrap rates. Ultrasonic vibration, known
for its bulk material softening effects, surface modification and friction
behavior improvements, offers promise in alleviating these concerns. This EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports fundamental
research to advance knowledge of the ultrasonic effects on material behavior in
ISF processes. Success in this unique multidisciplinary study will lead to
significant improved formability and process capabilities. Leveraging this new
knowledge will expand ISF applications in various industries, such as aerospace,
automotive, defense and medical, so that it has direct positive impact on the US
national security and economic welfare. Students involved in the project will
gain multidisciplinary knowledge and research capabilities including material,
mechanical and manufacturing science and technologies. Outreach activities will
emphasize the mentoring of women and underrepresented minorities.

The objective of this project is an innovative improvement of the incremental
sheet forming (ISF) process by effectively applying ultrasonic vibration to the
tool during the forming operation. The potential benefits are to reduce forming
force, increase formability, increase dimensional and geometrical tolerance and
improve surface quality. This collaborative project includes an integrated
experimental and modeling study of material behavior during tensile testing with
ultrasonic vibration utilizing high speed digital image correlation analysis.
The results will serve to design an effective approach for incorporating
ultrasonic energy into ISF process. Ultrasonically assisted ISF will then be
performed under different conditions. The interaction mechanisms between
ultrasonic vibration and material deformation during ISF will be studied in
terms of in-process variables, post-processing properties and multi-scale
microstructure. The effect of ultrasonic vibration on both surface and bulk
properties will be studied, including the impact on texture and grain size. The
goals of this project are (1) understanding of the fundamental principles that
govern the material behavior under ultrasonic vibration and (2) demonstration of
the improvements enabled by ultrasonically assisted incremental forming process
for complex free form geometries.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.