* 1841613
* EAGER SitS:  Sustainable Biosensor Integration for Precision Management of Agricultural Soils
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Stephen Welch, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2021
* USD 307,970.00

To avoid major global food disruptions by 2050, crop productions rates must
improve. One way to help improve crop production rates is to provide farmers
with real-time data on soil health so they can make better-informed agricultural
decisions, particularly during the growing season. Soil data is crucial, but
extremely difficult to obtain. Researchers and farmers often rely of soil
sampling methods that are not representative of overall field health. This
project will use sensors powered by microbes to measure soil moisture and soil
nutrients. These sensors will detect these soil variables using radio waves,
and, along with detailed mathematical models of the sensors and their
surroundings, extract comprehensive information on soil health. The rate at
which the microbes generate power for these sensors will also provide data on
soil activity. More importantly, the radio waves used for measurement will sense
overall conditions rather than just single points in a field, thus eliminating
the need for constant manual soil sampling. This unique combination of sensors
and mathematical models will thus collect hard to obtain soil information that
can help farmers make more informed decisions about agricultural practices. If
successful, this research could help improve crop production rates and ensure
the Nation's food security through 2050 demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal uses multidisciplinary methods to create a fused sensor for soil
microbial activity and non-point monitoring of soil moisture, multi-ion nitrogen
cycling, and nutrient availability. The project is based on three ideas. The
first idea is to use subsurface microbial fuel cells (MFCs) to power an
impedance spectroscopy sensor (ISS) operating from 0.04 to 1.0 megahertz.
Because water and various single-ion solutions have electromagnetic
permittivities that differentially vary with frequency, appropriate signal
processing will be able to disambiguate ionic concentrations in the soil water
mixture. This is not possible with normal soil conductivity sensors. As a bulk
volumetric measurement, ISS ameliorates the problem of soil variability that
cannot be adequately captured by point sensors. For the second idea, the MFC
will sense soil microbial activity. Metal anodes at different depths and redox
potentials will be dip-coated with a protective polymer coating doped with
enzymes that exclude endogenous soil microbes from the anode biofilm and create
anaerobic conditions at the point of power generation. In these anaerobic
conditions, organic acids will be produced to fuel the MFC. At each point in
time, the power generated by the MFC will reflect the soil microbes as they
metabolize soil carbon and nutrients near the sensor. In addition, the ISS will
periodically monitor internal properties of the MFC. For the third idea, the
project will develop a continuous-time, partial differential equation model
linking soil solute movement, thermal dynamics, soil chemical kinetics,
electrical redox processes, microbial activity, and basic root/shoot growth.
This model will yield the desired data on soil moisture, ionic concentrations,
and microbial activity based on the measured values of multi-frequency
permittivities and the MFC output currents. In addition to this research, the
principle investigators will collaborate with the local Manhattan Sunset Zoo and
Manhattan high school teachers to develop classroom lessons on soil sensing
technologies and soil processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.