* 1841799
* Educational support and synthesis based on the initial phase of the Ocean Observatories Initiative
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Scott Glenn, Consortium for Ocean Leadership, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2020
* USD 739,729.00

After more than a decade of planning and construction, the Ocean Observatories
Initiative (OOI) began to provide data to the community in 2016. The Consortium
for Ocean Leadership (COL) and Rutgers University have been maintaining the OOI
data and have run a series of workshops for early career faculty to introduce
them to the OOI data systems. There will be a funder-imposed breakpoint in OOI
on October 1, 2018, when all functions associated with data delivery will
transition to a new operations and management team. Data collected prior to
October 1, 2018 would benefit significantly from additional evaluation and
annotation. These efforts will improve OOI data quality assurance for the
benefit of the OOI researcher community in the future, as well as support
educational user engagement via the development of OOI data documentation and
case studies. Supported data activities fall into three categories: (1)
evaluation and validation of OOI datasets, (2) supporting educational engagement
in the use of OOI data, and (3) synthesis and additional evaluation of the
previous OOI community engagement activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OOI
provides an unprecedented opportunity for everyone, including scientists at all
levels, to use vast amounts oceanographic data without the need to secure large
funding grants or ship time. Because the OOI is open access, it allows
scientists to connect with cutting edge technology and ocean data regardless of
their age, gender, or physical disabilities. OOI data are also valuable for
education and providing data-based learning opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students that improve their STEM education and experiences. Activities
to be undertaken in this proposal will lift barriers to using OOI data for both
the scientific and education community. The effort will also support
opportunities for graduate students to share their OOI research with high school
students by organizing portions of the 2019 National Ocean Sciences Bowl, which
is focused on the theme of Ocean Observing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.