* 1841793
* EAGER:   Effects of Environmental Contaminants on the Lignocellulosic Biomass in Switchgrass Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 02/09/2018,03/31/2020
* Benoit Van Aken, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 03/31/2020
* USD 84,962.00

1624331 Van Aken

Growing bioenergy feedstock plants on contaminated land for the combined benefit
of bioenergy production and land bioremediation is an attractive strategy which
has the potential to increase the cost-efficiency of plant-based biofuel.
Production of bioethanol from lignocellulosic biomass, second generation
bioethanol, is currently considered one of the most sustainable options for
reducing dependency on fossil fuel and reducing carbon dioxide emissions, while
limiting competition with land for food production. The plant selected for this
study is the lignocellulosic feedstock species, switchgrass (Panicum virgatum),
which is a model plant to study the production of second-generation bioethanol.

The overall objective of the proposed research is to determine the physiological
and molecular effects of the phytotoxic antibiotic, chlortetracycline, on the
biomass productivity and digestibility in the lignocellulosic plant,
switchgrass. The contaminant that will be tested is the model emerging
contaminant, chlortetracycline, which is known to exert toxic effects toward
most plant species. The proposed research involves the two following specific
aims: 1. To determine the effects of the phytotoxic emerging contaminant,
chlortetracycline, on the biomass productivity, composition, and digestibility
in the model lignocellulosic feedstock plant, switchgrass (Panicum virgatum). 2.
To understand the molecular mechanisms by which chlortetracycline affects the
biomass productivity and lignocellulose composition in exposed switchgrass
plants. Using a combination of analytical and molecular biology methods, the
proposed research will address the following questions: 1. What is the tolerance
of switchgrass plants toward the selected contaminant, chlortetracycline? 2. How
will chlortetracycline affect switchgrass plants in terms of biomass
productivity, lignocellulose digestibility, and bioethanol conversion? 3. What
are the genetic and molecular bases underlying the changes in biomass and
biomass composition (e.g., lignin) in chlortetracycline-exposed plants? The
research team brings complementary expertise in phytotechnology, molecular
biology, and spectral analyses to conduct the research. Besides the research
objectives outlined above, this project will integrate research and education,
at the University and include the participation of high school students.