* 1841929
* SBIR Phase I:  Point-of-Use MEMS Gas Analyzer
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Xiaoli Su, Zebra Analytix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of a cost-effective,
user-friendly, high-performance microsystem suitable for in-field and on-site
gas analysis applications. Gas analyses are a mature but still growing multi-
billion dollar global market. The proposed product can have significant impact
across multiple industries and disciplines, including food processing and
safety, environmental monitoring, homeland security, and biomedical diagnostics.
It will provide the following important benefits to diverse customers: speed for
near-real time gas analysis with high performance, portability and robustness
for in-field and on-site uses, low cost to purchase and maintain, ease to use,
and versatility for different applications. Additionally, employment of the
proposed microsystem in process and quality controls can help improve
productivity while saving costs, and autonomously monitoring hazardous gases in
vulnerable environments can help protect workers and the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will be a proof-of-concept study on a
modular microsystem for point-of-use gas analyses. Conventional gas analysis
systems are bulky, resource and energy intensive, time consuming, and expensive
to purchase, operate, and maintain. Increasing demands for in-field and on-site
testing of volatile organic compounds and other gas phase species call for the
development of a miniaturized gas analyzer capable of overcoming these major
limitations. However, there are significant technical challenges associated with
such system integrations and instrument miniaturizations, which traditionally
result in significant compromises to the analytical capability/performance. The
proposed solution is a modular microsystem integrating multifunctional high-
performance microfluidic/sensor chips in a flexible and expandable format that
is suitable for mass production and versatile applications. In Phase I,
different chips will be fabricated and assembled into a testing system to
investigate the technical feasibility of modular design. A commercial prototype
will be developed in Phase II. Successful development of the proposed product
will provide opportunities to address unmet needs in a variety of markets
involving gas analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.