* 1841754
* Changes to Madden-Julian Oscillation Winds and Convection in a Future Warmer Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Eric Maloney, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 609,467.00

The Madden-Julian oscillation is a phenomenon of slowly eastward moving large-
scale tropical convection system thousands of miles across over the equatorial
Indian Ocean and Pacific. It affects the formation of hurricanes and tropical
storms by interacting with disturbances over Gulf of Mexico, Caribbean Sea, and
tropical Atlantic Ocean. The Madden-Julian oscillation is also capable of
producing alternating high and low pressure patterns over the north Pacific
Ocean and the United States, responsible for heavy rainfall events, droughts,
cold air outbreaks, and other extreme weather events that affect lives and
property. Such long-distance impacts of the Madden-Julian oscillation provide
useful forecast skill for extreme weather over the U.S. up to a few weeks in
advance. This project will explore if the Madden-Julian oscillation connections
to the United States may potentially weaken or shift geographically in a warmer
climate, which would have substantial implications for forecasts and for
society. This project will support a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher. Undergraduate students will also be involved in this research
through a summer internship program conducted at Colorado State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use a set of climate model simulations
to analyze how the Madden-Julian oscillation and its connections to the United
States may change in a future warmer climate. Idealized models with reduced
complexity will be used to identify and understand the underlying mechanisms
responsible for these changes. Foci will be how changes in the stratification of
the tropical atmosphere, and the position and strength of jet streams affect the
ability of the Madden-Julian oscillation to impact weather in mid-latitudes.
Whether the impacts of El Nino on United States weather may change in a warmer
climate will also be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.