* 1841519
* Planning IUCRC at University of Tennessee:  Center for High-Frequency Electronics and Circuits for Communication Systems (CHECCS)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Mongi Abidi, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The Center for High-Frequency Electronics and Circuits for Communication Systems
(CHECCS) team plans to establish a multidisciplinary IUCRC center in high-
frequency communication systems. Such systems have penetrated almost all aspects
of our daily life, with applications ranging from autonomous cars, personalized
medicine, and monitored healthcare to agricultural sensing and merchandise
inventory systems, for example. The scope of CHECCS broadly includes materials,
electronics, devices, circuits, radiation, and their applications. A team with
broad and complementary sets of expertise will collaborate with industrial
partners to initiate integrated research projects. Such projects will serve as
the foundation for the center, which will not only support research projects but
also coordinate educational activities in both high-frequency electronics and
communications to offer certificates and training as needed by industry
partners. The center?s objectives include solving multidisciplinary problems of
interest to industry in this technically-challenging and economically-vital
critical area, tackling industry strategic needs, and training future engineers;
thus, addressing a national need for qualified engineers and scientists with
deep expertise in the various technically-challenging areas supporting high-
frequency communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merits of CHECCS
are the development of the research and educational components of this
initiative into a highly visible integrated program in the US. At the University
of Tennessee, CHECCS will assist industry in addressing challenging
multidisciplinary research problems in the high-frequency bands including 5G and
UWB technology, healthcare and elderly care, digital RF frontend, and radars
with super high-resolution imaging. By combining knowledge from participating
research groups and creating a culture that links engineering research to
technological innovation through partnerships with organizations and to
stimulate technology transfer into commercial products or start-up companies,
thus producing highly qualified and trained engineers capable of leading
advanced research and exploratory activities. Broader impacts include
accelerating technology transfer research into viable products, stimulating
spin-offs and start-up businesses, and forming long-term partnerships various
with organizations while leveraging industry and NSF/DOD/DOE support. CHECCS
will combine knowledge from research groups, train future engineers, and equip
them with base knowledge through working on increasingly complex projects in
high-frequency communications. CHECCS will have graduate students involved in
high-quality pre-competitive research projects, thus developing students who are
knowledgeable in industrially-relevant research and attracting more domestic
students to strengthen ties to recruiters and alumni.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.