* 1841024
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Secure Context-aware Asynchronous Communication in Challenged Networks Based on XIA and MobilityFirst
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Peter Steenkiste, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2019
* USD 150,000.00

This project will conduct exploratory research combining the strengths of two
different visions of a next-generation trustworthy Internet: (1) MobilityFirst,
a design significantly enhancing mobile and wireless Internet capabilities; and
(2) eXpressive Internet Architecture (XIA), a design significantly enhancing
evolvability or the ability to introduce new network capabilities. This project
will explore a new communication primitive called named asynchronous
communication as a proof-of-concept synthesis of XIA and MobilityFirst's
strengths with two powerful distinguishing capabilities compared to the current
TCP/IP Internet: (1) Asynchronous communication allows two endpoints to exchange
data even when network connectivity is flaky and/or when there is minimal or no
trusted infrastructure (like cellular, WiFi, or satellite), scenarios in the
current Internet works poorly; (2) Named communication enables all communication
to be based on human-friendly names as opposed to IP addresses in the current
Internet, which simplifies the design, implementation, and maintenance of mobile
Internet applications. This EAGER project is the first example of a synthesis
effort across two large but separate projects funded as part of NSF's Future
Internet Architecture (FIA) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical scope of
the project will formalize name-based asynchronous communication as a general-
purpose communication primitive that works gracefully even in the absence of
contemporaneous end-to-end connectivity between communicating endpoints.
Compared to a large body of prior research on disruption-tolerant networks that
also shares overlapping goals but has largely focused on mobile ad-hoc edge
networks and "bundle" routing protocols, this project will develop an
information-centric communication primitive for general-purpose communication
across both edge and core networks in a manner that is robust to intermittent
connectivity outages. Named asynchronous communication will enable application
fine-grained control over the duration for which the network will attempt to
complete the retrieval or delivery by leveraging virtualized network functions
for intermediate storage. The key enablers of this design are MobilityFirst's
global name service (GNS) that enables seamless mobility and endpoint state
maintenance in a scalable and secure manner and XIA's ability to retrieve
arbitrarily named content in a verifiable manner. This exploratory effort will
conduct early research to instantiate a proof-of-concept of named asynchronous
communication, identify preliminary use cases, and quantify its benefits and
costs in challenged network environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader
impact of this exploratory effort is that it helps take us closer towards a
trustworthy and powerful Internet, a critical societal and national interest and
need. Asynchronous communication in particular is also especially suited to
military scenarios and if successfully deployed can significantly improve our
national defense capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.