* 1841153
* Acquisition of NMR and SIP instrumentation to support research and training of students from under-represented groups in near surface geophysics
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Lee Slater, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 144,406.00

This grant supports the purchase of two state-of-the-art scientific instruments:
a nuclear magnetic resonance borehole logging tool and a spectral induced
polarization borehole logging tool. These instruments will be used to enhance
and expand ongoing research in the earth sciences and near surface geophysics at
Rutgers University, Newark. The faculty are developing methods to improve the
evaluation of groundwater, to monitor processes associated with contaminant
remediation, and to evaluate carbon cycling in peatlands. The equipment will
also be used to recruit, educate and train undergraduate and graduate students,
specifically focusing on under-represented minorities, in near surface
geophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This grant supports the acquisition of two
state-of-the-art scientific instruments to enhance near surface geophysics
borehole logging investigations: a nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) borehole
logging tool (Vista Clara Dart), and a spectral induced polarization (SIP)
borehole logging tool (Mount Sopris QL40-SIP). These borehole tools will be used
by leading experts in both NMR and SIP at Rutgers University, Newark to address
scientific questions in multiple subfields of the earth sciences, including:
hydrogeophysics, biogeophysics and carbon cycling in peatlands. Within each of
these subfields, the borehole instrumentation will allow the near-surface
geophysics researchers at Rutgers University, Newark to develop critical
theoretical relationships in the laboratory, and test and apply them to answer
pertinent scientific questions in the field. In the area of hydrogeophysics the
instrumentation will be used to support ongoing projects to improve our ability
to estimate parameters used to quantify the flow of water, both in aquifers and
in the vadose zone. In biogeophysical research, these instruments will allow us
to upscale laboratory measurements, which have shown that NMR and SIP parameters
are sensitive to biogeochemical alterations associated with contaminant
degradation processes, to the field scale. In the area of carbon cycling in the
peatlands, measurements from the instrumentation will provide much needed
information to assess how variations in peat fabric structure observed across
peatlands regulate gas release to the atmosphere. The equipment will be
available for use by students in multiple NSF supported programs that are run by
faculty at Rutgers University, Newark and are aimed at increasing the
participation of under-represented minority students in STEM fields, including
the Garden State-Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation, the Rutgers
University REU program, and the GEOPATHS near surface geophysics field
experience program. Graduate students will also have full access to the
requested instrumentation, which will allow them to obtain unique skill-set and
expand their research interests, which will make them more competitive on the
job market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.