* 1841473
* Phase II IUCRC at University of Illinois at Chicago:  Center for Advanced Design and Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics (CADMIM)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Ian Papautsky, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 736,672.00

The Center for Advanced Design and Manufacturing of Integrated Microfluidics
(CADMIM) develops technologies for integrating and manufacturing labs-on-a-chip
(LOCs) for easy diagnosis of the human health, agriculture, and the environment.
CADMIM emphasizes design-oriented research that anticipates the need for cost-
effective manufacture and practical deployment, taking a broad integrated
strategy that seeks breakthroughs at the interfaces of material science,
engineering, biology, chemistry, and electronics in the development of next
generation LOCs. These considerations early in the research and design cycle are
key to transitioning technologies out of academic laboratories and into the
manufacturing sector. Expected broader impacts include competitive recruitment
mechanisms and attractive cross-disciplinary collaborative research
opportunities to engage excellent students and post-docs, including members of
underrepresented groups and veterans. Knowledge dissemination includes
publications, invention disclosures, and patents. Scalable prototyping processes
developed and/or adapted for microfluidics will also be made available to
academia and industry, including established companies and entrepreneurs, with a
goal to dramatically reduce the learning curve and streamline the idea-to-
product process. This center will help catalyze the generation of new knowledge
and pre-competitive research results to enable the development of microfluidics
based technologies to enable industry to address pressing societal
needs.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this center is to develop technologies
for integrating and manufacturing labs-on-a-chip (LOCs) for easy diagnosis of
the human health, agriculture, and the environment. The strategy for meeting
this goal centers on mass-produced diagnostic devices equipped with microfluidic
components, chip-sized devices with high sensitivities (nM - pM) and short assay
times (&lt; 30 min) -- capable of chemical analyses in miniaturized volumes (ul
- pl). The few available commercial microfluidic systems are expensive (costing
up to hundreds of thousand dollars) and do not have effective sampling and
analysis capability. What does not yet exist are mass-produced, cost-effective
LOC platforms that integrate components to carry out multiple
microfluidic/diagnostic functions and report results via a standard
communications device. A primary obstacle is the lack of integration-enabling
and manufacturable LOCs capable of processing real-world samples. Innovation is
needed on two related fronts: (a) employing and/or modifying existing scalable
processes make microfluidic devices, and (b) designing LOCs that are autonomous,
field deployable, and amenable to mass production. By working closely with
industrial member companies, CADMIM will make significant strides towards
commercialization of microfluidic technology, leading to new products, the
creation of new companies and/or new divisions within existing firms, new jobs,
and other tangible commercial and societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.