* 1841325
* 2018 MRS Fall Meeting: Symposium CM01 - Solid State Chemistry of Inorganic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Corey Thompson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2019
* USD 8,300.00

NON TECHNICAL SUMMARY

This Solid-State Chemistry of Inorganic Materials symposium at the 2018 Fall
Materials Research Society Meeting in Boston, MA, provides a dynamic venue for
scientists at various stages of their career, ranging from undergraduate and
graduate students to distinguished professors, to present their scientific
findings, ideas, and hypotheses in the area of inorganic materials research and
solid-state chemistry. A broad set of 27 invited speakers, including 9 female
speakers, and 60 contributed speakers together with multiple poster
contributions cover all aspects of the inorganic materials chemistry. The
contributors come from all over the world, with multiple contributions from
North America, Europe, and Asia. Given the interdisciplinary nature of solid-
state chemistry the MRS meeting is an extremely popular venue for such a
symposium.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY

The Solid-State Chemistry of Inorganic Materials symposium will be held at the
2018 Fall Materials Research Society Meeting in Boston, MA, it is the tenth in
an established series and is in part supported by the Solid State and Materials
Chemistry program in NSF's Division of Materials Research. The symposium focuses
on the presentation and discussion of recent advances in the solid-state
chemistry of inorganic materials and their impact on industrial applications.
Solid-state chemistry is an interdisciplinary field, which attracts a diverse
group of scientists interested in chemistry, condensed-matter physics, materials
science and engineering, ceramics, metallurgy, chemical engineering and
mineralogy/geology. Solid-state chemistry includes the synthesis of materials,
including novel compositions, crystal structures and morphologies
(nanocrystalline, thin film, heterostructures, and composites). Investigations
of the relationships between composition, structure and properties, as well as
the application of state-of-the-art and emergent characterization methods are
presented at the symposium as well. Solid-state chemistry encompasses not only
the discovery of new materials, but also advancements of techniques for
preparing and studying materials, including computational predictions. Knowledge
of the diverse properties of solids continues to expand. This symposium is an
important event for the international solid-state chemistry community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.