* 1841927
* SCUID: A Carbon Nanotube Based Sensor for Measurement of Dissolved Gases in Water
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Craig McNeil, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 11/30/2022
* USD 897,754.00

This research aims at developing an in-situ oceanographic sensor platform that
enables the measurement of dissolved gases of interest in the ocean in order to
study the nitrogen cycle in oxygen minimum zones. This type of sensor does not
exist to date and is accomplished by marrying two mature systems - a cutting
edge technology sensing platform, and a proven submergible housing. Carbon
nanotube-based gas sensors are considered cutting edge technology, allowing to
detect a wide range of environmental and safety related trace gases at relevant
sensitivities. They are low power, and have provided in-situ, real time,
automated measurement of chemicals in space, for fire detection, for fuel leak
detection, and as health monitoring system. Companies around the world are
looking to integrate these gas sensors due to their versatility, sensitivity,
and range of measurement. In recent years, start-ups manufacturing these sensors
in large numbers have formed in response to the high demand. While it is
possible today to measure trace gases such as N2O, NO, and DMS in the
atmosphere, the sensors to measure dissolved gases in seawater real time and in
situ are limited to only CO2, CH4, and H2S. Several of these climatically
relevant gases are known to be produced under low oxygen conditions, such as the
oxygen minimum zones in the open ocean, and ?deadzones? in the coastal ocean.
Today highly precise measurement of dissolved gases like N2O and NO rely on
laboratory-based analyses such as mass spectrometry and gas chromatography.
Global warming is the working hypothesis for the observed expansion of open
ocean Oxygen Minimum Zones; increased stratification reduces upper ocean
ventilation and aeration. Expansion of hypoxia in the coastal zone is linked to
eutrophication associated with excess nutrients in river runoff, from sources
such as chemical fertilizers applied to farms, fields, and lawns. Marine life
becomes highly stressed under hypoxic conditions, and dramatic ecological
impacts can occur, including massive kills of fish and shellfish and harmful
algae blooms. Longer lasting impacts also occur since juvenile fish are more
likely to be affected than mature fish, resulting in detrimental follow-on
effects such as economic losses. There is a critical need for a deeper
understanding of gas cycling in hypoxic zones. Measurement of climatically
relevant trace gases are necessary to quantify ocean sources and sinks, and to
understand their impact on global climate change. The oceanographic community
needs a new, small, low-power, real time dissolved gas sensor that can be tuned
to different gases of interest to allow high spatial resolution sampling for
specific gases of interest.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A platform independent sensor
can be used on floats, gliders, conductivity-temperature-depth sensors, and
automated underwater vehicles for open water and coastal surveys of dissolved
gases. This will not only expand the dissolved gases that a sensor can detected
in situ, but bolster scientific discovery, data, and models in areas such as
sea-air exchange, greenhouse gases, and hydrothermal vents. The sensing chip
consists of a single wall carbon nanotube gas sensor. It is provided by NASA
Ames Research Center and has been used to detect several gases in space and on
earth to date. For this research, the sensing chip is trained to detect N2O and
NO, two gases that are of great interest to the oceanographic community but have
not been possible to detect in situ to date. The sea-worthy, submergible housing
(to 2000m) will be provided by Pro-Oceanus, an expert in this field. Detection
limits aimed for are 100ppb and 5ppb, for N2O and NO respectively. Laboratory
testing of the gas sensor and integrated sensing system will take place at
APL/UW. Field tests to Hood Canal WA), and the Gulf of Mexico are planned in
year 3 of this proposal. If successful, these tests will yield unparalleled
spatial resolution of N2O and NO gas concentrations, and allow us to draw
conclusions about air-sea interaction that have not been possible to
date.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.