* 1841343
* Professional Experiences for Students in Plasma Science: Student Travel Support to Attend the 2018 Gaseous Electronics Conference
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Amy Wendt, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2019
* USD 10,530.00

This award will support student participation at the 71st Annual Gaseous
Electronics Conference (GEC) is to be held November 5-8, 2018, in Portland, OR.
The GEC has a long and venerable history in pursuit of the foundational physical
and chemical processes occurring in partially ionized, collisional plasmas,
encompassing the interactions between atoms, molecules, charged particles,
photons, waves, and fields. The GEC has a strong tradition of encouraging and
promoting student participation. Attending research conferences is an important
educational experience for students that cannot be replicated at their home
institutions. The GEC provides opportunities for students to expand their
networks, to learn about cutting edge research, and to develop and hone their
professional communication skills.

The GEC is a place to welcome students into a global professional community
where they can envision themselves spending their careers. The GEC program is
organized with coffee breaks mid-morning and mid-afternoon, as a way of
facilitating conversation among participants. At the 2018 GEC, intentional steps
are being taken to create a more inclusive conference atmosphere for those from
groups not well represented at the conference. These steps include a
reconsideration of the GEC experience to add a commitment to diversity and
inclusivity to its reputation as a premier venue for gaseous electronics
research. Although demographic changes in research communities have slower time
constants than might be desirable, the activities enabled by this award have the
potential for long term impact by introducing new traditions into the GEC
institutional memory. This approach includes introduction of several tested
professional development and social events intended to appeal to early career
attendees, including students and those from underrepresented groups. Questions
added to the post-conference survey will help to assess need for, interest in
and effectiveness of the added events, and responses will be used to guide
planning for subsequent years.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.