* 1841650
* EAGER SitS: Underground Radio Frequency Wireless Network for Measuring Soil Moisture over Large Spatial Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Xufeng Zhang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,958.00

Ensuring adequate food and water resources for an increasing population is one
of the major challenges of the 21st century. Our abilities to do this are highly
dependent on how efficiently soil and water natural resources are managed. In
addition, water stored in the soil changes considerably over space and time, and
it is difficult to measure these variations. This is important because water
variations in soil reservoirs affect the Earth's climate system, have large
influences on cloud formation and precipitation, and affect utilization of the
Sun's energy. An ability to accurately measure soil water content variations
over the landscape will enable us to improve agricultural yields, increase food
security, better manage water from rainfall (particularly intensive storms),
which is important in urban planning and management. The proposed research work
will create an inexpensive, wireless, scalable, fully buried system for frequent
measurements of soil water in field environments by using underground radio
frequency (RF) transmissions. The research brings together scientific expertise
from different disciplines, thus enabling collaboration among soil scientists,
engineers, and computer scientists to create an "internet-of-things" for
ultimate use in managing our limited water and soil resources and helping ensure
food security and societal well-being. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil water is one
of the most important factors that affects plant productivity. One of the grand
challenges in soil moisture monitoring is to capture the natural heterogeneity
of the soil-hydrological system at scales of 1 to 1000 m2. This intermediate
scale between point-scale and available remote sensing measurement scales is
important for determining impacts on ecosystem services as well as for improving
the use of water resources with environmentally sustainable management
practices. Currently, there are few methods for scaling soil moisture from very
limited numbers of point-scale measurements to larger scales (field, watershed
to regional). As a result, errors and biases are introduced in land surface,
hydrological, and vegetation models, and in determining soil saturation and
rainfall-runoff responses in catchments. It also handicaps the development of
precision and sustainable agriculture. Our objectives are to explore the
development of an inexpensive, wireless, scalable, fully buried sensor network
system using underground radio frequency (RF) transmission for measurements of
soil moisture over 1 to 1000 m2 spatial scales and high temporal resolution and
to evaluate the potential for this technology to serve as an accurate sensor in
soils. This technology, if successful, could enable soil scientists to gain a
better understanding of the complex soil system, its dynamics, and its
biological, chemical, and physical processes. We will use the attenuation of RF
signal that propagate inside soil to infer water content in the soil column
above the sensor. In this project, we will create a wireless cyberphysical
sensor network with approximately 40 nodes and implement it at a field site in
Illinois with highly-characterized soils for evaluation of concepts. Network
development includes hardware, firmware, and user interface. The RF nodes will
be buried in the field at about 25 cm deep to sense the water content between
the RF node and the soil surface. Data analysis will focus on the correlation
between soil moisture and changes in the wireless signal strength transmission.
Other factors, such as plant canopy height and root conditions, will be included
in machine learning algorithms to establish a robust model. The cyberphysical
sensing network will be relevant to many scientific and engineering
applications, including use by hydrometeorologists interested in land-atmosphere
interactions, by hydrologists for determining soil saturation for agricultural
purposes, drought monitoring, irrigation scheduling, and flash flood
forecasting, by water supply managers, and by scientists involved in weather and
climate research. This research has potential to influence development of new
sensing technologies in the future. The highly multidisciplinary nature of the
research will bring together soil scientists, computer scientists, and research
engineers to explore development of a novel "internet of things" for use in
managed and unmanaged soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.