* 1841964
* Materials Science and Engineering Educational Advances Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2022
* David Bahr, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 12/31/2022
* USD 49,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Materials science and engineering students are in
high demand from industry in areas ranging from steel fabrication to
semiconductor manufacturing to advanced composites for automotive and energy
generation. Graduates need to be able to use sophisticated tools, think
critically and innovatively, and be adaptive to a rapidly changing world. Now is
the time for the materials research and education community to explore advances
in pedagogy, effective learning principles, and educational content delivery to
better serve students. While the primary focus of this workshop is undergraduate
materials degree programs and introductory materials courses used by a wide
range of science and engineering majors, community college and graduate
education is also being addressed. This workshop is identifying the current best
practices in providing innovative and inclusive teaching methods and tools. The
results, distributed through a consensus report, will better prepare science and
engineering college graduates for using modern tools across all materials
science and engineering industry sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: The workshop brings together leaders and practitioners from the broadly
defined materials research and education field for a two-day workshop to share
new innovations in educational content delivery to impact the widest range of
students possible. The workshop includes demonstrations of new online learning
modules, the incorporation of computational simulation tools into both lectures
and labs, and the addition of active learning and entrepreneurship components to
the curriculum to foster a more inclusive student body and workforce of the
future. The workshop"s focus is on how these innovations are implanted in the
materials curriculum at the college level, and builds on prior meetings that
helped shape the continuously evolving content in materials courses across
several science disciplines. The organizers, drawn primarily from an
international organization of university materials science and engineering
department chairs, are committed to ensuring attendees represent all sectors and
dimensions of the materials research and education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.