* 1841261
* PhD Student Workshop on Transportation and Logistics Challenges and Opportunities; Loyola University of Chicago; Chicago, Illinois; May 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Mike Hewitt, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2019
* USD 49,797.00

This grant supports a workshop that will contribute to the national prosperity
and welfare, by expanding the capabilities of the United States scientific
community focused on transportation and logistics systems to meet their changing
needs and increased opportunities. Market factors such as same-day delivery,
technological innovations such as drones, and societal concerns such as
sustainability are driving needs and opportunities for new and more efficient
transportation and logistics systems. This workshop will bring together PhD
students with diverse backgrounds and from a wide selection of United States
universities to learn from academic and industry experts in these areas. By
exposing these PhD students to experts from both academia and industry, the
workshop will broaden and deepen the students' knowledge in a context wherein
they see how that knowledge can impact practice. These students will then be
better positioned and trained to perform research that enables today's and
tomorrow's US organizations to succeed economically in a sustainable manner. By
encouraging a diverse student population attending the workshop, it will foster
diversity in tomorrow's university faculties, and a scientific community that is
prepared to handle challenges on a global scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will broaden and deepen the knowledge base of PhD students doing
research in transportation and logistics at United States universities, both in
terms of methodologies and application domains. The workshop will include
learning activities that will enable the students to interact with and learn
from the academic and industry experts. The academic speakers will bring a broad
assortment of areas of scientific expertise, including deterministic,
stochastic, and dynamic optimization methodologies as well as their application
to various transportation and logistics systems. Applications will include
designing transportation systems, planning the use of drones for home delivery,
and supporting the transportation of hazardous goods. The industry experts will
come from various sectors, including eCommerce, software development and
consulting, and transportation, and will ensure that student learning remains
connected to practice. As a result, these students will be better positioned and
trained to develop further advancements in our understanding of how
transportation and logistics systems should be designed, planned, and executed.
To ensure that the workshop attracts a broad population of students, the
organizing committee will actively recruit students from a broad selection of
universities, including those that serve under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.