* 1841768
* EAGER: Advanced Cyberinfrastructure Training for Modeling Physical Systems Research
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Joel Giedt, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

There is a critical national need for the development of scientists with
expertise in modeling and simulating physical systems on the most powerful
computers available. Many pressing problems require this scale of extreme
computing in order to make significant advances that contribute to the national
welfare and security, such as stewardship of the nuclear stockpile, developing
advanced energy technologies, and discovering new physical interactions and
materials that may revolutionize technological sectors of the economy. In order
to address this need, a series of two-week summer schools, each preceded by a
three-day computational boot camp, is being hosted at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute. This series is aimed at graduate students and advanced undergraduate
students. The project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission:
to promote the progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity
and welfare; or to secure the national defense. The boot camp focuses on basic
computer skills that are needed for the more advanced material and methods that
are to be covered in the summer school. It will be offered to a subset of the
summer school students who need this basic training, since many students from
across the country come from colleges and physics programs where adoption of
cyberinfrastructure, computational methods and data-intensive computing is far
below the level desired by practitioners in advanced scientific computing. The
project is specifically addressing the compartmentalization between computer
science versus physics curriculum by bridging that gap through an intensive
hands-on learning experience from experts who have developed this type of
interdisciplinary agility. This project is performing significant outreach to
encourage women and underrepresented minorities to participate, coupled with
specific recruiting targets for this cyber-training
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The boot camp and summer school build on existing
activities at Rensselaer, which have successfully integrated computation into
the physics curriculum, including three computational courses and a
computational physics concentration that have been developed for physics majors.
This NSF project is scaling out these types of activities to a national stage,
where students and lecturers are brought from across the country to interact and
learn around lectures and activities that illustrate cutting edge physical
modeling with advanced algorithms and hardware. Participants in the summer
school have access to the significant supercomputing facility at Rensselaer, the
Computational Center for Innovations (CCI), which includes an IBM BlueGene/Q
platform. This facility is being used for hands-on training activities for the
students, thereby exposing them to computing at the highest levels, in
preparation for a career at the forefront of modeling and simulating physical
systems. The boot camp and summer school are resulting in world-class
instruction in basic computer skills and the use and design of highly optimized
and efficient codes and algorithms for solving important problems in the
physical sciences. Each summer school is culminating with a competition in which
students work in teams to solve significant computational problems related to
the physical sciences, with a poster session and prizes awarded. Domain specific
topics that are included in the summer school are density functional theory,
lattice gauge theory, numerical relativity, big data applications in physics and
astronomy, quantum finite elements and quantum many-body simulations. Since the
goal for attendance is 36 summer school students per year (18 to the boot camp),
the project activities are having a direct transformative impact on 72
scientists over the two-year period of this project. In order to create an even
greater impact, on-demand tutorials are being posted on an RPI website, based on
the video lectures, exercises and activities that are developed through the
course of the boot camp and summer school. The course materials and videos of
the lectures are also being made available on the website, along with e-mail
announcements to physics departments around the country, in order to encourage
integration and adoption of the curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.