* 1841280
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Politics of Local Policing
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Asya Magazinnik, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 17,509.00

Locally elected officials are quietly exercising more control over how residents
are treated by the criminal justice system. For example, city councils and
county sheriffs are deciding whether local law enforcement agents check
immigration status in the course of regular policing; whether and for how long
people are detained in custody for suspected immigration violations; and who
enters the federal deportation pipeline. This research examines how local
officials wield their authority. Do partisan politics play a role in their
decision-making? Do the specific policy preferences of their constituencies?
These questions are studied by collecting the first comprehensive dataset on
sheriff electoral returns and on the institutional rules that constrain
sheriffs, which vary dramatically across the nation and over time.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work advances several research agendas in
political science, law, sociology, criminology, and public policy. First,
variation in local immigration enforcement is only recently being documented and
explained, and the electoral motivations behind it have yet to be studied at
all. Second, the project is relevant to a large academic literature on local
politics and representation. For a long time, scholars in this field have argued
that there is a limited role for partisan or issue-specific responsiveness in
the local electoral context, though recent empirical work has produced new
evidence that voters' ideological positions affect municipal governments' fiscal
policy decisions. The study is the first of its kind to examine both policy
preferences and partisanship in the same framework; and by doing so in a domain
that is simultaneously politically charged at the national level and under
jurisdictions' immediate control, it will help resolve ongoing debates about the
degree and type of responsiveness that prevails in local government. Finally,
the project speaks to important normative questions raised by contemporary
American federalism, namely how much cross-jurisdictional variation, democratic
responsiveness, and partisan politics operate in the enforcement of national
laws.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.