* 1841424
* Planning IUCRC at Texas A&amp;M University:  Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect Farming (CEStIns)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Jeffery Tomberlin, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Reed
* 01/31/2020
* USD 14,999.00

Food demand from the growing human population is expected to increase 100% over
the next 40 years; however, predicted growth in agriculture production will fail
to meet demand by ~40%. The inability to meet future food demands places more
pressure on the one billion individuals currently underfed and living in
substandard conditions throughout the world. These limitations will manifest
into amplified social pressures such as, but not limited to, increased rates of
disease, demand for land and water resources, and a lack of agricultural
entrepreneurship, which only further weakens the global economy. A sustainable
method (i.e., practical and economical) for remediating agricultural waste,
while producing high value protein is essential to the long-term health of
ecosystems and agriculture. One solution is the utilization of insect farming to
convert organic wastes, which will potentially produce alternate resources of
monetary value for the farmer. Insect farming can produce enormous amounts of
protein and lipids that can be used in a variety of commodity settings (e.g.,
feed production, compost, biofuels, human food in some cases). And this
production of alternative protein sources is less environmentally straining than
most currently used methods in terms of reduced land and water usage and reduced
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Environmental Sustainability
through Insect Farming (CESTIns) will be comprised of three sites (Texas A&amp;M
AgriLife Research [TAMU], Indiana University-Purdue University in Indianapolis
[IUPUI], and Mississippi State University [MSU]), with each site specializing in
a specific area of research. The purpose of the TAMU site is to, 1) investigate
basic parameters of insect biology to optimize industrialized production, 2)
work with engineering to develop equipment needed for insect mass production,
and 3) conduct feed trials for using insect protein as feed for livestock as
well as people. TAMU will work with the other sites to integrate research
thrusts across the three sites with IUPUI and MSU focusing on genetics and
microbiology/quality assurance, respectively. Further, all three sites will work
with strains produced by Industry as well as strains developed internally as a
means to optimize mass production. Laboratory and field-based experiments will
also engage interdisciplinary expertise in microbiology, engineering, chemistry,
food nutrition, physiology, and vertebrate biology with cutting edge
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.