* 1841699
* CAREER: Quark and Gluon Structure of Nucleons and Nuclei
* MPS,PHY
* 06/14/2018,05/31/2021
* Phiala Shanahan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 05/31/2021
* USD 257,000.00

This project seeks to reveal new aspects of the structure of the atomic nuclei
that make up more than 99% of the matter on Earth. The classic picture of a
nucleus is a collection of protons and neutrons. The Standard Model of particle
physics describes the structure of these protons and neutrons in terms of more
fundamental constituents, matter particles (quarks) and force-carrier particles
(gluons) that bind the quarks together. Revealing the quark and gluon structure
of protons, neutrons and nuclei is a fundamental challenge bridging nuclear and
particle physics with data science and high-performance computing. In
particular, new studies of gluon structure require techniques that will be
developed and implemented in supercomputer calculations of the Standard Model
theory on the largest computers in the world. Building a new particle collider
to measure gluon structure is the highest priority in the long-range plan of the
nuclear physics community. This project will provide theory benchmarks for new
experimental programs and facilitate new tests of our understanding of the
structure of matter and of the emergence of the complexities of nuclear
structure in nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on new
aspects of the fundamental structure of nature through Lattice Quantum
Chromodynamics (QCD) calculations of the gluon composition of the nucleon and of
the modification of nucleon structure in nuclei. The results will provide
essential information for current and future nuclear and particle physics
experimental programs, such as the planned electron-ion collider (EIC) designed
to measure the gluon structure of nucleons and nuclei with unprecedented
precision over the next decade. In particular, the three-dimensional gluon
structure of the nucleon will be cleanly measured for the first time at the
planned EIC. A main goal of this project is the first calculation of the gluon
generalised form factors describing this structure. Another goal is the first
determination of exotic glue in nuclei through the gluon transversity structure
function. Finally, first calculations of QCD constraints on several muti-body
nuclear effects will be undertaken. These are increasingly important theory
inputs to the interpretation of the results of next-generation intensity
frontier experiments. For example, these calculations will constrain the
modification of the strange quark nucleon sigma term in nuclei, which provides
an important correction to theory cross-sections for the direct detection of
particle dark matter candidates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.