* 1841893
* EAGER: ISN: A Data Analytic Approach to Understanding Human Trafficking Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Andrew Trapp, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 11/30/2020
* USD 166,098.00

Human trafficking poses a grave threat to national and international security of
many countries, including the United States. Human trafficking is the criminal
commercial exchange and exploitation of humans for monetary gain or benefit, and
is a prevalent and malicious human rights issue as well as a driver of
transnational crime. Because human trafficking occurs within illicit supply
networks that are hidden from the public eye, insights into the structure and
characteristics of human trafficking networks are currently limited. Operations
research models have the potential to dramatically improve our ability to
disrupt human trafficking networks by increasing the efficiency of limited anti-
trafficking resources, but their impact remains largely dormant and unexplored,
as the structure and linkages of human trafficking networks is little
understood. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will
address operational methods to understand and mitigate human trafficking by
studying border control and transit center intercept data to identify key
aspects of labor and sex trafficking networks from the perspective of
traffickers and victims. The data analysis and operational methods will be
developed and evaluated by a transdisciplinary team of operations research,
human trafficking, and law enforcement experts. New insights into the
composition of both labor and sex trafficking networks will enhance related
analytical models by better understanding the similarities and key differences
with traditional supply chain networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support research to formulate high fidelity spatiotemporal analytical
models of cross-border human trafficking networks. The methods developed will
combine data science and social science approaches and will incorporate
different geographic and social network topologies, accounting for regional,
cultural and population heterogeneity. Six years of cross-border interception
data has been collected, consisting of over 350 data fields with detailed victim
and trafficker demographic information, origin and destination points,
recruitment methods and transit routes. Analytical results will be informed by
qualitative ethnographic techniques that describe recruitment tactics, and
regional and cultural nuances. Insights from this analysis will serve as
platforms on which to construct context-informed models for operations
researchers working in the domain of human trafficking, and are expected to help
inform policy makers that oversee resource allocation in border control and law
enforcement agencies, as well as anti-trafficking
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.