* 1841331
* EAGER: Engineering Metal-MAX Multilayered Nanocomposites: Hierarchical Microstructures for Tunable Strength and Toughness
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Garritt Tucker, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 321,514.00

For a number of applications in manufacturing, energy and infrastructure,
materials with high strength and high ductility are needed. Finding both of
these properties in the same material, however, is extremely rare. A number of
materials engineering approaches seek to create high strength, high ductility
materials, including fabricating nanostructured layered structures with
alternating materials. This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) award supports an exploratory experimental and computational effort to
engineer multi-layered metal-ceramic nanocomposite materials that exhibit
tunable strength and toughness. The nanocomposite will be composed of
alternating nanoscale metallic and ceramic layers. The ceramic layers are part
of the family of ceramic materials known as MAX phase, which themselves are
layered carbide or nitride materials. Combining metal layers with MAX layers
results in a unique structure with as a complex network of interfaces which will
eventually control the behavior of the material. These materials have
applications in multiple technological fields, including high temperature
structural applications, protective coatings, sensors, tunable damping films for
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS), and potential applications in cladding
materials for nuclear use. The ability to have a strong yet ductile metal-MAX
composite with improved mechanical behavior to satisfy the demands of such
applications will provide considerable technological and economic benefits. The
research will provide graduate training for a PhD student who will also benefit
from the collaboration with Los Alamos National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this combined modeling and
experimental EAGER research are to: a) design and synthesize multi-layered
nanocomposites composed of alternating metallic and MAX phase layers with a
lamellar thickness reduced to the nanoscale, b) establish a fundamental
understanding of the hierarchical interface driven microstructure and
microstructure-property relationships using nano-mechanical testing tools
(nanoindentation, micro-compression), and c) formulate and validate atomistic
models that outline the premise for controlling the activation of specific
deformation mode(s) through hierarchical design of metal-MAX nanolaminates, thus
tuning their mechanical properties to achieve greater strength and toughness.
Upon successful completion of this research, tunable properties will be realized
through guided variations in processing parameters from computation, as our
nanoscale modeling will unravel the role of interfaces and the hierarchical
microstructure of the metal-MAX system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.