* 1841109
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: Demonstrating the Importance of Research Setting Representativeness in Systems Engineering and Design Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Paul Grogan, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2021
* USD 59,178.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) grant supports
fundamental research into the factors that determine whether a research setting
is sufficiently representative of real-world systems engineering and design
situations. Designing complex engineering systems such as critical
infrastructure, capital-intensive projects, and national defense systems
involves large design teams consisting of hundreds to thousands of individuals
over timescales reaching into decades. This project addresses the fundamental
issue of understanding the design of such complex engineering systems using
simpler, shorter-duration, and more controlled research settings. The research
objective of this project is to explore the creation and validation of standards
for research setting representativeness to assess whether and the extent to
which findings from one research setting can be extend to others. If successful,
this work will transform research in the community by enabling more efficient
knowledge aggregation through a rigorous methodological foundation for assessing
how well, and in what dimensions, research settings represent their real
counterparts. This foundation will enrich empirical and theory-driven research
within the systems engineering and design community by improving validity
assessment of research outcomes across diverse methodological perspectives. As a
crucial component of this project, results will be disseminated to diverse
audience through presentations and workshops at community-specific conferences.
Dissemination and community-building activities will foster an ongoing
conversation around the need for shared standards and consensus for the kinds of
knowledge to be gained from diverse research settings and methodological
approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core intellectual contributions of this
high-risk high-reward work are to identify dimensions of research setting
representativeness, understand how they impact design and execution of research
studies, and demonstrate a methodology to generate insights regarding
representativeness. Two pilot studies will probe varying dimensions of
representativeness for a spacecraft design process. The first pilot study will
compare the real spacecraft design process to a concurrent design environment
with a smaller team working on a shorter timescale. The second pilot study will
compare a fully abstracted function optimization game to a more representative
game that models the context and technical dependencies of a spacecraft in the
optimization problem. The pilot studies will demonstrate the viability of
studying the effects of research setting representativeness on designer
behaviors. The potential exists that research setting representativeness is
impractical to characterize well, which is a principal risk factor for this
project. However, the potential reward is equally high. If successful, results
from this project are expected to provide the foundation of multi-method, multi-
scale research, allowing researchers to interpret, evaluate, and build on each
other?s results across different research methodologies. This would transform
the research community and enable new discoveries that far exceed current
research capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.