* 1841312
* Algorithms for Modern Power Systems PI Workshop
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Yulia Gel, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2022
* USD 49,500.00

The Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) at the National Science Foundation
(NSF) has recently formed a partnership with the Office of Electricity Delivery
and Energy Reliability (OE) at the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) to support
fundamental mathematical and statistical research that aims to develop novel
methodology and algorithms for improvement of the security, reliability, and
efficiency of the modern power systems. The new program, named the Algorithms
for Modern Power Systems (AMPS), intends to catalyze a broad range of
interdisciplinary research initiatives at the forefront of power system
engineering, mathematics, statistics, and financial mathematics. The objective
of this proposal is to request support to organize the NSF AMPS PI's workshops,
to be held in the fall terms of 2018 and 2019. The upcoming NSF AMPS PI's
workshops will gather principal investigators funded by the AMPS program along
with the stakeholders from DOE and other government agencies, to report the
progress from the research projects, and to facilitate creation, transfer and
application of knowledge on modern power grids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Resilience
of power systems is of the utmost importance to our daily lives. Understanding
the causes and impact of power disruption -- from random failures to natural
disasters to terrorist attacks -- is the key to the societal sustainability and
well-being. The ability to integrate concepts and methods from different domains
is essential to our understanding of the power system functionality and, hence,
to enhancing the national security. Furthermore, as broadly recognized nowadays,
the nature of power system analysis does not fit within a paradigm of any single
discipline and requires development of novel algorithms that transcend
traditional disciplinary boundaries. As the NSF Strategic Plan FY 2018--2022
emphasizes, ``combining our knowledge enables us to find more robust
solutions''. The NSF AMPS PI's workshops will create a unique opportunity for
interaction among diverse teams of researchers and practitioners to discuss
fundamental challenges of modern power systems and to offer interdisciplinary
insights on finding more secure and reliable solutions to analysis of modern
power grids and critical infrastructures, in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.