* 1841809
* Is the Massalia family of asteroids the source of the L-chondrite meteorites?
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Michael Gaffey, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 05/31/2023
* USD 469,669.00

Asteroids have long been believed to be the primary source of meteorites. In
many cases, ?parent? bodies of meteorites have been determined by comparing the
way those meteorites and specific asteroids reflect sunlight. However, the
parent body of the most common type of meteorites seen to fall, known as
ordinary chondrites, has yet to be firmly identified. The team's hypothesis is
that a group known as L-chondrites come from the (20) Massalia family of
asteroids (An asteroid family is a group of asteroids with orbits more similar
than would be expected by chance). The team will use telescopes to break down
the light reflected by the Massalia asteroids for comparison with L-chondrites
studied in the laboratory. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be
included in the research. This project is jointly funded by NSF AST and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Main belt asteroids are the sole surviving in
situ remnants from the formation epoch of the inner Solar System. With few
exceptions, meteorites are samples of main belt asteroids. Meteorites thus
provide a window into the condition and processes in the late stages of the
solar nebula and the earliest evolution of the inner Solar System. Studying
meteorites tells us about the geochemistry and petrology of the Solar System,
and about its age (from radiometric dating), but nothing about where these
processes occurred. If the L-chondrites can be linked to a specific asteroid
family, the late nebular and early solar system location of the conditions and
processes recorded by the L-chondrites can be constrained. Moreover, the age of
that family can be established by the shock ages of the L-chondrites. A firm
constraint on the age of a family would allow a more rigorous testing and
refining of dynamical models of orbital diffusion in the asteroid belt. Such
models are important for: A) constraining the sources of Earth-approaching
meteoroids and asteroids, B) for modeling the dynamical evolution of the
asteroid population, and C) for estimating the ages of other asteroid families
and hence the frequency of large collisions in the belt. The overall goal of the
present study is to test the (20) Massalia asteroid family as a potential source
of the L-chondrites. This work will be done by comparing spectra of Massalia
asteroids for comparison with laboratory spectra of L-chondritic
meteorites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.