* 1841660
* Succession Planning Workshops for the Generic Mapping Tools computer code
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Garrett Apuzen-Ito, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 07/31/2023
* USD 44,213.00

The data analysis and visualization package, Generic Mapping Tools (GMT), is a
workhorse piece of open source computer software that is extremely flexible and
has the power to produce publication-quality graphic presentations of data,
maps, and maps with data overlays. Since its initial inception, GMT has been
continually developed and updated to remain relevant to both advances in
software, software engineering, and the needs of scientists across the spectrum
of the solid earth sciences. It has become the de facto standard for a community
of over 25,000 registered users. GMT permeates work published in high profile
journals such as Nature and Science, as well as many others that report research
advances in geophysics and geology, including seismology, geodesy, and
geodynamics. Recent developments involving GMT have included extending it to be
able to analyze and display more diverse types of data and improving the code
for plotting vectors and their uncertainties, earthquake focal mechanisms, and
hemispherical projections. Efforts have also been successful in strengthening
GMT's capabilities in terms of high performance computing, time-series analysis,
ternary diagrams, and geologic symbols. Of importance has been the development
of an Applied Programming Interface and scripts that allow GMT modules to be
called directly from the Python open source programming language and MatLab, a
widely used mathematical analysis software package. With the pending retirement
of the primary developer and GMT host, a plan for its transition to a new and
permanent location, where GMT can remain accessible and continue to be updated
and extended as needed by the scientific community and public, is needed. These
two working summits provide the planning necessary to devise such a transition
plan and identify an appropriate new host. Broader impacts of the work include
international collaboration with Portuguese and German scientists who are
involved as key GMT developers and building infrastructure for science in terms
of providing critical tools for geoscientists to analyze, visualize, and display
their data and research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Generic Mapping Tools
computer code is an integral part of many scientific workflows in the earth and
ocean sciences. It is an extremely flexible data analytical and visualization
tool that has, over the last 30 years, become an essential part of geoscience
infrastructure. These two working summits are to position the code for its
upcoming transition to a new host and the identification of that host. One
workshop will be held in Portugal where one of the members of the core GMT
development teams resides. This is to enable other European scientists who are
part of the development team to join and provide input and suggestions for how
to continue to improve GMT and make it financially sustainable. This
summit/workshop will be devoted, in part, also to the continued hardening of the
code and improving code documentation and meta-documentation, the latter of
which will describe the code development process, code testing, building user
documentation, maintaining the wiki and error reporting database, etc. A second
summit will be held in the US and will involve participation from the GMT
steering committee. This working summit will help develop a robust and
comprehensive plan for GMT transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.