* 1841641
* EAGER SitS: Studying soil biotic and abiotic processes through continuous, high-precision monitoring of soil CO2 an O2 concentrations
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Daniel Breecker, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Kowalewski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 342,947.00

Soils are a vital natural resource, the successful management of which depends
on the ability to monitor and understand numerous belowground biotic and abiotic
processes. These processes, such as mineral weathering and carbon and nitrogen
cycling, directly affect soil health. In order to advance our understanding of
these soil processes, this research project will combine continuous, high
precision monitoring of soil pore space oxygen, carbon dioxide, and ammonia gas
concentrations, each of which are affected by these processes, with the
development of a computer model. Undergraduate students who identify with
underrepresented groups will be recruited to participate in this research
project. The research results will help to quantify soils as a carbon
source/sink and inform sustainable land management practices aimed at feeding
the expanding global population while managing environmental contamination from
fertilizers. These results will be disseminated through courses that the PI
teaches, in addition to peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
respiratory quotient (RQ, moles of CO2 produced per mole of O2 consumed during
respiration) is a fundamental indicator of metabolism that we currently cannot
monitor in-situ in soils. Learning about soil community RQ and the factors that
affect its variability will help to understand microbial metabolisms, controls
on autotrophic and heterotrophic respiration rates, and ultimately soil carbon
cycling. Therefore, the goal of this research project is to isolate continuously
and monitor in-situ the RQ of the soil community. The first step of this
research project will be to expand existing soil physics and chemistry models to
quantify the effects of diffusion and gas-water exchange on soil gas
composition. The effectiveness of these adapted models will be tested using
controlled laboratory experiments. The next step will be to calibrate pore space
NH3 and O2 concentrations as a measure of nitrification, using laboratory
incubations of soils selected for later field-monitoring. This information is
required for accurate determination of RQ, because nitrification consumes O2 in
addition to that consumed by respiration. The final step will be to measure
continuously and in-situ CO2, O2, and NH3 concentrations in natural soils using
commercially-available flow-through sensors coupled to a custom-built
autosampler. Simultaneous measurement of soil moisture, soil temperature, and
relevant meteorological variables will accompany the soil gas monitoring. The
expanded soil physics model and the laboratory soil core calibrations will be
used to account for diffusion, water-gas exchange and nitrification in order to
determine soil community RQ. Variation in soil community RQ through time and
space in grassland and forest soils will be investigated. An improved
understanding of natural variability in soil RQ will advance 1) understanding of
soil biotic processes, such as how metabolisms in soil change temporally and
spatially, and 2) the interaction between biotic and abiotic processes, such as
those that drive chemical weathering and calcium carbonate
dissolution/precipitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.