* 1841474
* Phase II IUCRC at The Pennsylvania State University:  Center for Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Michael Hickner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 615,000.00

The overall objective of this proposal is to develop a new Site in the Center
for Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology (MAST) at The Pennsylvania
State University with a specific focus on membrane applications in the
biopharmaceutical industry and the development of novel methods for membrane
characterization using state-of-the-art electron microscopy and tomography
facilities at Penn State. Membrane-based separations offer a number of unique
advantages compared to competing technologies including: lower energy
requirements, relative ease of scale-up, and no phase changes or chemical
additives. The establishment of a Penn State Site in the MAST Center will both
complement and expand upon the existing research portfolio in membrane science
and technology. The proposed research at Penn State is specifically designed to
address pre-competitive research challenges in bioprocessing, including the
development of membrane technology for use in continuous bioprocessing. In
addition, the Penn State site will provide an ideal environment for student
training, including both women and students from under-represented minority
groups. The addition of the Penn State site will significantly expand and
strengthen the MAST Center, including exciting new interactions with leading
biopharmaceutical companies, providing an even stronger environment for student
training, education, and research in membrane science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF IUCRC proposal aims to establish a 4th
site within the existing Center for Membrane Science, Engineering and Technology
(MAST) at The Pennsylvania State University with a focus on applications of
membranes in bioprocessing, including new methods for membrane characterization.
A number of recent developments are spurring further interest in membranes for
bioprocessing. There are significant economic pressures associated with the
growth in low-cost international manufacturers and the advent of biosimilars.
There is also significant interest in transitioning from current batch processes
to continuous operations, with the goal of enhancing product quality, improving
manufacturing flexibility, and increasing overall productivity. Specific
projects will address critical challenges in the application of membrane
technology in bioprocessing, including issues of fouling and virus capture
during virus removal filtration, integration of tangential flow filtration for
product harvest and cell recycle with perfusion bioreactors, and the use of
single pass tangential flow filtration / diafiltration for continuous product
concentration and formulation. These projects will fully exploit the expertise
at Penn State in bioprocessing along with state-of-the-art facilities for
membrane characterization, providing significant fundamental insights that
address critical pre-competitive research challenges in membrane technology in
bioprocessing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.