* 1841129
* CSR: EAGER: A Wearable Body Motion Sensing Platform Using Conductive Stretchable Fabric
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Gang Zhou, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 09/30/2020
* USD 216,000.00

This project aims to develop a wearable platform that enables the generation of
a three dimensional (3D) model of the human skeleton and tracking its motion.
There exist techniques that use depth cameras and special image processing
software to model motion of the human skeleton, and Microsoft Kinect is a well-
known example. However, the techniques using fixed cameras need to deploy camera
devices at fixed locations in order to sense human motions. While this may be
suitable for indoor fixed scenarios, it is not feasible for outdoor ubiquitous
scenarios. Instead, the wearable platform from this project works for both
scenarios. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This wearable platform is designed using a
conductive stretchable fabric that is comfortable to wear. To estimate 3D body
motions using the wearable platform, the model of the body skeleton needs to be
fused with the bend angles of major joints on the skeleton. This project
exploits the fabric's conductive resistance change to infer user dependent bend
angles of body joints that the fabric covers. Furthermore, a 3D motion
estimation method is developed for the platform that optimizes motion estimation
results with body kinematics constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being comfortable
for long-term wear and able to provide high motion sensing accuracy, this
wearable platform will largely enhance the current practice of healthcare,
sports, and outdoor entertainment. Benefits to senior residents and local
retirement communities will be delivered through collaboration with the Center
for Excellence in Aging and Geriatric Health. The research will be integrated
into three undergraduate and graduate courses. Open houses will provide hands-on
opportunities to a diverse group of minority students and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data from this project includes human-subjects
data, experiment results, software code, and curriculum materials. Data
collection and management will be under the supervision of the Protection of
Human Subjects Committee at William &amp; Mary. Data will be stored securely on
computers and regularly backed-up at William &amp; Mary. The project web site is
http://gzhou.blogs.wm.edu/nsf-eager-18/ , and the project web server is
maintained and achieved by William &amp; Mary. Data will be preserved for at
least three years beyond the award period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.