* 1841909
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Integration at Edges of States
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Matthew Sitek, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 22,151.00

Although rigidly bordered nation-states are ubiquitous in the modern world, both
cooperation and conflict frequently drive sociopolitical communities and
economic institutions to diffuse across borders. This transnationalism has come
to define our fundamentally cosmopolitan, global political economy. In order to
better understand the driving forces and sociopolitical dynamics of
transnationalism the researchers seek to identify an origin for these processes.
Given the inherently complex, densely connected and global scale of today's
geopolitical landscape, tracing the deep prehistoric origins of these phenomena
must be done using the archaeological record. Prehistoric examples traced
through the archaeological record offer ideal long-term case studies for
understanding the sociopolitical and environmental mechanisms that first
propelled communities across borders. This project pursues multiple lines of
archaeological evidence drawn from well-preserved archaeological sites located
in southern Peru, which constituted the western frontier of the Tiwanaku
civilization (ca. AD 500-1100), one of the earliest state-level societies to
develop in South America. Here in the northern reaches of the Atacama Desert,
hyper-arid conditions gave rise to one of the best-preserved archaeological
deposits in the world, giving this project an unprecedented view into the daily
lives of prehistoric populations. How communities living on the frontier of the
Tiwanaku state negotiated their roles within local and regional networks will
help to better understand processes and potential outcomes of personal as well
as community driven agency and negotiation in today's sociopolitical landscape.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the ancient Tiwanaku state to
investigate the development of early globalized networks from the perspective of
colonial encounters. With access to distinct scales and relationships, both
spatial and social, archaeology is uniquely suited to examine broad diachronic
patterns within complex systems from a variety of perspectives, from state
polities and local communities. Communities on the frontiers of states have
traditionally been considered disenfranchised and passive. Moving away from this
uniform assessment, this project examines an ancient frontier community as
embedded within dynamic local and regional social, economic, and symbolic
networks generated by the Tiwanaku state in the south-central Andes (Bolivia,
southern Peru, northern Chile). Focusing on the site of Cerro San Antonio
(Locumba Valley, southern Peru), this project will target the well-preserved
remains of three separate Tiwanaku frontier-settlements utilizing some of the
newest methods in the archeological toolkit. Methods include low altitude aerial
photography and remote sensing for large-scale mapping, and wide-area
excavations of households, neighborhoods, and living spaces to investigate the
connectivity and complexity of residential group networks. Treating such
settlements with this network approach will provide a powerful framework for
illustrating both the local source of global processes as well as the global
implications of local action. Following in the tradition of complexity and
network analysis, this project will demonstrate that the social, economic, and
ritual networks engaged in by frontier communities were localized within broader
regional, political processes otherwise attributed entirely to the Tiwanaku
state. Ultimately, the research will contribute to understanding how diverse
community networks can be integrated (or not) under incipient polities, and
their role in the generation and maintenance of
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.