* 1841503
* Phase I I/UCRC at Florida International University:  Center for Wind Hazard and Infrastructure Performance (WHIP)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Seung Jae Lee, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 01/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

The United States is annually impacted by windstorms, causing large numbers of
fatalities and injuries and severe damage to residential, commercial, and
industrial buildings as well as to power, communication, transportation, water
and other lifeline systems. Insured property losses exceeded $300 billion over
the last twenty years while total losses are estimated to be twice that number.
The goal of the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for
Wind Hazard and Infrastructure Performance (WHIP) is to enhance the resiliency
of buildings and infrastructure against hurricanes, tornadoes, and other
windstorms. Findings generated from WHIP Center research and implemented by its
industry partners will contribute to community resiliency against wind hazards
while enhancing the economic competitiveness of the U.S. and the well-being of
its citizens. Students will interact with industry partners, understand their
needs, and obtain both academic and professional training. The WHIP Center will
be promoted to grow in size and make greater impacts by attracting additional
industry members and collaborating institutions. Envisioned as a national center
it will address multiple thrusts in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction
Program (NWIRP). The concept of disaster resiliency will be advanced among
industries, government agencies, and the public at large through publications,
and social media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WHIP Center will adopt a broad-based
approach aimed at serving its members, who are concentrated in the insurance,
risk modeling, and construction industries. Its major research themes are: a)
wind hazards assessments; b) estimation of exposure and vulnerability of
buildings and infrastructures; and c) improvement of community resilience.
Within these themes the Industry Advisory Board (IAB) will select the projects
based on their priorities and the Center?s faculty specialties and expertise.
The NSF NHERI Wall of Wind (WOW) research and experimental facility will be at
the core of the Florida International University (FIU) WHIP Site. The WOW is an
open-jet hurricane simulation facility capable of testing full- and large-scale
models of buildings and infrastructure. The WOW will provide the following
distinct multi-scale test capabilities to the WHIP: (1) high-speed holistic
full-scale testing in up to simulated Category 5 hurricane winds; (2) wind-
driven rain simulations to study water intrusion through building envelopes; (3)
destructive testing to study progressive damage, enhance designs, and develop
new mitigation techniques; (4) large-scale aerodynamic/aeroelastic testing in
Atmospheric Boundary Layer (ABL) and high Reynolds number flows; and (5) classic
boundary layer wind tunnel testing in flows with a full turbulence
spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.