* 1841238
* Conference: Emergent Technologies for Intelligent Networks of Sensors and Actuators Conference, TO BE Held in Washington DC, March 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Linda Katehi, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2020
* USD 21,545.00

The proposed project seeks financial support to support invited speakers and
conference organization needs at a meeting to be held in March 2019 in
Washington, DC. The "Emergent Technologies for Intelligent Networks of Sensors
and Actuators" Conference will focus on bringing together a multidisciplinary
and interdisciplinary group of researchers whose ideas can help advance the
conception and development of intelligence in wireless systems and networks that
will revolutionize the way we live and change the industries and the economy.
This conference will foster advances in understanding of intelligence and the
conception and development of future intelligent systems or networks which will
transform the society. The conference's objectives and approach are inspired by
Intelligent Wireless Networks of Sensors and Actuators that are a digital
business innovation concept making Internet-of-Things service-oriented
architectures, and advanced human-computer interactions converge to a more
agile, flexible, and proactive management of unexpected events. The convergence
of technologies that were uniquely independent such as, analog and digital,
software and hardware, packaging and electronic materials, in addition to a
convergence of their cyber-biophysical capabilities in terms of curiosity-driven
intelligence, and multi-brain control and decision making will be a key topic of
the conference. The Conference is expected to play a key role in identifying new
directions in understanding of intelligence and the conception and development
of future intelligent systems or networks which will transform the society. It
will promote the convergence of diverse groups of designers, innovative ideas,
demonstration of concepts and commercialization of
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.