* 1841371
* Dynamics of 3-Dimensional Deformation at the Mendocino Triple Junction Across Timescales
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2023
* USD 227,215.00

This project seeks to measure the ongoing deformation at the Mendocino Triple
Junction, where three major tectonic plates meet in northern California. This
region hosts larger earthquakes than any other in the western United States. To
understand the factors contributing to its seismicity, the PI's team will focus
on vertical displacements using GPS and satellite radar data. Vertical
deformation rates are key to the understanding of the processes generating
earthquakes in convergent plate boundaries. Although it is challenging to
measure accurately vertical displacements, ongoing technical advances improve
the accuracy each year. The Mendocino Triple Junction is uniquely suited for
this study because of its extremely high surface uplift rates. The team will
model in three dimensions the deformation data and compare them with other
geophysical observations. The goal is to separate and quantify the long-term,
permanent, deformation from the short-term deformation which loads the faults
and potentially drives earthquake ruptures. This work will contribute to better
understand long-standing issues in active tectonics, such as the relationship
between short-term and long-term deformation, as well as the mechanisms of
crustal uplift in northern California. The two-year project will provide support
for a female graduate student in Geology and the expected results will help
assessing and forecasting earthquake hazards in the western United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The accurate measurement of uplift rates at convergent
plate margins provide critical information on the underlying processes
generating earthquakes and building permanent topography. Measuring and
interpreting uplift rates is challenging, as tectonic rates are slow and the
relationship between short-term (over earthquake cycles) and long-term
deformations remains unclear. The Mendocino Triple Junction, where the Pacific,
Juan de Fuca, and North American plates meet, provides a unique natural
laboratory for studying vertical deformation. In this region, geologic rates of
coastal uplift are among the highest in the continental United States. Here, the
PI's team will develop a dense interseismic velocity field of the Mendocino
Triple Junction by integrating three types of geodetic data (GPS, InSAR, and
GRACE). The goal is to use the three-dimensional dataset to test models of
elastic interseismic strain accumulation, permanent inelastic deformation, and
geodynamic crustal structure. The two-year project will provide support for a
female graduate student and help assessing earthquake hazards by quantifying
fault elastic-strain loading, hence the fault potential to produce earthquake-
generating ruptures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.