* 1841835
* Defining and Modeling the Response of a Low Gradient Coastal System to Rapid Sea-Level Rise during the Late Pleistocene
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Stephen Culver, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 149,115.00

Rates of sea-level rise have accelerated over the last 120 years, from global
rates of approximately zero in the 19th century, to an average rate in the 20th
century of approximately 1.7 mm/y, to the present rate of 3.4 +/- 0.4 mm/y.
Geologic observations of sea-level high-stand markers from 130,000 to 80,000
years ago suggest that global sea level attained a height of approximately +2 m
(relative to modern sea level) for several millennia, possibly followed by a
rapid rise to approximately +6 m. The goal of this proposal is to determine how
the coasts of North Carolina and Virginia responded to sea level changes during
these times. This project will collect geophysical data and sediment cores in
the North Carolina and Virginia region. The deposits contain a record of past
changes due to erosion and sedimentation that occurred during rapid sea level
rise that could provide an analog for future conditions in this region. The
project provides training for graduate and undergraduate students.

This proposal will address the objective of understanding the geological and
morphodynamic response of a low-gradient coastal system to sea-level rise. In
eastern North Carolina and Virginia, late Pleistocene transgressive to high-
stand deposits occur seaward of the Marine Isotope Stage 5 paleoshoreline on the
coastal plain and beneath the modern estuaries. Geophysical data and sediment
cores will be collected in two study areas in the region. These data will be
used in the future to develop a 3D model of facies relationships and the
sequence stratigraphic framework of the region, to develop numerical
hydrodynamic models to understand the response of the coastal system to rapid
sea level rise, and to place vertical constraints on Pleistocene sea levels.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.