* 1841701
* RCN: Developing a Multi-Institution Research-Practitioner Network to Enhance the Success of Diverse Students in Computer Science and Engineering From High School to the Workforce
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Raymond Laoulache, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 08/31/2023
* USD 499,366.00

The overarching goal of this Research Coordination Network (RCN) is to broaden
participation in computer science and engineering fields through new
collaborations, research and outreach. The nature of work in the United States
has changed rapidly in the 21st century. A growing proportion of all employment
today revolves around science and technology industries. Despite the national
demand for a workforce with expertise in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM), the supply of STEM graduates has lagged, resulting in a
substantial gap between demand and supply. While many efforts are underway
across the nation to increase the supply of STEM students, they are stymied by
two problems. First, most current efforts occur within institutional and
disciplinary silos, with little coordination across institutions or disciplines,
preventing synthesis of collective wisdom and hindering the replication of
evidence-based best practices across institutions. Second, because of
institutional silos, insufficient attention is given to student experiences at
cross-institutional transitions when attrition is high. This RCN will tackle
these two problems targeting computer science (CS) and engineering, by
developing a multi-institutional partnership in Massachusetts to connect
instructors of CS and engineering, social scientists who study STEM pathways,
educational support staff, and industry partners who hire and develop talent in
CS and engineering. This coordinated network of Researchers, Educators, and
Business Leaders (REBL) may become a model for other states across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN project will create three interconnected
Network Improvement Communities (NICs) in Massachusetts that will provide a
collaboration space for researchers and practitioners to work on equity in three
different areas; high school, colleges and universities, and workforce and
industry. NIC activities will focus on: (1) synthesizing knowledge from
research, teaching, outreach, and business, to identify multiple barriers in CS
and engineering pathways from high school to the workforce, with attention to
developmental transitions; (2) communicating evidence-based remedies to inform
decisions made by instructors and industry partners that influence the flow of
people from high school to the workforce; (3) increasing impact by replicating
successful remedies from one partner institution to others; and (4) matchmaking
new collaborations between researchers and practitioners to tackle knowledge
gaps in education, outreach, and business as they relate to broadening CS and
engineering participation. Focused on network formation in Massachusetts, the
effort will leverage the UMass system, Five Colleges, and cross-institutional
relationships developed by this project to enact remedies at multiple
institutions that scale impact and catalyze future grants by multi-institutional
teams to test new interventions. The network will also bridge college education
with career opportunities through internships and service learning with special
attention to underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RCN is co-
funded by the EHR Core Research program and by NSF INCLUDES, which focuses on
catalyzing the STEM enterprise to collaboratively work towards inclusive
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.