* 1841228
* Fe Behavior and Bioavailability in Sub-aerial Runoff into the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* W. Berry Lyons, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/30/2024
* USD 453,130.00

Phytoplankton, or microscopic marine algae, are an important part of the carbon
cycle and can lower the rates of atmospheric carbon dioxide by transferring the
atmospheric carbon into the oceans. The concentration of phytoplankton in the
Southern Ocean is regularly limited by the availability of marine iron. This in
turn influences the rate of carbon transfer from the atmosphere to the ocean.
The primary source of iron in the Southern Ocean is eroded continental rock.
Understanding the current and future sources of iron to the Southern Ocean as a
result of increased melting of terrestrial glaciers is necessary for predicting
future concentrations of Southern Ocean phytoplankton and the subsequent
influence on the carbon cycle. A poorly understood source of iron to the
Southern Ocean is stream input from ice-free regions such as the McMurdo Dry
Valleys in Antarctica. This source of iron is likely to become larger if
glaciers retreat. This study investigates the sources and amount of iron
transported by McMurdo Dry Valley streams directly into the Southern Ocean.
Because not all forms of iron can be used by phytoplankton, experiments will be
performed to determine how available iron is to phytoplankton and how iron mixes
with seawater. Immersive 360-degree video, infographics, and educational videos
of findings from this project will be shared on social media, at schools and
science events, and in an urban science center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the
Southern Ocean (SO) there is an excess of macronutrients but regional primary
production is limited or co-limited due to iron. An addition of iron to the
ocean will affect biochemical cycles, increase primary production, and affect
the structure and composition of phytoplankton communities in the SO. Iron flux
to the SO is globally significant, as increased Fe fertilization leads to
increased carbon sequestration which acts as a negative feedback to increased
atmospheric pCO2. One source of potentially bioavailable iron to the coastal
regions of the SO is from direct sub-aerial stream discharge in ice-free areas
of Antarctica, a source that may become more important if terrestrial glaciers
retreat. It is imperative to understand the source, nature, potential fate, and
flux of iron to the SO if better predictive models for the carbon cycle and
atmospheric chemistry are to be developed. This project will investigate in-
stream processes and characteristics controlling dissolved iron draining into
the Ross Sea including photoreduction, temperature, and complexation with
organic matter. The novel study will quantify bioavailability of particulate
iron and bioavailability of dissolved iron in Antarctic in streams draining into
the SO. On-site speciation measurements will be performed on dissolved iron
species, particulate iron speciation will be determined using high-resolution
spectroscopy, mixing experiments will be performed with coastal marine water,
and the bioavailability of Fe will be determined through marine bioassays. This
project will provide two students with valuable Antarctic field experience and
reach thousands of individuals through existing partnerships with K-12 schools,
public STEM events, an urban science center, and a strong social media
presence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.