* 1841619
* EAGER SitS: Soil Soundscapes from Seismic Arrays
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,11/30/2020
* Peter Shearer, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 11/30/2020
* USD 294,424.00

Soil is a vital natural resource, and understanding how and why soil particles
move has both practical and theoretical importance. This new collaboration takes
a novel approach to studying soil and biotic processes from soundscapes by
analyzing the seismic signals that can be readily measured by seismometers,
which are usually used to monitor earthquakes. This work represents an
exploratory phase in an interdisciplinary frontier to understand soil processes
by bridging the fields of geology, geophysics, ecology and biology. The
investigators will build capacity through training and integration of
disciplines and linking established National Science Foundation-funded networks
and datasets to probe soil movement and mixing processes in the arid University
of California Reserve Ecological Research site (Elliott Chaparral Reserve) and a
NSF-funded Critical Zone Observatory/Long-Term Ecological Research site: a
humid, tropical forest site (Puerto Rico - the Luquillo Critical Zone
Observatory). Listening to previously unheard soil soundscapes is a new horizon
for interdisciplinary soil research that will facilitate scientific progress and
learning opportunities for grant-supported trainees and the public. This project
will include a series of public outreach and training activities focusing on
earth sounds for students and community members, including those who are
visually impaired. The investigators will also develop a display for the Birch
Aquarium in La Jolla, CA to compare soil soundscapes and ocean
soundscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over ninety-nine percent of the signals
recorded by existing seismic arrays are traditionally considered 'noise' and
ignored. Recent work, however, has highlighted the generation of elastic waves
by processes in the atmosphere, hydrosphere, and soil. This research aims to
explore and quantify the geo-, eco- and anthro-soundscapes in soils. Biological
agents play an important role in landscape change as animals and plants erode,
transport, and deposit rock, soil, and unconsolidated material. Despite the
obvious role that biological agents play in driving surface processes, biology
and geomorphology have largely worked independently of one another in the
generation of quantitative geomorphic theories and models. The role that animals
play in landscape evolution is either generally ignored or broadly classified
because the non-uniform, non-steady nature of most biogeomorphic agents is
difficult to document and thus quantify. Stochastic, 'patchy' geomorphic
disturbances like tree fall and movement of sediment by animals can exert first-
order influences on landscapes and cycling of nutrients and carbon sequestration
in soils, but the rates and frequencies at which these disturbances mobilize,
exhume and bury sediment are challenging to constrain. Seismic observations and
methods offer complementary advantages for soil studies compared to traditional
detection, monitoring and characterization techniques because they provide high
temporal resolution and broad spatial coverage, are passive and non-invasive,
and provide the ability to collect continuous, real-time observations from
multiple sources and inaccessible environments. Though the seismic monitoring
sensors capable of detecting bioturbation have been used for decades throughout
the world, these data have not yet been exploited for such a purpose. The
broader use of seismological capabilities may provide insight into the
connections between mechanistic drivers and source processes, and promote new
insights into the underlying physics and relationships between Earth surface and
near-surface processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.