* 1841790
* Fe3+/FeT Ratios in Amphiboles - A New Tool for Understanding the Redox State of Arc Magmas
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Jennifer Jackson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2023
* USD 290,000.00

Subduction zones, where one tectonic plate descends beneath another, are
fundamental the formation of continental crust, the terra firma upon which
humans live, and the generation of important ore deposits. A critical aspect of
both of these processes is the exchange of material between the surface and
deeper parts of the Earth. Magmas formed at subduction zones reflect this
transfer of material through distinctive chemistry suggesting surface-derived
material in their source region. One salient example of this is the elevated
redox state of subduction zone volcanic rocks, as compared to mid-ocean ridge
basalts, which is generally thought to arise from the subduction of oxidized
surface material. Although the redox state of volcanic rocks can be assessed
through more established methods, the redox state of subduction zone plutonic
rocks can be more difficult to assess due to slower cooling rates and lack of
appropriate mineral assemblages. This work will expand our knowledge of the
redox state of arc magmas through development of a detailed understanding of Fe
redox state in a ubiquitous mineral in arc magmas, amphibole, and application of
this understanding to a suite of subduction zone plutonic rocks. This work will
provide a new tool for the community to implement in the study of subduction
zone redox. In addition to scientific contributions, this work will support the
scientific training of a female post-doctoral scholar and summer undergraduate
researcher at Caltech.&lt;br/&gt; Volcanic rocks erupted in subduction zone
settings are generally more oxidized than those from mid-ocean ridges. The cause
of elevated magmatic redox state in arc environments is controversial but
commonly attributed to one or more of the following: (a) source processes: sub-
arc mantle oxidation via melts/fluids carrying oxidized species from the slab;
(b) crustal differentiation processes: assimilation and fractionation during
storage in the crust; or (c) eruption and shallow level processes: degassing
during ascent and eruption. Most studies on in arc rocks focus on volcanic
rocks, which may have experienced some or all of the above processes.
Consequently, volcanic rocks are difficult geological records from which to
untangle the effects of various oxidizing mechanisms. To understand the
processes responsible for the oxidized nature of arc magmas, this research
focuses on temporally and genetically related arc plutonic rocks from different
crustal depths using Fe valence state in amphibole. The research objectives are
three-fold: (1) synthesis of amphibole grains under varying oxygen fugacities
using high-pressure and temperature piston-cylinder experiments; (2) development
of a new workflow to quantify both Fe valence state and accommodation mechanism
of ferric iron in amphibole via in-situ, high-resolution synchrotron M?ssbauer
spectroscopy (SMS); and (3) application of the results of part 1 and 2 to
igneous rocks from different crustal depths in the accreted Talkeetna arc
(Alaska). Although Fe speciation in amphibole has been characterized previously,
primarily through bulk techniques (e.g., wet chemistry), SMS affords high
spatial resolution and precision which is critical in determining amphibole Fe
speciation at the sub-grain scale, as these minerals are often spatially zoned,
can exhibit sub-solidus alteration along rims and fractures, and contain
inclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.