* 1841562
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the ACM Conference on Information-Centric Networking 2018 (ACM ICN 2018)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Karen Sollins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2020
* USD 10,000.00

This travel grant helps fund 15 students to attend the annual ACM Conference in
Information-Centric Networking, September 21-23, 2018 at Northeastern
University, Boston, Massachusetts. This conference is the leading venue for
research on the relatively new concept of Information Centric networking that
gained credence as a result of the NSF's Future Internet Architecture program.
Students given the opportunity to attend and participate in the conference will
be exposed to and interact with the leaders in this field of research, a full
program of peer-reviewed papers, poster and demonstration sessions, and social
events. Exposing graduate students to the research venues and participants in
the research field of their choice is a critical part of their education. These
travel grants will allow them to attend.

The best research occurs when researchers are able to interact directly,
discussing and questioning each others' research. This is very effectively
achieved at research conferences. Enabling students to participate fully is key
to building the next generation of top-notch researchers. The more frequently
they are included in the research community and able to participate in such
conferences, the better prepared they will be to become full-fledged
researchers. This award supports US students generally, but specifically targets
women, underrepresented minorities, and students with disabilities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.