* 1841895
* SBIR Phase I:  Presbyopia Correcting Intraocular Lens with a Novel Refractive System for Restoration of a Complete Range of Vision and Spectacle Independence
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2019
* Kevin Harris, CLEARSIGHT, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project aims to address two conditions that are very prevalent
in the aging population, presbyopia and cataract, with a single intraocular
lens. Presbyopia, the age dependent loss in the ability of the eye to adjust
focus, is expected to affect 1.37 billion people worldwide by 2020. Cataract,
the irreversible clouding of the lens that results in blurred vision, is
expected to affect 30.1 million Americans by 2020. Despite these ever-increasing
numbers, there currently is no single product available that restores both
visual acuity and a complete range of spectacle-free vision following cataract
refractive surgery. Such a solution would provide a greatly improved quality of
life for patients and would inform future scientific developments in human
accommodation and cataract formation. Alongside improved quality of life, vision
correction has the added benefit of increased productivity in the workforce. The
cataract surgical and intraocular lens exchange markets are significant, with
25.5 million IOL implants and $3.3 billion in sales in 2016 worldwide. With the
growing and aging population, these numbers are expected to increase at a rapid
rate. This device will fill a significant unmet need and has the potential of
restoring a range of vision unlike any device currently in the market.

The proposed intraocular lens utilizes a highly sensitive refractive system
leveraging large differences in refractive indices and has a mechanism of action
unlike any currently in the market. It has the potential of levels of
accommodation that are on par with accommodative abilities in a healthy, natural
human lens. Forces in the eye are minimal, so this level of sensitivity is
critical to any effective accommodating intraocular lens solution. Current
devices and those in development do not exhibit the required level of
sensitivity and subsequent accommodative amplitude to warrant significant
adoption in the industry. Additionally, the proposed device shape mimics the
natural lens, which allows for maximum utilization of the minute forces in the
eye and prevents posterior capsular opacification. The first goal of this
research will be the design and optimization of the lens utilizing a combination
of mechanical and optical modeling. Lens prototypes will then be molded in a
biocompatible, medical grade silicone. These prototypes will then be assessed
for accommodative ability - first in an established opto-mechanical model eye
experiment, then in an established human cadaver eye experiment. Finally, the
prototypes will be assessed for injectability, to assure smooth integration with
standard cataract surgical procedures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.