* 1841055
* Workshop: Building Leadership Capacity for Systemic, Scalable and Sustainable Change in Undergraduate Biology Education; Spring, 2019
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Susan Elrod, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Sophie George
* 03/31/2020
* USD 74,210.00

There is an increasing need for building campus leadership capacity to
facilitate institutional change that improves undergraduate Biology student
learning, retention and graduation. While the approaches for making these
improvements are well-known, their application on campuses is still not wide-
spread. To facilitate implementation of these improvements, campus leaders play
critical roles. In particular, those leaders with decision-making authority over
budget, personnel and policy (e.g., deans) can either be gatekeepers or gateways
to promoting the success of these efforts. A recent review makes the case for
the need to develop shared leadership models in higher education to more
effectively solve the increasingly complex problems facing colleges and
universities. However, there is no clear definition of the skills required to
lead using this type of model, nor are there manuals, workshops or other
resources to help leaders develop these competencies.

The proposed workshop will bring together positional leaders to reflect on both
their experience and the current leadership development literature to define the
set of distinctive competencies required to lead scalable, sustainable systemic
institutional change. These competencies will be defined and then used as the
basis for building resources that will be geared toward developing these
competencies in positional leaders across the country. The set of competencies
will be published in a summary article and used to create a plan for the
development of leadership program resources. Participants will also contribute
to the development of resources that can be made widely available for higher
education leadership programs offered through higher education associations and
other organizations. This will develop leaders who can more effectively
implement, scale and sustain institutional change efforts geared towards
improving undergraduate Biology student access, persistence and graduation of
underrepresented minority students. This work may also lead to additional
workshops to develop corresponding competencies for faculty, staff and students
who are participants in campus change projects. Finally, this work will
contribute to the development of new research questions regarding how well
leaders who have been exposed to the new resources exhibit the competencies and
use them to more effectively lead campus change efforts. This award is supported
by the Division of Biological Infrastructure in the Biological Sciences
Directorate and the Division of Undergraduate Education in the Education and
Human Resources Directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.