* 1841654
* RAPID: Trajectories of Social Vulnerability among Houston Area Households: A Pre- and Post-event Study of Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Timothy Collins, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 09/30/2019
* USD 40,225.00

Hurricane Harvey hit the Houston, Texas, metropolitan area on 25 August, 2017
and caused unprecedented damage. As of 4 September, 2017, estimates indicate
that over 156,000 homes were destroyed and at least 60 people died. Preliminary
loss estimates suggest that impacts could well exceed $100 billion, making
Harvey the costliest disaster in U.S. history. This project examines underlying
factors influencing Hurricane Harvey-induced flood experiences, impacts, and
short-term recovery across Houston area households. The project leverages
baseline data collected before Hurricane Harvey from a representative sample of
Houston area households regarding their vulnerability to hurricanes and
flooding, and involves the rapid collection of post-Harvey survey data from
those same households. By clarifying how pre-event factors shape households'
experiences, impacts, and short-term recovery during and immediately following
Hurricane Harvey, the project provides new insights into determinants of
community vulnerability versus resilience. As was demonstrated during Hurricane
Harvey, people's decision making plays a critical role in the vulnerability of a
communities' built environment when subjected to extreme events. Through the
collection and examination of a pre- and post-event survey data from the same
sample of households, this research project advances our knowledge of the role
of underlying social vulnerability in community resilience and recovery during
and immediately following large-scale disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this project is to collect data in Houston following
Hurricane Harvey to further our understanding of how social vulnerability
manifests in flood experiences, impacts, and short-term recovery. The project
leverages survey data collected from 600 randomly selected Houston area
households in 2012, and involves re-surveying them regarding their Hurricane
Harvey-induced flood experiences, impacts, and short-term recovery (in October
2017). Based on updated contact information, the project will collect a second
wave of survey data from households still residing in the Houston area at the
time of Hurricane Harvey. With this survey data, multivariate statistical models
will be used to predict flood experiences, impacts, and short-term recovery
across study households using explanatory variables derived from the 2012 and
2017 surveys.