* 1841433
* Planning IUCRC at NJIT Center for Integrated Material Science and Engineering for Pharmaceutical Products (CIMSEPP)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Rajesh Dave, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This IUCRC planning project focuses on establishing a collaborative three-
university center to advance fundamental materials science and engineering
research for facilitating high quality drug product development. The
pharmaceutical sector in the USA is a major, trillion-dollar industry, having
broad impacts on the health and well-being of its population. Yet, there are
major problems, e.g., slowing market growth, long time and high costs of
bringing a new drug to market, product quality and regulatory issues, and drug
shortages. These arise largely due to highly complex nature of pharmaceutical
products, which contain many different components, the inadequate understanding
of the manufacturing processes, and lack of predictive tools to assess product
performance from material properties. This Center aims to address these problems
and the needs of industry through paradigm shifting mechanistic approach for
developing predictive understanding of the impact of processes and material
properties on product performance. Proposed material science based translational
research is expected to have significant economic impact, due to improved
product quality, reduced product failures, simplified manufacturing operations,
and significantly reducing product development times and manufacturing costs.
The Center will also positively impact students from under-represented minority
groups, through training in cutting edge research methodologies, tech-transfer,
innovation and entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims
at developing a fundamental understanding of structure-function-performance of
particulate-based drug products and their process engineering, paving the way
for applying crystal and particle engineering towards enhancing drug
bioavailability, manufacturability, product stability, and product quality.
Center research thrusts, designed for transformative impact, are: A) Particle
and Crystal Engineering, B) Model Predictive Understanding of Materials and
Product Performance, and C) Bioavailability Enhancement and Stability. Tre
CIMSEPP team will advance understanding of the material properties and
interactions among drug(s) and additives at the molecular/particulate level as
affected by manufacturing processes. NJIT's expertise in particle contact-
physics will enable development of predictive models for particle agglomeration,
drug content uniformity, and tablet weight variation using dimensionless
parameter(s) based on material sparing measurements of particle properties such
as size, shape, and roughness. Expertise in modeling of particle processes,
e.g., mixing, coating, and drying, employing discrete element method, population
balance modeling, and multi-phase CFD, will enable better understanding of
traditional and emerging technologies, such as thin films and 3D printing.
Center-wide collaborations will lead to technologies for improved drug
solubility, dissolution rate and bioavailability, personalized medicines and
pediatric dosing, while reducing time for product design, process development,
scale-up, as well as enabling continuous
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.