* 1841716
* 2018 NSF Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) Program Aspiring PI Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Sajal Das, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,964.00

This project supports organization of, and travel grants to, the inaugural Smart
and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) Program Aspiring Principal Investigator
(PI) Workshop that will be held in Kansas City, MO in September 2018. The
workshop will be co-located with the 4th IEEE International Smart Cities
Conference (ISC2), the flagship conference sponsored by Institute of Electrical
and Electronic Engineers (IEEE) Smart Cities Technical Community, which is the
coalition of multiple technical societies within the IEEE. The S&amp;CC Aspiring
PI workshop will assemble a group of aspiring PIs with diverse backgrounds
across disciplines and sectors, ranging from economists and sociologists to
computer scientists and engineers to city and community stakeholders. The
workshop will place particular emphasis on exploring the integrative research
and community engagement aspects of the S&amp;CC program goals. The workshop
will include talks and panels by National Science Foundation (NSF) Program
Directors as well as the current program awardees. The agenda will also include
a session for small group discussions among aspiring PIs and panelists for
mentoring on research concepts. The workshop will aid early- and mid-career
researchers in developing a research agenda that effectively advances science,
while aiding communities in improving safety, security, economic prosperity,
wellbeing, and quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will foster
the growth of the S&amp;CC community by emphasizing recruitment and
participation of early- and mid-career faculty and underrepresented minorities
(URMs). Recipients of travel grants will be selected based upon the Intellectual
Merit and Broader Impacts of one to two-page position statements submitted in
advance. The participation of early- and mid-career faculty and URMs will be
strengthened by recruiting from multiple women in computing networks, Hispanic
serving institutions, historically black colleges and universities, primarily
undergraduate institutions, as well as city and community stakeholders
interested in the S&amp;CC program. The co-location of the S&amp;CC Aspiring PI
Workshop and IEEE ISC2 will have a strong synergistic impact. The conference
will attract the interests of potential PIs and their collaborators. The
workshop will also promote IEEE ISC2 to become an influential venue for current
and future NSF S&amp;CC PIs to disseminate their project results to an
international audience. The outcomes of the workshop, including presentation
materials and submission and acceptance information, will be shared following
the workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.