* 1841421
* Planning IUCRC at Mississippi State University:  Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect Farming
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Heather Jordan, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 14,994.00

Food demand from the growing human population is expected to increase 100% over
the next 40 years; however, predicted growth in agriculture production will fail
to meet demand by ~40%. The inability to meet future food demands places more
pressure on the one billion individuals currently underfed and living in
substandard conditions throughout the world. These limitations will manifest
into amplified social pressures such as, but not limited to, increased rates of
disease, demand for land and water resources, and a lack of agricultural
entrepreneurship, which only further weakens the global economy. A sustainable
method (i.e., practical and economical) for remediating agricultural waste,
while producing high value protein is essential to the long-term health of
ecosystems and agriculture. One solution is the utilization of insect farming to
convert organic wastes, which will potentially produce alternate resources of
monetary value for the farmer. Insect farming can produce enormous amounts of
protein and lipids that can be used in a variety of commodity settings (e.g.,
feed production, compost, biofuels, human food in some cases). And this
production of alternative protein sources is less environmentally straining than
most currently used methods in terms of reduced land and water usage and reduced
emissions.

The Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect Farming (CESTIns)
will be comprised of three sites (Texas A&M AgriLife Research [TAMU], Indiana
University-Purdue University in Indianapolis [IUPUI], and Mississippi State
University [MSU]), with each site specializing in a specific area of research.
The purpose of the MSU site is to: 1) Investigate insect microbiomes to
optimize, and to evaluate their utility for increased insect nutrition,
nutrition as feed, and waste conversion; 2) Conduct experiments to determine
effects of probiotic supplementation on insect nutrition, feed nutrition, and
waste conversion; 3) Use classical and molecular microbiology to develop and
implement management plans for quality assurance (prevention) and control
(detection) of microbial pathogens. MSU will work with the other sites to
integrate research thrusts across the three sites with IUPUI and TAMU focusing
on genetics, insect biology, and engineering and feed trials, respectively.
Further, all three sites will work with strains produced by Industry as well as
strains developed internally as a means to optimize mass production. Laboratory
and field-based experiments will also engage interdisciplinary expertise in
microbiology, engineering, chemistry, food nutrition, physiology, and vertebrate
biology with cutting edge technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.