* 1841492
* Planning IUCRC at University of Arkansas: Center for High-Frequency Electronics And Circuits for Communication Systems (CHECCS)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Gregory Salamo, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 14,977.00

The Center for High-Frequency Electronics and Circuits for Communication Systems
(CHECCS) team plans to establish a multidisciplinary IUCRC center in high-
frequency communication systems. Such systems have penetrated almost all aspects
of our daily life, with applications ranging from autonomous cars, personalized
medicine, and monitored healthcare to agricultural sensing and merchandise
inventory systems, for example. The scope of CHECCS broadly includes materials,
electronics, devices, circuits, radiation, and their applications. A team with
broad and complementary sets of expertise will collaborate with industrial
partners to initiate integrated research projects. Such projects will serve as
the foundation for the center, which will not only support research projects but
also coordinate educational activities in both high-frequency electronics and
communications to offer certificates and training as needed by industry
partners. The center?s objectives include solving multidisciplinary problems of
interest to industry in this technically-challenging and economically-vital
critical area, addressing industry strategic needs, and training future
engineers; thus addressing a national need for qualified engineers and
scientists with deep expertise in the various technically-challenging areas
supporting high-frequency communications.

The intellectual merits of CHECCS include activities that would support the
development of the research and educational components of this initiative into a
highly visible integrated program in the US. The excellent semiconductor
fabrication and RF test facilities at University of Arkansas will be great
assets for the industrial partners. Researchers and industrial partners will
work on developing devices, circuits and systems supporting commercial and
defense-oriented applications. CHECCS envisions producing highly qualified and
trained engineers capable of leading advanced research and exploratory
activities. Broader impacts include accelerating technology transfer research
into viable products, stimulating spin-offs and start-up businesses, and forming
long-term partnerships with various organizations while leveraging industry and
NSF/DOD/DOE support. CHECCS will combine knowledge from research groups, train
future engineers, and equip them with base knowledge through working on
increasingly complex projects in high-frequency communications. CHECCS will have
graduate students involved in high-quality pre-competitive research projects,
thus developing students who are knowledgeable in industrially-relevant research
and attracting more domestic students to strengthen ties to recruiters and
alumni.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.