* 1841879
* Collaborative Research: An Ice Core from Hercules Dome, East Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/2020,06/30/2027
* Murat Aydin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 06/30/2027
* USD 97,261.00

The goal of this project is to drill and recover an ice core from Hercules Dome,
Antarctica. The geographic setting of Hercules Dome makes it well-situated to
investigate changes in the size of the West Antarctic ice sheet over long time
periods. The base of the West Antarctic ice sheet lies below sea level, which
makes this part of Antarctica vulnerable to melting from the relatively warm
deep water of the Southern Ocean. An important research question is whether the
West Antarctic Ice Sheet collapsed during Earth's last prolonged warm period,
about 125,000 years ago, when the ocean was warmer and sea level was several
meters higher than today. Evidence for or against such a collapse will be
recorded in the chemistry and physical properties of the ice. The Hercules Dome
ice core will be obtained over three to four field seasons in Antarctica using
efficient drilling technology. This grant includes support for project
management, pre-drilling science community engagement, ice-core recovery, and
education and outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hercules Dome is
located at the edge of the East Antarctic ice sheet, south of the Transantarctic
Mountains at 86 degrees South, 105 degrees West. Glaciological conditions at
Hercules Dome are simple, with well-defined layering to the bed, optimal for the
recovery of a deep ice core reaching to the last interglacial period at depths
between 1600 and 2800 meters. An ice core from Hercules Dome will provide a
research opportunity for ice-core analysts and others to make progress on a
number of science priorities, including the environmental conditions of the last
interglacial period, the history of gases and aerosols, and the magnitude and
timing of changes in temperature and snow accumulation over the last 150,000
years. Together with the network of ice cores obtained by U.S. and international
researchers over the last few decades, results from Hercules Dome will yield
improved estimates of the boundary conditions necessary for the implementation
and validation of ice-sheet models critical to the projection of future
Antarctic ice-sheet change and sea level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.