* 1841363
* Planning IUCRC at University of Minnesota-Twin Cities:  Center for Integrated Material Science and Engineering for Pharmaceutical Products (CIMSEPP)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Changquan Sun, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This IUCRC planning project focuses on establishing a collaborative three-
university center to advance fundamental materials science and engineering
research for facilitating high quality drug product development. The
pharmaceutical sector in the USA is a major, trillion-dollar industry, having
broad impacts on the health and well-being of the US population. Yet, there are
major problems, e.g., slowing market growth, long time and high costs of
bringing a new drug to market, product quality, and drug shortages. These arise
largely due to highly complex nature of pharmaceutical products that contain
many different components, the inadequate understanding of the manufacturing
processes, and lack of predictive tools to assess product performance from
material properties. This Center aims to address these problems and the needs of
industry through paradigm shifting mechanistic approach for developing
predictive understanding of the impact of processes and material properties on
product performance. Proposed material science based translational research is
expected to have significant economic impact, due to improved product quality,
reduced product failures, simplified manufacturing operations, and significantly
reducing product development times and manufacturing costs. The Center will also
positively impact students from under-represented minority groups, through
training in cutting edge research methodologies, tech-transfer, innovation and
entrepreneurship. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims at developing
a fundamental understanding of structure-function-performance of particulate-
based drug products and their process engineering, paving the way for applying
crystal and particle engineering towards enhancing drug bioavailability,
manufacturability, product stability, and product quality. Center research
thrusts, designed for transformative impact, are: A) Particle and Crystal
Engineering, B) Model Predictive Understanding of Materials and Product
Performance, and C) Bioavailability Enhancement and Stability. The CIMSEPP team
will advance and promote fundamental understanding of the material properties
and interactions among drug(s) and additives at the molecular and particulate
level as affected by manufacturing processes. The UMN team's expertise in powder
characterization and property enhancement through integrated crystal engineering
and particle design will enable the development of both highly effective and
easy-to-adopt strategies to solve manufacturing problems. Fundamental
understanding in structure - property relationship will be gained through
systematically characterizing materials at length scales, ranging from molecular
dimension to single crystal/particles, to powders, and to finished products. The
highly collaborative efforts within the CIMSEPP are expected to benefit the
health and well-being of the U.S. population through enabling high quality
pharmaceutical products using more efficient design and development process,
robust scale-up, and continuous manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.