* 1841373
* EAGER SitS: Nanorod-Based, On-the-Go Raman Sensors for Real-Time, Multiplexed Soil Nutrient Monitoring via Direct Ground Probing
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Angel de Dios, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,995.00

Soil nutrients play multiple crucial roles in crop production. Nutrients affect
the quality and quantity of plants and their resistance to different stresses
that reduce yield. Hence, smart management of soil nutrients is vital to meeting
the increasing global need for quality food, feed, and fiber without
continuously expanding the land area for agriculture. The researchers in this
project will create a nanomaterial-based, on-the-go sensor which can enable
real-time and continuous detection of multiple soil nutrients. When successfully
completed, a demonstration module of a hand-held sensor will be developed by the
graduate and undergraduate students on the project, and it will be exhibited to
the general public at the USA Science and Engineering Festival and Exposition.
This highly interdisciplinary research project will also provide ideal learning
opportunities for chemistry graduate and undergraduate students by engaging them
in a wide breadth of research experiences ranging from nanomaterial synthesis,
to sensor development, to soil measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
accurate, on-site detection of various nutrients is critical to precision
agriculture and site-specific soil management, analytical techniques currently
available for soil measurements including Raman spectroscopy can present
challenges associated with inadequate accuracy, low reliability, insufficient
sensitivity, and laborious sample preparation. This research group will exploit
the superior physical and optical properties of zinc oxide nanorods to create
Raman nanoprobes for use as on-the-go soil nutrient sensors. Specifically, the
subwavelength waveguiding and surface evanescent waveguiding attributes of zinc
oxide nanorods as well as the high shape anisotropy of the one-dimensional
nanomaterial will be exploited. Once transformed into a novel Raman nanoprobe, a
vertical array of zinc oxide nanorods will permit highly intensified and
spatially localized excitation as well as effective coupling and transport of
even hard-to-detect Raman scattering signals from soil nutrients. Collectively,
the nanorod-based, Raman soil sensor will provide multiplexed chemical analysis
with its detection sensitivity high enough to quantify both the more abundant,
macro nutrients as well as the trace-level, micro nutrients in a background soil
fluorescence-free manner. Sensor calibration, quantification, and validation
steps will be established for the sensor, and the full performance
characteristics of this novel Raman nanoprobe sensor will be determined. The
research efforts will not only permit multiplexed detection of soil nutrients
via chemically fingerprinting their Raman signatures but also ensure accurate
and reliable soil nutrient quantification by utilizing the newly developed
nanoprobe sensor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.