* 1841246
* Collaborative Research: Studies of the Microphysical Processes in Ice and Mixed-Phase Clouds and Precipitation Using Multiparameter Radar Observations Combined with Cloud Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Alexander Ryzhkov, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 214,562.00

Winter storms cause major disruptions to transportation, commerce, the power
grid and public safety. The goal of this research project is to provide better
information on the properties of clouds and precipitation during winter storms
so that these events can be better forecast. The researchers will use advanced
radar observations, and techniques to analyze that data, to study a variety of
processes in winter storms that affect the types and amount of precipitation
that falls at the surface. Better predictions of snowstorms are especially
important for ground and air travel and this work has connections to the
relevant operational forecast agencies. In addition, students will be trained in
radar meteorology techniques, ensuring the advancement of the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will investigate the
microphysics of cold-season storms, with a focus on the use of multi-frequency,
dual-polarimetric radar observations. A unique combination of state-of-the-art
tools in modern weather radar technology and explicit microphysical modeling
will be used to derive a better understanding of the microphysics in winter
storms, including dendritic growth, riming, aggregation aloft, and processes in
the melting layer. The main observational tools will be the radar facilities at
Stony Brook University, which are highlighted by the Ka-band scanning radar and
W- and Ku-band profiling radars. Ground measurements will include the Multi-
Angle Snowflake Camera (MASC), disdrometers, and Community Collaborative Rail,
Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) observations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main
objectives of the work are to: 1) Explore synergy among polarimetric, multi-
frequency, and Doppler radar measurements using innovative techniques for
processing and representing multi-parameter radar data to provide information
about microphysical and kinematic processes in ice and mixed-phase clouds, 2)
Investigate novel radar methods for quantification of ice hydrometers, and 3)
Develop a 1D cloud spectral bin model combined with a forward radar operator to
simulate key microphysical processes of snow formation and provide
recommendations for improving the parameterization these processes in large bulk
and spectral bin models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.