* 1841608
* EAGER SitS: Collaborative Research: Projecting Arctic soil and ecosystem responses to warming using SCAMPS: A stoichiometrically coupled, acclimating microbe-plant-soil model
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Edward Rastetter, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Gregory Anderson
* 08/31/2020
* USD 69,197.00

Understanding future arctic terrestrial carbon balance is vital because high
latitude soils contain about twice as much carbon as is in the atmosphere and
its release would drive a major acceleration of atmospheric carbon dioxide
accumulation. This research will advance the understanding of processes
regulating the storage and release of carbon from arctic soils across biological
and physical scales using a modeling approach. The study will promote both basic
research into the controls on arctic soil and ecosystem processes and be
applicable to management agencies by describing how linked biotic-abiotic
responses to unprecedented warming may influence future carbon balance in Arctic
terrestrial ecosystems. Further, this grant will help advance the career of an
Assistant Professor at a primarily undergraduate institution, while enhancing
gender and racial diversity in the biogeosciences. This research will also
directly enhance undergraduate education in arctic biogeoscience through
directed mentorship of undergraduate researchers; the research approach and
findings will also be incorporated into courses and other teaching activities by
the primary investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field studies suggest that
inconsistent responses to comparable experimental manipulations across arctic
tundra ecosystems might be driven by local variation in the plant and decomposer
community. However, the relative importance of, and links between, key biotic
(e.g. microbial acclimation) and abiotic factors (e.g. altered snowpack, thaw
depth, and nutrient availability) that govern these divergent responses of
tundra to climate variation, remains unknown. This project will synthesize
available data from ambient and experimental manipulations of arctic ecosystems.
The investigators will then use the synthesis to refine, parameterize, and
validate a changed version of the Stoichiometrically Coupled, Acclimating
Microbe-Plant-Soil (SCAMPS) model. Simulations will explore how variation in
seasonal warming and the acclimation potential of the soil microbial and plant
community, encompassing community shifts, evolutionary adaptation, and
physiological changes across tundra landscapes, affects biogeochemical feedbacks
and regulates future carbon balance of arctic soils and
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.