* 1841404
* Planning IUCRC at Louisiana Tech University:  Center for Innovations in Structural Integrity Assurance (CISIA)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

Louisiana State University (LSU) and Louisiana Tech University (LA Tech) propose
to establish the Center for Innovations in Structural Integrity Assurance
(CISIA). Structural integrity and reliable life prediction of infrastructure and
mechanical components have relevance in every public and private sector, ranging
from oil &amp; gas to aerospace to construction to energy processing industries.
In addition to fundamental research for establishing linkages between material
properties, infrastructure performance, and structural integrity ?which is
beyond the scope of most industrial R&amp;D organizations of today? the academic
and industrial members of CISIA will work in concert to produce engineers who
are trained in state-of-the-art facilities to utilize modern methods of
structural health monitoring and analysis. These engineers will join a highly-
qualified and productive workforce that significantly enhances the global
competitiveness of U.S. industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LA Tech site of
CISIA focuses on structural integrity of structural systems, with emphasis on
deteriorated material characterization/testing and innovative sensor
development, to conduct research on pipe, structural member, and composite
rehabilitation component performance, life-cycle assessment, non-destructive
condition determination, and failure prediction. By integrating validated
diagnostics, machine learning, and data-driven decision making, CISIA will be
well-positioned to interpret and translate the links between structural material
design, operational performance, structural repair, and their collective impact
on reliability across all U.S. industrial sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.