* 1841667
* EAGER: Operationalization of the Structural Extreme Events Reconnaissance (StEER) Network
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ian Robertson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 09/30/2021
* USD 418,351.00

Over 39 percent of the US population live in coastal shoreline counties exposed
on the Atlantic and Gulf coasts to meteorological hazards like hurricanes and on
the Pacific Coast to geophysical hazards like earthquakes and tsunamis.
Meanwhile, much of the remaining population at the interior of the country is
subject annually to the damaging effects of thunderstorm downbursts and
tornadoes, in addition to the looming threats of potentially catastrophic
earthquakes. Concentrating property and human life in some of the country's most
hazard-prone areas inevitably results in catastrophic losses, as powerfully
illustrated by the 2017 Hurricane season's sequence of Harvey, Irma, and Maria,
which caused the highest insured losses ever. Each disaster provides an
important opportunity to evaluate the performance and vulnerabilities of
buildings and other constructed civil infrastructure that led to dramatic losses
of life and property. Research (knowledge) advances to reduce risks to civil
infrastructure from natural hazard events are strongly guided and informed by
field evidence documenting the performance of the built environment after the
event. As natural disasters occur with little warning, reconnaissance teams must
immediately mobilize over large geographical areas to gather large quantities of
perishable research data on civil infrastructure performance that must be
effectively captured through a finite number of field observations. While the
National Science Foundation uses the Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID)
funding mechanism to support structural engineering researchers to collect post-
event perishable data, the response of the structural engineering community to
such extreme events has been ad hoc, leading to slowed in-field response times,
uncoordinated data collection, and missed opportunities to maximize learning
from disasters. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
responds to this challenge by establishing the Structural Extreme Event
Reconnaissance (StEER) network to coordinate the structural engineering research
community's rapid response to natural disasters and build its capacity for more
effective, systematic, and consistent post-disaster RAPID reconnaissance and
data collection. The goal is to use the event data collected for subsequent
research investigations to reduce risks to constructed civil infrastructure and
thus promote national welfare and prosperity by saving lives and reducing
property losses in future disasters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER will guide
the community-led design and launch of the StEER network and establish its
mission to (1) promote community-driven standards, best practices, and training
for coordinated RAPID field work, (2) represent the vision of the structural
reconnaissance community outwardly to other aligned organizations, and (3)
coordinate official event responses in collaboration with other stakeholders.
StEER will be founded upon regional nodes that provide convening points to give
voice to the needs of the windstorm and earthquake engineering communities,
while establishing common ground to foster interaction between them. These nodes
more importantly will enable swift and cost-effective response to disasters.
Creating a single point of coordination for the structural engineering research
community will also enable better connectivity with the wider established
extreme events (EE) consortium in geotechnical engineering and social sciences
to foster greater potentials for truly interdisciplinary reconnaissance. StEER
will be operationalized through the following objectives: (1) establish its
governance structure, policies and data standards to enable more effective,
coordinated field reconnaissance by leveraging its geographically distributed
network; (2) implement standard workflows for a wide array of assessment
technologies to swiftly and reliably capture, curate and disseminate large
volumes of perishable research data; (3) increase the community's capacity for
high-quality damage assessments through standardization, rigorous quality
assurance, and web-based training programs; (4) foster greater collaboration
across hazard and disciplinary boundaries through coordination and blended
reconnaissance efforts within the wider EE consortium; and (5) promote broad
dissemination of high-quality reconnaissance findings to diverse audiences to
benefit researchers, practitioners, students, and the public-at-large. StEER
will also coordinate its reconnaissance with the NSF-supported Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI) RAPID facility and its data
archiving with the NHERI cyberinfrastructure Reconnaissance Portal
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.