* 1841687
* STEM Equity Achievement (SEA Change)
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Shirley Malcom, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Jessie Dearo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,974,650.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) proposes the
development of a national initiative called STEM Equity Achievement (SEA)
Change. SEA Change will be a voluntary system of self-assessment and recognition
for colleges and universities working on institutional transformation to support
diversity, equity, and inclusion in science, technology, engineering,
mathematics, and medicine (STEM). SEA Change is informed and inspired by the
National Science Foundation's (NSF) ADVANCE program and by the United Kingdom's
highly regarded Athena SWAN program. NSF ADVANCE has promoted organizational
change within U.S. institutions of higher education to address systemic
inequities. The Athena SWAN program has created healthy competition among U.K.
institutions by awarding Bronze, Silver, and Gold-level status to STEM
departments and to institutions that meet research-informed criteria in
promoting gender equity and diversity. The goal of SEA Change is to adapt this
incentive model to the United States and develop a well-regarded, credible
initiative that results in structural change in higher education. SEA Change
will seek to provide fair, impartial reviews and assist institutions with
attainment of awards through transparency in processes and standards. AAAS is
the largest general science organization in the world and is widely respected
for its more than 40 years of programmatic commitment to diversity and inclusion
in STEM and is well positioned to shepherd an effort like SEA Change. This grant
funding will support the development of the infrastructure needed for SEA Change
to reach its ambitious goals and eventually to become self-
sustaining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SEA Change program is a bold, innovative,
and systemic approach to promote structural transformation in higher education.
As a positive, voluntary recognition system, SEA Change will promote excellence
and incentivize colleges, universities, and their STEM departments to become
more diverse and welcoming through transformations in organizational structures
of these institutions, providing a more supportive learning and working
environment for faculty and students from groups under-represented and
underserved in STEM. Institutions that participate in the program will commit to
diversity, equity, and inclusion program principles; perform in depth self-
assessment to determine their baseline status; develop unique, mission-driven
goals and detailed action-plans; receive feedback on their self-assessments;
track and report on progress; and seek award renewal or progression on a five-
year schedule. Through this process SEA Change will drive sustained and systemic
changes in institutional culture, incentives, leadership, and student
populations, all driven by a focus on equity and
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by several National Science
Foundation (NSF) directorates, offices and programs including: Directorate for
Biological Sciences, Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering, Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Directorate for
Engineering, Directorate for Geosciences, Directorate for Mathematical and
Physical Sciences, Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences, NSF
Office of Integrative Activities, NSF ADVANCE, Alliances for Graduate Education
and the Professorship (AGEP), Historically Black Colleges and Universities-
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP), Engineering Education Centers (EEC), Broadening
Participation in Engineering Geosciences Education and Diversity Programs, and
NSF INCLUDES, which focuses on catalyzing the Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive change.
In addition, the National Institutes of Health's Office of Research on Women's
Health has co-funded this project to include the biomedical sciences in the SEA
Change effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.