* 1841351
* EAGER: A Framework for Learning Graph Algorithms with Applications to Social and Gene Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Srinivas Aluru, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Many real world applications, such as discovering gene interaction networks,
detecting fraud in financial networks and personalizing recommendations in
social networks, involve NP-hard graph problems. Typically, approximation or
heuristic algorithms designed for these problems rely heavily on manually
specified structural information of graphs. Furthermore, previous graph
algorithms seldom systematically exploit a common trait of industrial graph
problems: instances of the same type of problem need to be solved repeatedly on
a regular basis, and algorithms which are effective on average are more
preferable than those with only a worst case guarantee. This project explores a
novel deep learning framework for automating the design of algorithms for
challenging graph problems. The framework delegates difficult choices during the
design to deep learning models, and uses a distribution of problem instances to
train effective graph algorithms. The project presents a paradigm shift in graph
algorithm design, and results in a software package to disseminate the research.
The project also involves a broader swath of students including undergraduates
and underrepresented minorities through multiple existing summer research
internship programs that target students nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the framework casts a graph algorithm as a composition of many
small learnable operators either because it works on graph inputs, produces
structured outputs, or the computation graph of the algorithm itself contains
structures such as branches and recursions. Instead of specifying each operator
manually as in traditional algorithm design, the framework parameterizes these
operators using nonlinear embeddings, and learns them jointly from graph input
and output pairs using supervised learning or reinforcement learning. Though
demonstrated in specific gene and social networks, the framework is generic and
broadly applicable to a large class of graph analysis problems appearing in a
diverse range of real world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.