* 1841587
* EAGER SitS: Bury and Forget Nitrogen Sensors Coupled With Remote Sensing for Soil Health
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* William Eisenstadt, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 08/31/2021
* USD 150,000.00

Excess fertilizer application from farm fields results in nitrogen runoff which
causes major drinking water contamination as well as commercial fishing and
tourism industry decline. Therefore, it is vitally important to have accurate
predictive nitrogen soil models that can help farmers reduce fertilizer use by
knowing exactly what type of fertilizer to use and precisely when and where in a
field to apply. However, the accuracy of these soil models is lacking because
soil nitrogen concentration data acquired at numerous points within a field is
currently cost prohibitive and technically challenging. This research will
create low-cost sensors that can electrically transmit soil nitrogen levels
(ammonium and nitrate ion concentration levels) from various soil depths and
locations to a central hub so that data can be transmitted through the internet
and analyzed remotely. Sensors that can be fitted with low-cost data
transmission electronics will be made of low-cost graphene (carbon) that is
disposable and can be created using scalable manufacturing protocols. The
completed sensors will be tested in the soils surrounding tomato plants to
acquire high resolution spatial and temporal nitrogen data for improving soil
nitrogen models that can be utilized by farmers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop bury-and-forget nitrogen sensors coupled
with remote sensing technologies for real-time analysis of soil health. The
sensors will be developed with flexible graphene electrodes functionalized with
ionophore membranes for sensing of ammonium and nitrate ions in soils using
laser inscribing and inkjet printing techniques (Aim 1). A network of these
sensors will be developed using commercial Bluetooth-based mesh network modules
for sensor power, computing, and communications (Aim 2). This project will
elucidate the sensor depth and broadcast frequency that is capable/needed for
successful in-soil nitrogen monitoring using a bucket brigade approach. This
sensor network will be merged with existing crop models developed and challenged
with in-field relevant conditions using a model tomato system in a testbed
facility (Aim 3). The testbed facility will be used for collecting high
resolution nitrogen sensor data from the soil coupled with monitoring of the
Normalized Difference Vegetation Index of the plants as benchmarks to integrate
remote sensing and real-time field measurements. The proposed project will lead
to new: 1) wireless nitrogen sensors (both labile and mobile); 2) knowledge of
spatiotemporal dynamics of soil nitrogen coupled with above ground plant
physiology; 3) knowledge of scaling micro/nanosensor subsurface soil data, long-
duration signal acquisition/curation, and pinpointing the maximum wireless data
transmission depth in soil; and 4) best management practices for coupling soil
sensor results to current field-scale tools such as remote sensing. The project
will be the first to connect in-situ nanosensors, remote sensing, and crop
modeling for the same sample, therein establishing a platform for improving
understanding of soil biogeochemistry, sensor networks, and fundamental
spatiotemporal scaling principles. This project will facilitate rapid studies
for improving empirical model parameters (crop coefficients), as well as to
validate assumptions in remote sensing (links between yellowing leaves and
nutrient stress) and in-situ soil sensors (nutrient fate and transport). In
addition to testing the developed sensor systems, this project will establish
strategies and best practices for the development, testing, and deployment of
soil nutrient sensors that can be reproduced anywhere for sensor testing and/or
hypothesis testing, leading to improved models and observation networks to
manage soil health. Such sensor networks and resultant models are expected to
lead to precision agriculture where fertilizers are spread onto specific
locations of the field in a metered fashion only when
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.