* 1841512
* Planning IUCRC at Northeastern University:  Center for Solid-State Green Electric Power Generation and Storage (CEPS)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Sanjeev Mukerjee, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The NSF IUCRC Center for Solid-State Green Electric Power Generation and Storage
(CEPS) is based on long-term partnerships between universities, industry,
national laboratories, and state and federal institutions. The IUCRC CEPS goal
is focused on fundamental mechanisms of novel superfast solid-state glass-
ceramic conductors and on correlation of these mechanisms with respect to
corresponding solid-state energy storage. The IUCRC CEPS will advance the NSF
mission by expanding fundamental scientific knowledge related to charge transfer
in solid state applications. IUCRC CEPS will provide solutions for safe, high
efficiency, and eco-friendly sustainable energy storage leading to energy
security, stronger national defense, and advancements in the interests of
national health. The role of the SDSMT center is to develop the next generation
of solid-state energy storage architectures through a fundamental understanding
of structure-property relationships. The SDSMT center effort is focused on
alternative solid-state deposition approaches that will provide a cutting edge
strategy for manufacturing of solid-state energy storage devices. The faculty
associated with SDSMT center will advance the NSF mission of diversity by
mentoring young scientists and minority students, and providing broad
multidisciplinary educational experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prospective
Center focuses on advancing understanding of fundamental mechanisms that take
place in novel superfast solid-state glass-ceramic conductors under electric
transient conditions and correlation of these mechanisms with the corresponding
transport mechanisms for high efficiency, safe, and environmentally friendly
all-solid-state energy technology. New knowledge and scientific contributions to
the field of solid-state ionics will be generated through the following: 1)
Mechanisms of micro- and nanostructural evolution of novel nano-architectures at
atomic scale; 2) Understanding mass and charge transfer mechanisms by in-situ
operando studies; 3) Self-charging mechanisms within intrinsically integrated
solid-state energy storage multilayer structures involving perovskite solar
cells; 4) New miniaturization technology leading to safe, human-friendly, and
long-lasting solid-state energy storage systems for medical applications; and 5)
Solid-state energy storage integration into green power generation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.