* 1841551
* Fiscal Decentralization, Development, and Governance
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Jean Ensminger, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 89,037.00

Stable, well-functioning economies have the potential to allow nations to better
serve the needs of their citizens. They also create an environment in which
neighboring countries, such as the United States, can grow and prosper. One of
the driving forces behind economic stability and performance is thought to be
good governance, particularly significant fiscal decentralization. But cross-
country analyses of the effects of decentralization on economic development and
corruption reduction have produced contradictory findings. The result is that
both theoretical and practical understanding of what promotes good governance
and, thereby, economic stability and development, has lagged. The research
supported by this award addresses this policy challenge through an in-depth,
locally comparative, ethnographic investigation of the effects of a case of
recent fiscal decentralization. The research is important because if the links
between decentralization and good governance can be identified through an
intensive study of a single case, findings can then be generalized to improve
theoretical understanding and policy globally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research will be conducted by anthropologist Dr. Jean Ensminger (California
Institute of Technology). The researcher has identified Kenya as an excellent
site for this study because the country has recently implemented a strong
version of decentralization. The new governmental structure divides the nation
into 47 counties each with a governor who controls significant fiscal resources.
Theory that links decentralization to better economic performance in democratic
countries rests on two unproven assumptions: that citizens will have improved
access to information so that they can monitor the performance of their leaders,
and that citizens value performance above other factors such as ethnic
favoritism and patronage. This research tests these assumptions and theoretical
predictions. Because of the inconsistent findings of quantitative studies of
this problem, the researcher will take a largely qualitative and inductive
approach. The researcher will collect data with a mix of qualitative and
quantitative methods, including: interviews with governors, particularly those
identified by civil society leaders as reformist; interviews with constituents
and county-level government officials; analyses of longitudinal county-level
records, voting records, and publicly available polling data; and analyses of
reports of anti-corruption and audit bodies. Findings from the research should
help policy makers understand whether a strong model of fiscal decentralization
can offer a path forward for more effective policy. Results will also support
better theoretical understanding of what promotes good governance and well-
functioning economic systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.