* 1841416
* RAPID: First contact with Punan Batu hunter-gatherers in Borneo
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* John Lansing, Santa Fe Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 43,703.00

During the Pleistocene, our ancestors lived as hunter-gatherers, a way of life
that shaped the biology and social behavior of our species. Consequently the
study of the few remaining populations of hunter-gatherers has high priority for
the social, medical and behavioral sciences. Most research has focused on a few
very well-known African groups, notably the Khoisan peoples of southern Africa
and the Hadza of Tanzania, who have been conscripted by anthropologists and the
popular media as the model for ancestral human society. In the past, hunter-
gatherer societies also existed in tropical Asia, but much less is known about
them. It is an open question whether Asian rainforest hunter-gatherers differ in
significant ways from the savannah-dwelling Africans. The discovery of an
isolated tribal population is an unique and exceedingly rare event, and one that
is likely to excite public interest in anthropological, biological, and
linguistic science. The research team have plans to educate both scientific and
non-technical audiences about the population genetics, language, and ethnography
about this group, thereby engaging a wider audience in scientific research. In
addition, the project would strengthen collaboration among scientists in the
U.S. and Indonesia, and broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
the sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This RAPID award supports the collection of
critical but ephemeral data on the island of Borneo in Indonesia. Borneo is the
third largest island in the world, and contains the greatest terrestrial
biodiversity. Until recently the island was home to hunter-gatherers called
Punan. But full-time hunting and gathering by the Punan is believed to have
ended more than a generation ago, and most of the remaining Punan now live in
reservations. In 2017 the elected leader of the Punan of the eastern region of
Indonesian Borneo discovered an unknown, isolated population of 118 cave-
dwelling Punan hunter-gatherers. Concerned about their welfare, the Punan leader
requested assistance from a biomedical research team from the Indonesian
Ministry of Research, Technology and Higher Education, including anthropologist
Dr. Steve Lansing of the Santa Fe Institute. Specifically, the Punan leader
requested that Lansing and one Indonesian researcher accompany him to the cave,
to assess the immediate biomedical vulnerabilities of the inhabitants, and
ensure that appropriate precautions are taken to safeguard their health and
welfare. Lansing and the Indonesian research team will seek the informed consent
of the Cave Punan for follow-up visits to conduct comprehensive studies of their
health, demography, languages, material culture and kinship practices, using
methods described in numerous recent publications by Lansing and colleagues.
Realistically, without NSF support contact is likely to occur soon, but not by
anthropologists and medical researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.