* 1841671
* 2018 Connections in Smart Health Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* John Lach, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2019
* USD 99,938.00

This proposal supports the Connections in Smart Health 2018: Principal
Investigators Workshop in Arlington, VA on September 24-26, 2018. The meeting
will bring together principal investigators of projects awarded by the Smart and
Connected Health program from with other researchers looking at smart health in
the broader community. The SCH program was set up in order to bridge gaps in
fundamental science necessary to transform health and healthcare, as well as to
be focused on prevention and person-centered care. Connections in Smart Health
Workshop is designed to address the next generation of challenges in advancing
health with foundational research from the computer science, engineering and the
social, behavioral and economic disciplines. An objective of the Workshop is to
provide an opportunity for the principal investigators and other smart health
researchers to explore research progress in a diverse set of projects and
discuss important current issues, as well as future challenges associated with
research in transdisciplinary scientific areas. The discussions will be
supported by keynotes, panels, project-related posters, rapid talks and
participant-generated workshops. It is anticipated that the meeting will
stimulate discussions, connections, and collaborations that will facilitate
progress in the area of Smart and Connected Health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop should have a significant impact on the participants and the future of
the Smart and Connected Health program. The focus of the workshop is on
foundational research that supports the growth of smart health within connected
communities. The workshop results are likely to include new research directions
that will be publicized to the research community through publications and a
workshop website. The results dissemination should inform and the developing
Smart and Connected Health research community in their transdisciplinary
collaboration, educational activities, and spur other innovative research
directions. The broader impacts of the workshop are to facilitate progress in
the field and stimulate conversations, connections, and collaborations that will
lead toward better informed and effective smart and connected health research
and resulting technologies for the broadest possible user populations.
Additionally, there will be a workshop attached to the Principal Investigator
meeting that will support the travel for ten students from under-represented
STEM disciplines to attend the PI Workshop. This should also help grow the field
by providing mentorship and support for a new cadre of investigators looking to
do work in the Smart and Connected Health area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.