* 1841338
* CONVERGE: Coordinated Social Science, Engineering, and Interdisciplinary Extreme Events Reconnaissance Research
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lori Peek, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 08/31/2023
* USD 4,528,384.00

The National Science Foundation Natural Hazards Engineering Research
Infrastructure (NHERI) supports research that improves the resilience and
sustainability of civil infrastructure against natural hazards to reduce loss of
life and injury, damage, economic loss, and other forms of societal disruption.
NHERI is a distributed, multi-user national facility that provides the natural
hazards research community with access to research infrastructure. NHERI is
currently comprised of separate awards for a Network Coordination Office,
Cyberinfrastructure, Computational Modeling and Simulation Center, and
earthquake and wind engineering and rapid reconnaissance Experimental
Facilities. To extend the NHERI portfolio and more fully connect it with the
social science hazards and disaster research community, this project creates a
CONVERGE Facility to be headquartered at the University of Colorado Boulder
Natural Hazards Center,that will coordinate hazards and disaster researchers and
link them to the existing NHERI scientific plan, facilities,
cyberinfrastructure, and technological resources. It also advances platforms,
networks, mobile research applications, cyberinfrastructure, and research
opportunities for Social Science Extreme Events Reconnaissance (SSEER) and
Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering Extreme Events Reconnaissance
(ISEEER). Through CONVERGE, ISEEER will serve as the connecting body for the
GEER (Geotechnical Extreme Events Reconnaissance), STEER (STructural Engineering
Extreme Events Reconnaissance), and SSEER networks and the NHERI RAPID Facility
and NHERI DesignSafe-Cyberinfrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CONVERGE
Facility establishes and supports a new Extreme Events Reconnaissance Research
Leadership Corps that connects researchers from different disciplines, develops
best practice guidelines for reconnaissance research, and supports public
communications in the event of a major disaster. Additionally, this project
advances social science and interdisciplinary reconnaissance efforts by
identifying, mapping, and collecting relevant information on SSEER and ISEEER
researchers and offering free online training to inform research efforts across
the disaster life cycle. In the event of a NHERI-relevant natural hazard, the
facility will encourage and fund rapid reconnaissance efforts that seek to
understand and reduce systemic risk among vulnerable people, structures, and
places. Finally, the project will develop mobile applications in collaboration
with the NHERI RAPID Facility to expand next generation data collection and
analysis strategies for social science researchers and interdisciplinary teams
and create an open-access social science data repository for collecting,
archiving, curating, publishing, and sharing data through a partnership with
NHERI DesignSafe-Cyberinfrastructure at DesignSafe-ci.org. This project connects
diverse groups of specialists and scholars to advance the practice of conducting
rapid reconnaissance research in a way that is holistic, scientifically
rigorous, and ethically grounded.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.