* 1841992
* Development of Novel Augmented Reality Tool for Teaching Molecular Visualization in Biochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Andrew Wilson, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 03/31/2024
* USD 299,292.00

A core learning objective for students in biochemistry courses is understanding
the relationship between the function and the structure of macromolecules, such
as proteins. However, instructors must typically teach students about 3D
molecules by using 2D images. As a result, many students have trouble grasping
key elements of 3D macromolecular structure, including scale and the effects of
molecular shape changes. This project aims to address this limitation by
developing an augmented reality (AR) application to visualize 3D macromolecules
that are central to understanding biochemistry, cell biology, molecular biology,
and genetics. AR is an interactive system in which a computer-generated 3D
object is superimposed onto the physical environment. This project aims to
develop a freely available AR-based application that can be installed on mobile
smartphones and tablets and that can be used to visualize and manipulate
macromolecules. The project seeks to implement the application in classes at two
liberal arts colleges that include a combined total of ~100 students each year.
It will also assess the impact of these AR-based teaching tools on student
learning. Since the AR application will be freely available, it can enable the
public to easily 'see' and interact with biological macromolecules that are
important to human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address the current gap in
instructional tools available for teaching macromolecular structure, this
project has three objectives: 1) Develop an application that uses AR technology
to allow students and instructors to engage and interact with virtual 3D
macromolecular structures; 2) Develop three learning modules on biochemistry
topics of membrane transport (potassium channel), allosteric regulation
(hemoglobin), active site catalysis (G-proteins); 3) Implement each learning
module and evaluate its impacts in biochemistry courses taught by different
instructors at different institutions. The project will evaluate the impacts of
AR technology on both student learning outcomes and on potential changes to
instructional practices in the classroom. The project aims to evaluate the
effectiveness of the modules with respect to i) user experience with the
technology; ii) impacts on student attitudes and visuospatial skills; and iii)
impacts on instructional practices of using virtual 3D objects to teach
macromolecular structure and function. During evaluation, the project will also
develop and validate new instruments for effective assessment of the modules.
The project aims to disseminate the AR applications through workshops for
interested instructors and professional science educators, thus layin the
groundwork for academic collaborations and community partnerships that can
develop additional interactive AR modules. In addition to providing a novel tool
for teaching molecular structure and function, the project will lay a strong
foundational framework for the evaluation and development of additional AR-based
teaching tools in the future. This project is supported by NSF's Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education (IUSE) Program: Engaged Student Learning
(Exploration and Design tier).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.