* 1841087
* EAGER: Adapting Multi-Modal BCI-Based Assistive Technologies for Patients with High Spinal Cord Injury
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2022
* Laleh Najafizadeh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 05/31/2022
* USD 120,000.00

The goal of this research is to advance the brain computer interface (BCI)
technology by bringing the technology closer to the needs of patients with high
spinal cord injury (SCI). While BCI-based assistive technologies hold a great
promise to improve the quality of life of patients with SCI by enabling them to
independently perform simple activities of their daily life, several factors
have prevented their successful application in practical and clinical settings.
A major contributing factor to this problem is related to the secondary health
conditions (e.g. chronic pain) that are developed as a result of SCI, but have
been largely ignored in BCI research. The presence of pain can negatively impact
the control signals acquired from BCIs, and consequently, compromise the
operation of the assistive device, thereby, adding to stress, discomfort, and
depression for the patient. Using innovative approaches and experiments, this
research aims to investigate how the presence of pain impacts the operation of
multi-modal BCIs, thereby, promoting the progress of science. By providing an
understanding of the effects that pain, the outcome of this work is expected to
provide guidelines for developing effective methods for realizing robust and
high-performance BCI-based assistive technologies for SCI patients. This project
will also offer educational and outreach activities for the unrepresentative
researches working in a STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
advance the non-invasive multi-modal brain computer interface (BCI) technology
by bringing the technology closer to the needs of patients with high spinal cord
injury (SCI). By collecting information from the brain at two different
physiological levels via electroencephalography (EEG) and functional near
infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), the number of commands required for controlling
assistive devices can be increased. Using innovative approaches, the project
will investigate how the presence of pain, a condition that unfortunately most
SCI patients live with, will influence the operation of multi-modal BCIs.
Different classes of multi-modal BCIs are considered. The results from this
project are expected to provide important information and guidelines for
developing effective strategies and methods for realizing robust and high-
performance BCI-based assistive technologies for SCI patients who are in real
need of them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.