* 1841658
* Workshops:  Development of a roadmap for the next decade of microbial systematics research
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Anna-Louise Reysenbach, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2021
* USD 119,996.00

The microbial world is incredibly diverse and plays critical roles in all
biogeochemical cycles. However, the process describing and classifying
microorganisms continues to be very challenging. The dominant taxonomic system
for Bacteria and Archaea relies on the careful description of single-species
cultures, stemming from traditions rooted deeply in the history of microbiology.
In recent decades, microbiologists have increasingly relied on molecular
investigations, including single-cell genomics and metagenomics, which provide
insight into prokaryotes without reliance on cultivation in the laboratory. In
parallel, progress has been made to reframe microbial systematics in the
genomics age, which in principle could enable expansion of the taxonomic
structure to include uncultivated organisms. However, uncultivated
microorganisms have no status within the code of nomenclature and currently
there is no system to name uncultivated organisms. This project will involve
three meetings over the course of ~18 months to convene a group of world experts
to develop a cohesive plan to integrate uncultivated prokaryotes into a
systematics framework. Ultimately, an actionable plan will be created to modify
the code governing microbial nomenclature and to publish a blueprint for
prokaryotic systematics for the next decade. The results of this project will
impact all microbiologists, including microbial ecologists and clinicians, by
providing a robust plan for a system of nomenclature for all prokaryotes. The
project will also engage groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields and
provide leadership opportunities for early-career scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will involve three workshops.
Workshop 1 will engage experts on the systematics and genomics of prokaryotes
and eukaryotes, and will consider several existing proposals and to integrate
uncultivated microorganisms into a system of nomenclature, including a call to
modify guidelines for Candidatus status, a call to enable genomic material to be
used as type material for taxonomic proposals, and more aggressive proposals to
recalibrate all of microbial systematics using genomic data. The workshop will
also review two different proposals for the standardization of genomic data for
taxonomic purposes. Workshop 2 will discuss existing databases that are relevant
to microbial taxonomy such as the List of Prokaryotic Names with Standing in
Nomenclature, the Microbial Genomes Atlas, the Digital Protologue Database, and
the Genome Taxonomy Database with a goal of better integration and development
of systems to link diverse datasets directly to taxonomic data. Workshop 3 will
engage a small working group to pull together the findings of the two workshops,
synthesize recommendations and provide recommendations on how to proceed and
implement these recommendations. The outcome of the workshops will be an
actionable plan to integrate uncultivated organisms into a system of
nomenclature and a roadmap to guide microbial systematics for the next
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.