* 1841673
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Investigating the Universality of the Subject Requirement through a Language With Overt Correspondents for Postulated Null Subjects
* SBE,BCS
* 12/15/2018,05/31/2021
* David Pesetsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2021
* USD 13,651.00

It has been estimated that over half the world's roughly seven thousand
languages are on the verge of disappearing, while many others face a similar
future in the slightly longer term. The loss of a language entails a loss of
cultural and intellectual wealth both for its community of speakers and for a
scientific community for whom linguistic diversity provides a vital natural
laboratory for understanding the nature of human language as a whole. This
project investigates unique and scientifically significant sentence structures
of a language still spoken by a speech community of reasonable size, but facing
clear signs of future threat due to the encroachment of English and larger
regional languages: B&amp;ugrave;l&amp;igrave; (bwu), a Gur (Mabia) language
spoken in Sandema, Ghana. In many disciplines, abstract elements are posited but
not directly observable, such as quarks in physics. B&amp;ugrave;l&amp;igrave;
has the potential to reshape our understanding of abstract syntactic elements
posited in linguistics. The impetus for this project is the discovery of overt
elements in the language B&amp;ugrave;l&amp;igrave; that appear to be the
counterpart of elements that are hidden in (most) other languages of the world.
The investigation of this phenomenon requires observing and analyzing these
elements as used by actual speakers of the language in Ghana, since the language
is underdocumented. Broader impacts include the training of a dissertation
student. In addition, for the local community of speakers, this project will aid
local educators by laying a foundation for the future development of pedagogical
materials, including an introductory grammar book. this project falls in the
national interest by strengthening the existing close relations between the U.S.
and Ghana, especially between educational and scientific institutions. The
importance of the Ghanaian people and their diverse cultures to the United
States more generally is evidenced by the fact that three presidents since 1998
have visited Ghana &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns subordinate
clauses in B&amp;ugrave;l&amp;igrave;, which have been discovered to have
several surprising properties. The most striking discovery concerns the fact
that certain controversial abstract elements that have been proposed as part of
the grammar of languages like English are overt and pronounced in
B&amp;ugrave;l&amp;igrave;. In particular, the unpronounced subject position of
certain infinitival clauses in English has been claimed to be occupied by an
element that is present in the mental representations of speakers despite being
unpronounced. This proposal is important to our understanding of the laws that
govern the structure of sentences in general, but because it has complex
consequences, some researchers have advanced theories that dispense with
unpronounced subject positions. In B&amp;ugrave;l&amp;igrave;, however, some
(but interestingly not all) of the positions for which a silent subject has been
posited for English are occupied by an overt pronoun. The presence of this
pronoun appears to argue in favor of the universality of a requirement that all
clauses have a structural subject, but hypotheses concerning the details of its
distribution and testing of these hypotheses will show whether this conclusion
is supported or not. These discoveries concerning B&amp;ugrave;l&amp;igrave;
have the potential to shape our entire understanding of how clauses (basic
building blocks of language) are formed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.