* 1841463
* EAGER: Nanostructured porous and laminate coatings for biodegradable magnesium-based implants with tunable water permeability and improved mechanical properties
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jagannathan Sankar, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Nadia El-Masry
* 08/31/2022
* USD 190,000.00

Biodegradable Mg-based alloys are considered as a great material for
implantation without additional secondary surgery for implant removal. They are
lightweight, have close to bones physical and mechanical properties, excellent
biocompatibility and osseointegration, and they can completely degrade and be
replaced by naturally re-grown bones. However, installation of bare Mg-based
implants has frequently been accompanied with high initial corrosion rate and
hydrogen release burst that can cause variety of post-surgical complications.
Therefore, the success of their implementation highly depends on control of
corrosion rate and hydrogen release especially during the initial stage of
installation. This function can be provided by special coatings having well-
controlled water permeability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports
exploratory work on an untested, but potentially transformative idea for
biodegradable Mg implants. It is exploring a new process methodology and
underlying mechanism in a new "thin film coatings concept for tunable water
transport" - through coating components that are capable of providing
targeted/tunable resorption or degradation time. It will study how combining
thin, degradable and nanoporous layers into nanolaminate coatings can
significantly extend tunable control of initial corrosion rate of Mg-based
implants. This project also supports providing URM students at an HBCU with
state-of-the-art science and technology training, along with deeper exposure to
team-based research and value-creation best practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.