* 1841220
* EAGER: An Innovative Modelling Approach to Predict Non-Equilibrium Phases Produced in Metal Additive Manufacture Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Judy Schneider, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 01/31/2020
* USD 208,742.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will develop a
new and untested approach toward modeling of the non-equilibrium behavior of
complex metal alloys in terms of the evolution of their atomic arrangement. In
additive manufacturing of metals, various process maps are used to guide the
selection of time and temperature to produce the desired microstructure to meet
the required mechanical properties or performance. Most metal fabrication
processes occur at equilibrium, with known conditions of temperature and time.
In contrast, the laser-engineered net shaping and related additive manufacturing
processes builds a part by depositing the metal as small molten drops which are
rapidly and repeatedly heated and solidified layer by layer. While this greatly
reduces the time, cost, and weight in the direct build of a complex multi-part
assembly, the rapid and repeated melting and re-solidification in additive
manufacturing results in a variety of difficult-to-predict non-equilibrium
phases that lead to uncertainty in the resulting microstructure and mechanical
properties. At present, expensive trial-and-error experimental studies form the
basis for such microstructural development. This work has the potential to
realize non-equilibrium maps that will enable the full potential of additive
manufacturing, thereby advancing the processing of industrially significant
alloys to empower new applications in the biomedical, aerospace, chemical, and
energy industries. As a result, this work will enhance the US economy, society,
and global competitiveness in manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize
the full potential for reducing fabrication costs through the use of additive
manufacturing, viable thermodynamic and kinetic road maps need to be generated
for predicting the microstructures to guide and optimize the processing
parameters to optimize the material performance. The thermodynamics and kinetics
of Inconel 718, a nickel based superalloy, will be modeled from first-principles
calculations and data-intensive statistical mechanics approaches. The temporal
evolution of atomic arrangements at given temperature and chemical potentials,
will be modeled based on the diffusion through vacancy mechanism. The change of
atomic configuration will be simulated under an adiabatic approximation,
averaging out fast degrees of freedom such as electronic and lattice vibrations
on the hopping time scale. Then, the temporal evolution of atomic arrangement
will be modeled by a series of events: switching a vacancy with one of its
nearest neighbor atoms, which is equivalent to the hopping of the switched atom
to the vacant site. Integrating numerical predictions with experimentally
observed microstructural responses will rapidly verify the proposed
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.