* 1841251
* EAGER: Lipids on the move
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Susanne Hoffmann-Benning, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 298,575.00

Plants are essential for all life on earth: they provide the oxygen we breathe,
medicines, raw materials for industry and construction, fuel, nutrition, and
food. Globally, 62% of harvested crop is used for human food, 3% to produce
seeds for replanting, bioenergy, and industrial products, and 35% for animal
feed. The priority goals of the United Nations include "End hunger, achieve food
security, improve nutrition, and promote sustainable agriculture". This is not a
trivial goal as plants are quite literally "rooted to the spot" and cannot
escape adverse conditions. It is essential to understand how plants sense
environmental changes, signal these changes to other parts of the plant and
adjust development accordingly. Lipids are oil and fat-soluble molecules that
play an important role in plant and animal development and serve as signals for
changing environmental conditions. As a result, understanding the function of
plant lipids and the mechanism of their transport will serve not only the
scientific understanding of plant developmental processes but will also
translate into tangible improvements of food sustainability and
quality:&lt;br/&gt; - Understanding how lipids affect plant growth and seed and
fruit development will lead to higher yields and more food.&lt;br/&gt; -
Understanding how lipids affect plant survival in changing environments (cold,
freezing, drought, nutrient-deficient soil, insect feeding etc.) will reduce
crop losses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lipids are essential components of plants.
They provide energy for metabolic processes, are membrane components, and serve
as intracellular signals. Simple lipids such as oxylipins are long-distance
signals of biotic stress suggesting other lipids function as systemic signals as
well. Given the fundamental importance of mobile signals for the coordination of
abiotic stress and development, and thus for plant survival and food security,
it is imperative to unequivocally demonstrate the existence of long-distance
phospholipid-signaling and its components. The PI's lab has identified the lipid
phosphatidic acid (PA) and a PA-binding protein (PLAFP) in phloem exudates and
proposed that phloem lipid-binding proteins, particularly PLAFP and PA act in
development and in long-distance signaling in response to environmental stress.
To test this hypothesis, the lab will&lt;br/&gt; - Investigate localization and
movement of the protein PLAFP using a combination of transgenic approaches,
grafting, western blot, confocal microscopy, immunogold labeling and NightOWL
imaging.&lt;br/&gt; - Monitor lipid movement in wild type, PLAFP-overexpression
and PLAFP knock-down plants. MS will confirm the identity of the radiolabeled
mobile compound.&lt;br/&gt; - Determine binding mechanisms and specificity of
the PLAFP-PA complex and its movement using a combination of a "Red-Light-ON"
optogenetic switch with a novel FRET approach that visualizes protein-lipid
interaction in vitro and in-planta. Once established this system will provide a
tool to study protein-ligand interactions in any system.&lt;br/&gt;The work will
be assisted by a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate student, and an
undergraduate. They will be able to participate in an international
collaboration/exchange with the Heinrich-Heine University Duesseldorf,
Germany.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.