* 1841839
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Monumentality in Early Florida
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Victor Thompson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2019
* USD 25,089.00

Doctoral candidate Matt Colvin and Dr. Victor Thompson of the University of
Georgia will undertake research on the nature of cooperation and community
formation among hunter-gatherer-fishers in the Lake Okeechobee region of
Florida. Recent studies in both the social and evolutionary sciences have taken
a more pronounced focus on cooperation, seeking to understand how unrelated
groups work together and form formal communities. These investigations often
focus on groups that follow hunting and gathering and limited agricultural
economies. Archaeology has the ability to inform on the history of practices
that belie such cooperation though an analysis of the built environment,
particularly through the study of the form of monuments and constructed civic-
ceremonial spaces. Reconstructing the building and occupational sequences, as
well as the intensity of use, at such places is one measure of how cooperation
and co-residence became entrenched among these communities. The primary
contribution of this research will be to advance understanding of institutional
development among hunter-gatherer-fishers, and the degree and context in which
such groups managed to cooperate in large-scale labor projects over extended
periods of time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To conduct this research the project will
investigate the site of Fort Center, a multi-mound ceremonial complex in the
southern Florida interior that exhibited periods of monument construction and
co-residence among hunter-gatherer-fishers for over 2000 years. This research
will address two interrelated trajectories: (1) Identify the intensity of
activity change over time (e.g., shifts from a periodic usage to more continual
activity). (2) Determine if shifts in the intensity of activities in other areas
correspond with novel types of monumental architecture. Following the
identification and extent of both domestic and communal middens, the
investigators will conduct excavations within identified middens at the site.
These excavations will provide samples to create a robust radiocarbon
chronology, identify rates of accumulation both spatially and through time, and
also determine the distribution of middens to interpret related activities.
Finally, this work will provide training opportunities for undergraduate
students, as well as engage with local communities and public outreach regarding
the cultural history of the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.