* 1841020
* RAPID: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  OBS survey of Kilauea's submarine south flank following the May 4, 2018 M6.9 earthquake and Lower East Rift Zone eruption
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Julia Morgan, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 06/30/2019
* USD 9,994.00

In April 2018, a dramatic shift took place in the ongoing eruption of Kilauea
volcano. Both the summit lava lake and the vent at Puu Oo, active for 35 years,
catastrophically drained, sending magma to the Lower East Rift Zone where it
began to erupt, and eventually to flow into the ocean. This project is to deploy
a network of 12 ocean-bottom seismometers to record earthquakes associated with
the ongoing eruption. The instruments will be deployed on the south flank, and
will record several hundred offshore earthquakes and thousands more occurring
beneath Hawaii Island. The earthquake locations will aid in understanding
deformation on the submarine south flank of the volcano, and provide insight
into properties of the fault zone along which Kilauea Volcano moves across the
Pacific plate. Recordings of the energy generated at the ocean entry where lava
enters the ocean will be used to understand submarine eruptive processes such as
lava-water explosions, submarine lava flows, and landslides. This project will
enhance understanding of the seismic and volcanic hazards associated with
eruptions from Kilauea Volcano, including possible offshore landslides and
potential tsunamis. The project supports the training of students on a research
expedition. The data will be made available immediately upon
collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At Kilauea Volcano the change in
eruptive activity in Spring 2018 was accompanied by an increase in seismicity
within the rift zone, at the summit, and beneath the submarine south flank of
the volcano. Activity has also been recorded at the margins of the submarine
south flank, in areas that have not seen significant seismicity in the past.
Earthquakes that have been recorded offshore are poorly located because the
seismic network is limited to one half of the focal sphere. This work will focus
on answering several key questions. What structures within and beneath the
mobile south flank are active today, what are the deformation mechanisms
associated with them, and how do they relate to the ongoing eruptions? The M 6.9
earthquake appears to have also ruptured an area that experiences aseismic slip
although the interpreted slow-slip source region has far fewer aftershocks than
the adjacent regions. What caused the region to slip co-seismically? Much of the
submarine south flank of Kilauea is composed of fragmental lava that has been
transported downslope through landsliding. How does this process evolve as a new
ocean entry develops?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.