* 1841103
* 26th NSF EPSCoR National Conference: Science and Partnerships Across Disciplinary Boundaries
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Prakash Nagarkatti, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jose Colom
* 09/30/2022
* USD 737,585.00

Nontechnical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) holds National Conferences that bring
representatives from all EPSCoR jurisdictions together to discuss strategies to
promote EPSCoR goals of building STEM research and education capacity to
increase their national competitiveness. This biennial event is a forum for
EPSCoR project directors and participants to discuss opportunities and
challenges at the local, state, national, and international levels and how
EPSCoR efforts can collectively contribute to the advancement of science and
engineering research and education. This meeting also showcases results from
projects funded by NSF EPSCoR. The 26th National EPSCoR Conference will be held
in Columbia, South Carolina from October 27-30, 2019 and is expected to have
300-400 attendees. This meeting is organized by South Carolina EPSCoR with a
focus on transdisciplinary science and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme for
the 26th National EPSCoR Conference is "Science and Partnerships across
Disciplinary Boundaries". The program will include five sub-themes to provide a
organizing framework for the meeting: 1) Promoting transdisciplinary research
and education through NSF EPSCoR investments; 2) Broadening participation in
STEM through partnerships; 3) Promoting public-private partnerships in education
and research leading to economic competitiveness; 4) Big data in a
transdisciplinary perspective: crossing boundaries; and 5) Evaluating
transdisciplinary research and conveying its importance to a broader audience.
The National Conference will showcase high-impact programs and explore the
elements and strategies that make them successful over the long-term in their
capacity for scientific and economic advancement. The conference program will
include platform and poster sessions to encourage the active participation of
EPSCoR awardees - Principal Investigators, Project Administrators, Education,
Outreach, Diversity Coordinators as well as other senior personnel and early-
career researchers (including students). Plenary sessions featuring national
experts will highlight different aspects of the meeting
theme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.