* 1841917
* ERA-CAPS:Activation and regulation of plasma membrane receptor signaling complexes controlling plant development and immunity, and their connection to downstream signaling cascades
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Zachary Nimchuk, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2023
* USD 385,049.00

Plant development is driven in part by chemical communication among cells that
signal and co-ordinate growth. Some of these signals are small molecules, called
peptides, that are perceived by other "receptor" molecules in the plant cell. A
cascade of developmental information is transmitted when peptides find their
receptors, similar to the opening of a door by a key in a lock. Surprisingly,
scientists discovered that receptors are also used by plants to detect signals
from invading pathogens. Upon detection, plants can then ward off further
pathogen attack by activating an arsenal of molecular defenses. How these
related and similar receptors function in normal plant development and also
plant defense is puzzling and remains an important unanswered question in plant
biology. This research tackles the problem by identifying the molecular basis of
peptide recognition and by deciphering how receptors control both development
and defense. Specifically, the research addresses the question of how the same
receptor family can distinguish between very different peptide signals to
activate different cell signaling pathways. The research brings together a
diverse and international group of scientists with complementary technical
skills to address these questions. Challenges to plant health from pathogens
remain a pressing problem facing national food security, as diseases spread
widely across the globe. The outcomes of this research provide foundational
information that can be applied to improving disease resistance in plants. In
the process, students and post-doctoral researchers are trained in cutting edge
interdisciplinary science in the area of basic plant development and practical
plant health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peptide perception in plant pathogen
interactions and development are mediated primary receptors belonging to the
leucine-rich repeat transmembrane kinase superfamily. Individual primary
receptors mediate specific peptide binding, but it is becoming clear that
diverse receptors can use specific and often shared co-receptors for peptide
recognition and downstream signaling. The molecular basis of specificity in both
recognition and downstream signaling is unclear. This research studies the
structural basis of how related receptors use co-receptors to recognize specific
peptide ligands. In addition, the project aims to use phosphoproteomics and
quantitative biochemistry to determine how specific ligand perception is
transduced into specific downstream signaling outputs. The project will also
decipher the function of a clade of receptor interactors in the control of both
development and defense receptor signaling using a combination of biochemical
and genetic methods. It is envisioned that this work will provide a molecular
framework for understanding how specificity is encoded at the molecular level in
receptor kinase signaling, setting the stage for engineering these pathways in
crops in the future as one of the major broader impacts of the reseach. The
program also ensures a productive future by training the next generation of
scientists in inter-disciplinary and international
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.