* 1841767
* Planning IUCRC at St. John's University:  Center for Integrated Material Science and Engineering for Pharmaceutical Products (CIMSEPP)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Abu Serajuddin, Saint John's University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The pharmaceutical sector in the USA, a trillion-dollar industry, has tremendous
impacts on the health and well-being of its population. However, unlike the
enormous progress made in manufacturing technologies in recent years in many
industries, including semiconductor, electronics, automotive, food, chemicals,
etc., the pharmaceutical industry has lagged much behind. The situation is such
that, according to recent public comments and reports by the US Food and Drug
Administration, there has not been much innovations in how pharmaceutical
products are developed and manufactured even during the past half a century. As
a consequence, the US is facing very high risk and cost of developing new drug
products, high drug prices, many quality and regulatory issues, and,
importantly, drug shortages. The lack of progress in pharmaceutical
manufacturing sciences and technologies could primarily be due to highly complex
nature of pharmaceutical products that consist of numerous different components,
the inadequate understanding of material properties necessary at different steps
of the manufacturing process, and non-availability of predictive tools to assess
product performance based on material properties. This three-university center
will bring together a team of engineering and pharmaceutical experts to address
these problems by conducting fundamental research in partnership with experts
from pharmaceutical industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over 80 percent of medicines
used in the USA are in solid dosage forms, such as tablets and capsules that
consist of granules and particles. Even many products that are injected or
inhaled are produced as particulates. Currently, there is poor understanding of
the behavior of particulate systems resulting in major development and
manufacturing issues, and alternative approaches are needed to characterize them
and predict their performance. Additionally, over two-thirds of new chemical
entities synthesized during drug discovery are extremely water-insoluble and
newer technologies are needed to improve solubility, dissolution rate and
bioavailability of such materials. Innovstive technologies are also needed to
address the urgent needs of personalized medicines, targeted drug delivery, and
abuse-deterrent medications (opioids). Implementation of continuous
manufacturing in pharmaceutical industry, which is currently normal in other
industries, is also not possible without advancement in materials sciences. The
St. John's University team will contribute to resolving these issues by applying
its extensive expertise in drug product development, novel drug delivery
systems, and pharmaceutical processing. The university's modern state-of-the-art
facilities in its Industrial Pharmacy Innovation Laboratory to conduct research
on crystal and particulate engineering, melt extrusion and granulation,
nanotechnology, spray drying, 3D printing and continuous manufacturing will be
utilized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.