* 1841783
* EvaluATE: Evaluation Learning and Resource Hub for Advanced Technological Education
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Lori Wingate, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2023
* USD 6,407,856.00

EvaluATE is the evaluation learning and resource hub for NSF's Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) program. This award will support EvaluATE's
research, education, and network building activities, with the goal of enhancing
the quality and impact of ATE workforce development projects. It is expected
that higher quality evaluations will increase the potential of the evaluation
results to inform practices in STEM workforce development. The goals of this
project are to: Expand the evidence base for effective science, technology,
engineering and mathematics education evaluation practices; Improve ATE
evaluators' knowledge and skills in evaluation; Improve the ability of ATE
project personnel to use evaluation effectively (e.g., for improvement,
understanding, and accountability of federally funded projects focused on
workforce development); and increase professional exchange and strengthen
connections among ATE evaluation stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will conduct four research studies with the overarching goal of improving the
evaluation of federally supported projects. Study 1 examines the validity of the
ATE Evaluation Task Framework to guide the design and execution of rigorous
project evaluation. Study 2 investigates the procurement of evaluation services.
Study 3 explores the feasibility of measuring equity, diversity, and inclusion
in the ATE context. Study 4 examines evaluation in decision-making. Drawing on
adult learning principles, the project will help ATE project evaluators and
personnel to design conduct, manage, and use evaluation in their projects.
Building on existing strategies and resources, such as webinars and job aids,
the project team plans to integrate and investigate fellowships and one-on-one
technical assistance in evaluation capacity building. Working with other ATE
community and capacity building efforts, EvaluATE will facilitate development of
a sustainable ATE evaluation network that includes evaluators and ATE
practitioners. This network has the potential to further strengthen the
evaluation capacity of the ATE community and to enable rigorous evaluation of
federally funded projects focused on workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.