* 1841792
* Progress and Pitfalls in Monitoring STEM Doctoral Degree Holders Career Paths
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Thomas Hoffer, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Earnestine Psalmonds
* 08/31/2019
* USD 246,863.00

The National Opinion Research Center (NORC) at the University of Chicago will
conduct a spring 2019 conference and related preparatory tasks focused on how
doctoral-granting universities and their doctoral programs can collect and
utilize data on STEM PhD career pathways. The overarching objective of the
project is to help develop widely-shared standards for the kind of career
outcomes that should be measured; the methods for collecting the data; and the
ways in which data should be analyzed and findings disseminated to prospective
students, faculty, and administrators. Funding will be used to support four main
activities: a web-based national survey of graduate deans in fall 2018, a focus
group of graduate deans in December 2018, a one-and-a-half-day conference in May
or June 2019, and a multi-pronged dissemination of results of the project. A
proposed survey of graduate schools will be the first systematic effort to
collect data nationwide and across classes of institutions and graduate programs
on the various approaches being implemented to consider how they are working.
The project has potential to influence knowledge that could be available to
students and university doctoral program leaders about career paths followed by
recent cohorts of doctoral recipients to enable graduate students to make wiser
career choices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring together
representatives from higher education institutions who have been developing
different approaches to studying career pathways of PhD recipients in the STEM
fields as well as social science experts in data collection and utilization. The
conference will enable participants to exchange lessons learned to date on
challenges and accomplishments in tracking STEM careers, develop strategies for
mitigating the challenges, and generate an empirically based understanding of
issues surrounding career pathway data collection and utilization. The project
team will employ a two-step process in collecting quantitative and qualitative
data from approximately 270 institutions that currently engage in a career
pathways project, have provided information on PhD graduate career outcomes in a
public form, or have not engaged this topic. Prior to the conference, they will
conduct an online survey to better understand the barriers to beginning a career
pathway data collection process and hold focus groups to present the survey
findings. The project will culminate with the conference and dissemination of a
monograph that will provide insight and guidance for universities on career
pathways data collection and utilization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded by he EHR Core Research Program (NSF 15-509) under the STEM Professional
Workforce Development core theme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.