* 1841738
* Conference Support for the 2019 Ribosome Meeting; January 6-10, 2019, Merida, Mexico
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Alexander Mankin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 08/31/2019
* USD 12,000.00

This award will support early career researcher attendance at the Ribosome
Structure and Function Meeting, which will be held at the Fiesta Americana Hotel
in Merida Mexico on January 6-10, 2019. An important aim of the conference is to
provide early career researchers with experiences that help them develop
professional skills. The format of the conference is a combination of talks,
poster sessions and informal meetings. This format promotes scientific exchange
in both formal and informal settings, and provides opportunities for networking
with leaders in the field of ribosome research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein
synthesis is catalyzed by the ribosome, the ancient and evolutionary conserved
cellular machine. Although recent decades have brought a basic understanding of
the mechanisms of protein synthesis, many aspects of translation remain largely
unanswered. These aspects include the ribosome dynamics during translocation,
tRNA selection and peptide release, the kinetics of individual steps of
translation, the modes of action of many protein synthesis inhibitors and many
others. An overarching goal of the meeting is to bring together researchers
working on different aspects of translation, exploiting different experimental
approaches and using different experimental models. The most recent discoveries
related to the ribosome will be presented within 10 scientific sessions
structured around thematic topics. The scientific program will showcase advanced
techniques and the use of multidisciplinary approaches for solving key
biological problems related to gene expression and protein synthesis. In
addition to the oral and poster presentations the organizers plan to disseminate
the information through a special volume of one of the mainstream scientific
journals, with chapters written by invited speakers and
trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.