* 1841184
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Public Views about Economic Inequality and Government Policies
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2020
* Emily Wager, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 15,547.00

This research studies mass sample surveys as tools for measuring public opinion
about economic inequality and government policies. The PI visits three American
states (South Carolina, West Virginia, and Vermont) to talk to individuals from
a variety of backgrounds regarding their attitudes. Through gathering a range of
perspectives from different corners of the country and across economic status,
this project seeks to gain insights into how citizens view economic inequality
in their own words, as well as their beliefs about ways in which the government
should address economic challenges facing citizens. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, the PI seeks to better understand the causal mechanisms underlying
views about inequality and government measures aimed at decreasing inequality.
It is theorized that Americans believe in conditional equality, where they
support equalizing policies as long as they perceive the beneficiaries as
"people like me." It is hypothesized the public prefers the government to do
more in some circumstances and less in others. The fieldwork for the project
involves multiple types of data collection, including focus groups and in-depth
interviews with local residents, and draws on both positivist and interpretivist
methodological approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.