* 1841928
* Integrating Transdisciplinary and Computational Approaches in the Earth Science Curriculum Using Data Visualizations, Scientific Argumentation, and Exploration of Geohazards
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/2018,09/30/2023
* Hee-Sun Lee, Concord Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,978,274.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (preK-12). This project will advance research and
development of new transdisciplinary approaches to computational STEM teaching
and learning that will integrate computational thinking through data
visualizations, the scientific practice of argumentation from evidence, and
earth science concepts focused on geohazards. The team will develop a open-
source scaffolded programming tool for data visualizations, and two curricular
modules on geohazards for middle and high school aligned with Next Generation
Science Standards. Integration of computational thinking and science practices
will occur as students transform real-world GPS data into manageable and
interpretative visualizations using the programming tool and use them as
evidence to formulate scientific arguments about predicting the impact of
geohazards. The resulting products can serve as exemplars for curriculum
developers, researchers, and educators to integrate computational data
visualization practices with disciplinary STEM learning, and inform strategies
to support teachers and students when implementing these practices. This project
is supported by the STEM + Computing Program that advances research and
development of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the
integration of computing within science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) teaching and learning for preK-12 students in both formal and
informal settings. STEM+C supports research on how students learn to think
computationally to solve interdisciplinary problems in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The examination of the integrated geohazard units
with the scaffolded programming tool for data visualization will take place in
two phases. First, design-based research will be conducted to refine the tool
and curriculum modules, develop assessments for students' content learning and
argumentation practices, and identify teacher supports necessary for
implementing this type of curriculum module in classroom. Second, a delayed
cohort pre-post-test design will investigate the impact of integrating the
computational practice of data visualization on student learning. The project
will reach 800 students and 12 teachers, and be implemented in a wide range of
schools including those that serve underrepresented students in STEM. Developed
products and research findings will be widely disseminated to practitioners,
developers, and researchers in the fields of science education, geosciences,
educational technology, and learning sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.