* 1841080
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding the Barriers to Political Representation of Women
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2021
* Tsering Youdon, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 23,448.00

This study examines how women become candidates in new democracies. While the
number of women in elected positions has been slowly increasing over time in
many countries, there is limited understanding of the unique challenges that
often make it more difficult for women to become candidates when compared to
men. To explain why women may be less likely to be selected as candidates, this
study focuses on the role played by party gatekeepers in party-controlled
candidate nominations. Drawing on insights from interviews with party officials
and candidates, the PI examines how barriers in candidate selection are
magnified for women through the informal selection criteria used by the party
gatekeepers who assess and rank candidates. Although both male and female
candidates are subjected to informal selection criteria at local and national
levels, only women must visibly demonstrate that they satisfy the financial and
mobilizing expectations of party gatekeepers. These gendered expectations entail
greater costs for women seeking party nominations because they must demonstrate
their wealth and their connections during the candidate selection process in
ways that are not demanded from men. This study provides new insights into the
organizational impediments to women's inclusion in politics. It shows how biases
can arise and be replicated within a party's candidate selection process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study contributes to new knowledge in the study of
women in politics in developing countries where democratic institutions remain
weak. First, while existing scholarship of women office-seekers tends to focus
on aggregate measures of legislative representation or their success as party
candidates in elections, the project focuses on the understudied first-order
questions: How do women become candidates? Do they face obstacles that are
different from men? This study includes a survey that employs a novel design to
assess how party members' candidate preferences are influenced by political
experience, ambivalent sexism, and financial or mobilizational expectations.
Experimentally, the survey employs two different designs to assess the project's
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.