* 1841231
* EAGER: A Systems Approach to Predicting and Preventing Accidents During Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Nancy Leveson, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2019
* USD 124,450.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will
contribute to the economic prosperity, safety and wellbeing of the nation by
taking the first proof-of-concept steps in investigating a new approach to
identifying leading indicators signaling the potential for an accident before it
occurs. Despite our best intentions to develop safe products and services,
accidents and losses still occur. As the potential for greater losses involved
in our advanced technology today increases, it will be harder to design
inherently safe systems and operational risk management practices will become
more important. There are always warning signs before a major accident, but
these signs may only be noticeable and interpretable in hindsight. At the same
time, enormous amounts of data can now be collected by computers but most of
theses data are not used because of the size and difficulty in creating useful
information from the data. This research will take a new and unique approach to
analyzing operational data and identifying when risk is increasing. Three
international airlines are participating in the research by providing real
operational data and their expertise to validate the feasibility and efficacy of
the new risk analysis technique. While airline operations are used as the
testbed, the research results can be extended to any safety-critical industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The basic hypothesis to be evaluated in this research is
that useful leading indicators can be identified based on the assumptions
underlying the safety engineering practices employed and on the vulnerability of
those assumptions. This process will require the use of various types of
operational data that can be (and often is) collected but needs some process for
determining the potential consequences of the collected data. The research will
build on a new model of accident causation called STAMP (System-Theoretic
Accident Model and Processes) and a new hazard analysis technique (STPA or
System-Theoretic Process Analysis) to work on that model. STAMP extends current
accident causality to include more complex causes than simply component failures
and chains of failure events or deviations from operational expectations (which
is the basis for traditional hazard analysis methods). STAMP incorporates basic
principles of systems thinking and is based on systems theory rather than
traditional reliability theory. A new analysis tool called Active STPA will be
created that will use data commonly collected during operations to identify when
the assumptions made during design and development of a product or service are
violated during operations and thus may be a precursor for an accident and
evidence that risk may be increasing. The test bed will be airline operations.
While the subject of this research is limited to identifying leading indicators
related to safety and accidents, the ideas will apply to leading indicators and
risk management for system properties other than safety and could open a new
path to evaluating risk during operations for researchers to
explore&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.