* 1841398
* EAGER: RUI: Elucidation of the AlCl4- and Al2Cl7- ions speciation, interactions and transport in electrolytes comprised of RTILs by Multi-Nuclear NMR techniques.
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Sophia Suarez, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 07/31/2021
* USD 232,093.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;Societal energy needs demand the expansion of
current electrical energy storage systems capabilities. Lithium ion batteries
have dominated the markets due in part to lithium's high gravimetric and
volumetric capacities and have advanced the development of products like
electric vehicles and smartphones. However, they are expensive and more suitable
for portable and small-scale applications due to lithium's limited long-term
utility. Additionally, lithium ion batteries can be a fire hazard, a problem
which has caused restrictions in their application and transportation. To ensure
the advancement of society, improvements in electrical energy storage systems
are needed and the development of aluminum ion batteries is one approach.
Aluminum metal is attractive because of its low cost, low flammability and high
charge storage capacity. Aluminum ion batteries are cheaper and safer than
lithium ion ones, and they can be used for large-scale storage applications as
needed by renewables like wind and solar. Their wide-scale application is,
however, impeded by a number of factors, including a lack of enhanced
electrolytes. This project, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
Program in NSF's Division of Materials Research, identifies electrolytes for
aluminum ion batteries and investigates fundamental characteristics of ion
transport that enable better performance in the future. The project incorporates
educational programs for students of all levels and interests and involves
students of all education levels in the research activities. The scientific
broader impact of this project is to promote the advancement of science through
enhancement of energy storage systems. This in turn advances the welfare of
society through improvements in our living and environmental conditions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;This project, funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in NSF's Division of Materials
Research, elucidates the fundamental ion-ion interactions and their effects on
ion dynamics and transport in aluminum ion battery electrolytes, addressing a
lack of fundamental understanding of the aluminum ions' solvation, their
interactions and transport. Knowledge of all three is necessary for the
optimization of the electrolytes and for advancing the development of aluminum
ion batteries as alternative energy storage devices. Therefore, the PI and her
group investigate the available free volume of all ions through measurements of
multi-nuclear (protons, fluorine, aluminum and chlorine) magnetic resonance
self-diffusion coefficients and spin-lattice relaxation times, both as a
function of increasing hydrostatic pressure, and temperature. Special focus will
be on the aluminum nucleus. The procedure involves working both in the fringe-
magnetic field to determine the pressure dependent self-diffusion coefficients,
and in the homogeneous field to determine the temperature dependencies of the
focused parameters. Through these measurements the researchers gain knowledge of
the effect of aprotic organic solvents on the aluminum ion dynamics, and produce
the first successful application of the aluminum high-pressure nuclear magnetic
resonance technique. The electrolytes of interest are room temperature ionic
liquids with imidazolium and pyrrolidinium cations, fluorosulfonamide and
chlorine anions, containing the aluminum chloride compound combined with organic
aprotic additives such as cyclopentane and benzene, with molar ratios of
AlCl3/RTIL in the acidic range. This research opens the door for direct
determination of the mass transport of other non-lithium ions in electrolytes
and broadcasts the capabilities of the much-underutilized fringe-field high-
pressure nuclear magnetic resonance technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.