* 1841670
* EAGER: Tagging and Browsing Videos According to the Preferences of Differing Affinity Groups
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* John Kender, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2020
* USD 160,000.00

This exploratory project studies how different groups of people tend to create
and describe (tag) videos of the same common event differently. Since each of
these affinity groups share particular backgrounds, languages, interests, and
locations, they also tag and browse these videos differently as well. For
example, an international health crisis is portrayed rather differently by the
news media of China compared to that of the U.S. Chinese coverage tends to
include historical clips, talks about countries, and has less focus on
individual participants. In contrast, U.S. coverage tends to be more
contemporary, uses countries mainly to identify the background of individuals,
and prefers to highlight the actions and reactions of people who are fully
named. The aim of this project is to develop new ways of making the videos of
other groups to be more accessible and more understandable to different groups
by developing a browser that graphically illustrates the visual differences
across such videos, and that translates the preferred tags of one group into the
preferred tags of the other. The resulting new browser would make a broad range
of videos, especially those in a different language, easier to find, scan, and
compare.

This exploratory project has three major components: (1) Development of a novel,
shareable catalog of statistically significant cross-group differences. To do
this, it will first map visual and textual features, from many videos about a
single topic, into a joint latent space. Then, by using reliable shared visual
cues, it will determine tag relationships using variants of canonical
correlation analysis, sort them using measures such as G2, and validate them
against users who are members of both groups. (2) Exploration of how well these
non-linear methods can be extended to the videos of multiple pairs of affinity
groups with more subtle differences, such as comparing the U.S. to Canada. In
particular, it will use a novel variant of the PageRank algorithm to track the
influence and persistence of visual memes across groups, validating this by
ground truth. (3) Implementing and evaluating a prototype browser that
visualizes on parallel timelines the perspectives of different groups, both
statically and dynamically as they evolve over time. The project will measure
the usual browser attributes (time, accuracy, satisfaction, ease of use), but
also some unusual and exploratory ones (appropriateness of retrieval, accuracy
of tag translations, increases in user engagement, impact on journalists).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.