* 1841453
* Phase II IUCRC at The Pennsylvania State University: Center for Dielectrics and Piezoelectrics: CDP
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 662,323.00

The Center for Dielectrics and Piezoelectrics (CDP) is a joint
industry/university cooperative research center (IUCRC) between North Carolina
State University (NCSU) and the Pennsylvania State University (PSU), with an
international affiliate site at The University of Sheffield. Dielectric and
piezoelectric materials, which can transduce and store energy, are ubiquitous in
modern electronics that underpin most transportation, communication, defense and
medical technologies. The goals of the CDP are to: 1. Improve the fundamental
understanding of dielectric and piezoelectric materials and their device
integration; 2. Discover transformative dielectric and piezoelectric materials
that support innovative technology advancements and transfer this technology to
support new products and processes; 3. Educate students and postdoctoral
scholars to become leaders in the research community and create long-term
technical impact; 4. Develop unique measurement, characterization, and modeling
infrastructure to support industry; 5. Catalyze strategic coupling with other
organizations to expand scientific impact and technology transfer; 6. Become the
internationally recognized center of excellence in the science, technology, and
integration of capacitive and piezoelectric materials. At each step, CDP faculty
work closely with industry and national laboratory members to advance the state-
of-the-art in dielectric and piezoelectric materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; CDP
research will develop new materials, new metrology methods, new processing
methods, and new scientific understanding of dielectric and piezoelectric
materials, including lifecycle analysis. The research portfolio will include
projects on: 1. Capacitors for extreme environments to address the need for
increased voltages and operation temperatures in application areas such as
automotive, power electronics, and aerospace/defense systems. Research topics
include, for example, understanding the reliability of high voltage and high
temperature capacitors. 2. Piezoelectric materials used in ultrasound and
precision actuation applications, and will include research on the factors
controlling the electrical and electromechanical reliability of piezoelectric
microelectromechanical systems. 3. High energy density capacitors for electric
vehicles and wearable electronics, including research on thin glass dielectrics.
4. Dielectrics for low-temperature and flexible substrates for foldable and
stretchable electronics, including understanding both the fundamental mechanisms
that drive cold sintering, as well as the range of systems to which this
processing technique can be applied.. 5. Non-linear and high frequency
dielectrics for 5G communications, including new measurement methods for low
loss high frequency materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.