* 1841435
* Phase II IUCRC at Virginia Institute of Marine Science:  Center for Science Center for Marine Fisheries (SCeMFiS)
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2026
* Roger Mann, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 02/28/2026
* USD 612,927.00

The Science Center for Marine Fisheries (SCeMFiS) uses academic and commercial
finfish and shellfish fisheries resources to address scientific problems
limiting sustainable fisheries. SCeMFiS reflects both a continuing expansion of
industry-supported research in an era of increased science rigor in management,
and the importance of synergistic collaboration between academics, industry, and
regulatory agencies in complex management decisions. Phase II will focus
research efforts on: (1) precautionary management that maintains quotas below
sustainable levels, thereby limiting economic value and jobs, (2) the influence
of climate change on sustainable management and long-range planning, (3)
resolution of multiple use conflicts (both spatial and over multi-decadal time
frames) between fisheries and energy production, and (4) ecosystem management
with a focus on forage fish and ecosystem trophic structure. SCeMFiS will
develop essential biological data on fish stocks; improve models of sampling
design, population dynamics, and fishery performance; evaluate trends in stock
structure and their relation to genetics, physiology and sexual dimorphism; and
improve approaches to fishing to reduce discards through gear innovation and
modifications in fleet deployment. SCeMFiS offers the coalescence of
capabilities from a range of oceanographic and marine biological disciplines
that is essential to meet the challenges faced by fisheries management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SCeMFiS provides a mechanism by which a diverse group of
fishing companies and organizations can develop a coherent, problem-solving
research plan advantaged by access to a wealth of academic resources. Phase 2
will continue to build on this effort. SCeMFiS partners gain ownership of the
products developed, and become full partners in assessment and regulatory
actions supporting sustainable management. SCeMFiS provides a mechanism by which
industry can publicly demonstrate their support for the goal of sustainable
seafood. In Phase 2 we will expand efforts to leverage additional research
support emphasizing the integrated efforts of the two sites to achieve industry-
wide research goals, stabilize precautionary management actions that would
otherwise drive quota reductions, reflect management actions that are responsive
to climate change driven variations in fish production and accessibility, with
all actions in compliance with federal mandates under the Magnuson Stevens
Fishery Conservation and Management Act. These goals will be achieved in an
environment that promotes graduate education, enables rapid response to emerging
data needs, and provides a combined fishery and economics approach to address
societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.