* 1841470
* EAGER:  Removing barriers to macro-ecoevolutionary studies of the avian brain
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Carlos Botero, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2020
* USD 149,729.00

Why does brain size vary so much among closely related bird species? Why do some
species rely heavily on cognitive solutions to life's challenges, whereas others
do not? This research will take advantage of the considerable diversity of brain
sizes and natural history among birds to investigate these fundamental
questions. The researchers will generate a large dataset of within and between
species variation in brain size to facilitate this comparative study in
cognitive ecology. They will integrate these data with long-term datasets from
other fields to investigate whether species with larger (and smaller) than
expected brains have unique ecological roles. The project will also examine how
different historical and natural history constraints can lead to fundamentally
different pathways for brain size evolution. This approach is highly relevant to
our own species, given that the conditions that drove the evolution of our
exceptionally large brain are currently unclear. Broader impacts include
engaging diverse citizens in accessible monthly presentations of this work at
the farmer's market in Ferguson, MO. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To increase the depth
and breadth of the current sample of avian brain size estimates, data collection
efforts will target North American songbirds. This group exhibits considerable
variation in relative brain size, ecology and natural history, as well as strong
correlations between brain size, behavioral flexibility, and neuron numbers. The
North American region offers a wide variety of environmental conditions, well-
characterized ecological communities, and a wealth of high-quality time-series
data on local population dynamics, ecology and phenology. The researchers will
evaluate how brain size relates to the breadth, mean overlap, and position of
abiotic ecological niches, measured as the volume that a species occupies in
multi-dimensional climate space. To investigate the possibility of alternative
pathways for brain size evolution, the researchers will evaluate the extent to
which species with small relative brain sizes in variable habitats differ in
diet, size and reproductive output from those with relatively large brains. Data
sharing will be achieved by developing and hosting an online repository that
will provide free and unrestricted access to all available avian brain size data
(and their associated metadata). This web page will also provide a mechanism for
obtaining and vetting new data from community contributors from around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.