* 1841349
* EAGER: Interacting with Machine Learning through Visual Comparison of Outcomes
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Michael Gleicher, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 185,964.00

This project will explore a new approach to the challenging problems of enabling
people to work effectively with machine learning systems. The project will
develop new tools that will assist users with a wide range of tasks, including
building and tuning models, assessing and diagnosing them to build appropriate
levels of trust, and using the learned models to gain insight on the data. In
order to meet user needs in the face of increasingly large and complex systems,
the project will develop a new approach to interacting with learning systems:
providing interactive visualization tools that enable exploration and comparison
in sets of model outputs. The project will explore tools for exploring learning
experiment results, comparing these results with tests of other models, and
helping run specialized tests. These new tools will have broad impact as they
will enable a wide range of users to more effectively work with machine learning
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore the viability of the
outcome comparison approach by developing it in the context of two applications.
In one, will develop tools for identifying causal insights from complex models.
This will allow us to show that the approach scales to state-of-the-art model
types and complex experiment designs. A second application will develop tools
for diagnosing and interpreting embeddings from text corpora. This application
will allow us to demonstrate the approach on complex data types and significant
scales. The project is exploratory: there is no evidence that the approach can
scale to such challenging scenarios, and the project must explore experiment
strategies and visual designs that support large and complex scenarios. Products
of the project, including publications, open source software, demonstrations and
tutorials will be available from the project website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.