* 1841190
* EAGER: Developing a Theory for Function Optimization on Graphs Using Local Information
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Robert Nowak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2021
* USD 175,326.00

This project seeks to advance the frontiers of knowledge concerning efficient
search on networked data. The investigators will devise new algorithms for
optimizing a function defined over a graph. Such algorithms will be easily
implementable, broadly applicable, and backed by mathematical theory. Some
example application areas in which the work will be relevant include faster web
retrieval and cybersecurity, where it is important to identify key individuals
in a large web of interconnected data. The project will also support the
educational goals of the investigators by training multiple graduate students
working at the interface of theoretical and applied data science
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work conducted in this project will establish
new connections between continuous and discrete optimization. The investigators
will explore notions of smoothness and convexity that may be used to
characterize the convergence properties of their proposed optimization
algorithms; unlike optimization on graphs, optimization on continuous domains is
backed by a mature theory that has been developed over several decades.
Developing an analogous theory for discrete domains such as graphs poses many
challenges, however -- in particular, it requires developing new notions of
derivatives, Hessians, smoothness, or convexity, which have no obvious analogs.
This work is divided into the following sub-projects, each with a distinct set
of research objectives: (1) Develop and analyze iterative and local algorithms
on graphs; (2) Find suitable notions of smoothness and convexity on graphs, and
analyze their consequences. In addition, the algorithms will be implemented and
evaluated on various real-world networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.