* 1841138
* EAGER: Fairness-Aware Personalized Recommendations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* James Caverlee, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 170,000.00

The goal of this project is to create effective information curator
recommendation models that can be personalized for individual users, while
maintaining important fairness properties. Information curators serve as
conduits to high-quality curated content, providing unique specialized
expertise, trustworthiness in decision-making, and access to novel content. This
variety and the resultant heterogeneity -- in terms of content types, social
relations, motivations of curators, etc. -- place great demands on effective
personalization. Further, existing expressed preferences for these curators in
the forms of likes, following relationships, and other interactions are often
sparse. Hence, a key challenge for personalized curator recommendation is
tackling sparsity while carefully modeling curators in complex, noisy, and
heterogeneous environments. Compounding this challenge, most current access to
information curators is mediated by centralized platforms (like search engines,
social networks, and traditional news media), meaning that personal preferences
may not align with the goals of these platforms, leading to potentially biased
(or even limited) access to curators. A key question is how to maintain fairness
properties in curator recommendation. The expected results of this project
include research advances that can positively impact existing web and social
media platforms, as well as provide a theoretical foundation for future advances
in information curation recommendation. The advances in uncovering information
curators at scale, reliably connecting users to appropriate curators, and
ensuring fairness-preserving properties of such curators are critical for
trustworthy information supporting an informed populace. By bringing these
research advances, datasets, and toolkits to the wider research community, this
project can spur additional advances from complementary efforts by other
researchers. Further, this project will develop new classroom materials, new
outreach efforts, and new broadening participation workshops and
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore and test four
challenging research problems: (1) Learning Tensor-Based Recommenders in
Heterogeneous Environments. Since user preferences for curators may be impacted
by many contextual factors, this first task will directly incorporate the
multiple and varied relationships among users, curators, topics, and other
factors directly into a tensor-based approach. (2) Neural Personalized Ranking
for Curator Recommendation. Complementary to such a tensor-based approach, this
project will also explore the capabilities of new neural models of personalized
curator recommendation. Neural models promise potentially more flexibility in
model design, added nonlinearity through activations, and improved performance
relative to tensor-based approaches. (3) Hybrid Neural+Tensor Models. Third,
this project will investigate new hybrid models that combine the benefits of
tensor-based methods (which are principled and interpretable) with neural-based
methods (which promise improved performance). (4) Fairness-Aware Learning for
Curation. Finally, this project will explore personalized recommendation under
fairness-aware constraints. Since recommenders may inherit bias from the
training data used to optimize them and from mis-alignment between platform
goals and personal preferences, this project will build new fairness-aware
algorithms that can empower users by enhancing diversity of topics, curators,
and viewpoints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.