* 1841292
* Collaborative Research: 2018 Mixed Integer Programming Workshop Poster Session, Greenville, South Carolina, June 18-21, 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2019
* Akshay Gupte, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 06/30/2019
* USD 2,500.00

The Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) workshop is an annual event with the goal of
encouraging participation of junior researchers in integer programming and
related areas. A primary focus of this workshop is to showcase young
researchers; to increase the visibility for accomplished students at an early
stage in their career; and to provide an opportunity for graduate students to
network with the world's top researchers. This award will provide funds for 10
graduate students to attend the 15th MIP workshop, each of whom will be
presenting his or her poster at the workshop. MIP student poster sessions
provide students with an opportunity to highlight their ongoing work and network
with other researchers from industry and academia. During the workshop, student
posters are also judged by a workshop committee and outstanding posters are
recognized. This award provides travel support for 10 student poster presenters.

The 2018 MIP workshop will be held from June 18th to June 21st, 2018 in
Greenville, South Carolina. The solicitation for the poster presentations will
be sent to a variety of mailing lists, with particular effort to broaden
participation by attracting students from underrepresented groups in
engineering. By providing travel funds for graduate students, NSF will help to
decrease the cost of attendance to encourage participation of students and will
support the engagement of STEM students in emerging research in the field of
MIP.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.