* 1841400
* Quantifying the relationship between erosion and permafrost thaw in a changing Arctic environment
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Mark Abbott, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 05/31/2024
* USD 548,404.00

Arctic environments are undergoing rapid change. The thawing of permafrost
soils, for example, can release vast amounts of carbon to the atmosphere and
cause widespread soil erosion. Erosion that exposes deep permafrost soil can in
turn redistribute sediment and water across terrestrial and riverine systems.
The investigators will take an integrative approach, analyzing paleoclimate
fluctuations and watershed topography across space and time, to understand the
relationship among climate, permafrost thaw, and soil erosion. Results will
improve our ability to predict Arctic system change. Educational outreach to
K-12 schools will involve designing hands-on experiments for a truck-based
mobile science laboratory that visits schools in and around Pittsburgh,
including those serving minorities and under-represented populations. Graduate
and undergraduate students supported as part of this study will participate in
both research and outreach activities, training a new generation of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The influence of permafrost thaw on soil erosion is
largely unquantified to date, as is the dependence of permafrost thaw and soil
erosion on topographic attributes, latitudinal location, and climate. This study
seeks to: (1) quantify the relationship between soil erosion and permafrost thaw
in Arctic environments in the context of paleoclimate fluctuations; (2) explore
the dependence of these processes on topographic attributes and latitudinal
location; and (3) evaluate and improve the capability of landscape evolution
models to simulate erosion in Arctic environments. To accomplish these
objectives, the investigators will sample and analyze sediment cores from two
clusters of lakes at different latitudinal locations in Alaska. They will
integrate topographic analysis and geomorphologic modeling with the chemical
signature of aged carbon that is sourced in thawed permafrost and preserved in
lake sediments. This approach will improve and guide future modeling efforts to
predict the response of the Arctic system to a changing
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.