* 1841905
* An International Network-to-Network Approach to Generating New Scientific Community Collaborations in the Gulf of Mexico Region - A Case Study
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Jack Baldauf, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Claire Hemingway
* 11/30/2020
* USD 182,551.00

This award funds planning and implementation of a workshop for stakeholders from
the U.S. and Mexico working to advance research on climate variability and its
impact on community resilience and adaptive capacity in the Gulf of Mexico
region. The workshop is intended to be an initial step in developing a network
of networks to coordinate among existing networks of researchers focused on the
Gulf of Mexico and surrounding coastal communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
network-of-networks will support a new community to facilitate collaborative
research and education for researchers, educators, engineers, decision-makers
and the public. It will establish critical research priorities that link natural
and social sciences to better understand the complexity of GOM systems in a
changing climate. The priorities can then be used as a focal point by
researchers and funding agencies in addressing the most pressing science to
inform robust and actionable solutions for decision-making. The network-to-
network approach will require cross-sectoral, interdisciplinary and
international risk-based solutions and thus will spur integrated research teams
that transcend traditional boundaries. The network will foster focused
innovation and targeted use of limited resources for maximum societal, economic
and environmental impacts, by exploiting novel data and platforms, decision
support that advances social, economic and environmental sciences, and improved
earth systems forecasting, and by aligning research to provide state of the art
testbeds and infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A parallel outcome of the
project will be a case study documenting the methods used to facilitate the
network-of-networks collaboration. The case study will document development of
shared research priorities among existing networks, perceptions of the value of
the network-to-network collaborations, along with the challenges, barriers and
time investment necessary to initiate this approach. The case study will provide
an example pathway for development of future network-to-network
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.