* 1841467
* NSFGEO-NERC: Ice-shelf Instability Caused by Active Surface Meltwater Production, Movement, Ponding and Hydrofracture
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Douglas MacAyeal, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 144,129.00

The evolution of surface and shallow subsurface meltwater across Antarctic ice
shelves has important implications for their (in)stability, as demonstrated by
the 2002 rapid collapse of the Larsen B Ice Shelf. It is vital to understand the
causes of ice-shelf (in)stability because ice shelves buttress against the
discharge of inland ice and therefore influence ice-sheet contributions to sea-
level rise. Ice-shelf break-up may be triggered by stress variations associated
with surface meltwater movement, ponding, and drainage. These variations may
cause an ice shelf to flex and fracture. This four-year project will provide key
geophysical observations to improve understanding of ice-shelf meltwater and its
effects on (in)stability. The work will be conducted on the George VI Ice Shelf
on the Antarctic Peninsula, where hundreds of surface lakes form each summer.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a 27-month period, global positioning systems,
seismometers, water pressure transducers, automatic weather stations, and in-ice
thermistor strings will be deployed to record ice shelf flexure, fracture
seismicity, water depths, and surface and subsurface melting, respectively, in
and around several surface lakes on the George VI Ice Shelf, within roughly 20
km of the British Antarctic Survey's Fossil Bluff Station. Field data will be
used to validate and extend the team's approach to modelling ice-shelf flexure
and stress, and possible "Larsen-B style" ice-shelf instability and break-
up.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.