* 1841584
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: Spatial Variability of Small-Strain Stiffness, Go, and Effects on Ground Movements Related to Geotechnical Construction in Urban Areas
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Richard Finno, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2020
* USD 99,999.00

Increased dense urbanization and traffic congestion in the US is prompting a
significant demand for underground space. Underground construction provides
sustainable development benefits in terms of creating mass transit and
commercial space in areas with existing infrastructure, the ability to capture
emissions, and the opportunity to preserve green space by relocating
transportation systems and other structures underground. However, development of
underground space may result in damage to adjacent infrastructure. Furthermore,
planning and constructing underground space is a lengthy process that requires
large budgets, and most underground construction are public, taxpayer-funded
projects. Efficiencies that can be developed in design and construction of
underground space will have a large financial benefit to the US. This Grants for
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project will develop tools that will advance the
state-of-art and practice in the underground construction industry so that
underground space can be created in urban areas in such a way that the process
will have minimal impact on adjacent structures and utilities. Recent NSF
sponsored research has resulted in advances in techniques to predict, monitor,
and control ground movements during excavation. These efforts have shown that
small-strain shear stiffness of soil, Go, and its variation with strain is a key
ingredient in a model used to predict ground movements. Engineers need to have
accurate predictions of ground motion caused by excavations because excessive
movements (often and inch or less) can cause damage to adjacent infrastructure
and structures. An accurate estimate of movement will allow engineers to adjust
their design to limit the movement to an acceptable level. Natural soils are
heterogeneous and Go values vary laterally and with depth around the plan area
of typical urban excavations. This project will determine the spatial variations
of Go around a large excavation in Seattle, WA, specifically the Washington
State Convention Center Addition (WSCCA), and quantify the effects of the
variations on measured and predicted ground movements that arise during
excavation. The project is a collaboration between Northwestern University, the
University of Texas at Austin, the University of Florida and GeoEngineers, Inc.
Collaboration, at no cost to the project, with GeoEngineers, a leading
geotechnical consulting firm in the country and the geotechnical engineers of
record for the WSCCA project, ensures that results will have an immediate impact
in the underground construction community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSCCA
excavation provides a number of unique opportunities. A large portion of the
site is green space, and as such, the initial Go variation in most of the site
will mostly be unaffected by previous construction activities. Therefore, when
Go is evaluated after excavation, a direct measure of the change in the soil
properties will be available. These measurements are rarely, if ever, performed.
The project team will obtain spatially dependent Go values prior to start of
construction using NHERI@UTexas field equipment and SASW arrays; analyze the
seismic data via advanced 3-D full waveform tomography to develop a 3-D map of
Go; conduct detailed experimental programs using both advanced triaxial and
combined dynamic torsional resonant column and cyclic torsional shear devices on
thin-wall tube and block samples; develop soil parameters for an advanced
constitutive model that includes small-strain stiffness using optimization
techniques based on the laboratory data and the field measurements collected
during excavation; collect and record field performance and relate it to
construction activities; and simulate the excavation process using the finite
element method. While addressing ground deformations specifically associated
with deep excavations, the project results are applicable to any geotechnical
construction activity. There is very little detailed information concerning the
stress-strain-strength characteristics of the glacially consolidated soils in
the Seattle area, and information developed as part of this project will be
useful for any large project in the vicinity. The project team will disseminate
its results to the scientific and professional communities by means of journal
publications and conference presentations. The interactions among GeoEngineers,
Inc. professionals, NU, UT and UF participants via project interaction and
seminars automatically will foster the rapid technology transfer of these
advances. A NHERI@UTexas user workshop also will be held during the field
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.