* 1841962
* Critical Assessment of the Three-dimensional (3D) Standard Model of Solar Eruptions Using a Data-driven MagnetoHydroDynamic (MHD) Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* K Leka, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2023
* USD 341,489.00

Theoretical models of solar eruptions are supported by numerical MHD
calculations that use simple magnetic and velocity fields. The Sun, however, is
much more complex, and it is therefore unclear whether models that work under
ideal conditions resemble on the actual Sun. The aim of this three-year research
project is to test a popular model of solar eruptions, "the standard 3D model,"
under realistic conditions by modeling real eruptions using photospheric
observations to drive active-region-scale coronal MHD simulations. The project
team will devote a significant amount of time and effort to compare their
numerical simulations to real solar observations. The research study will have
three parts: (i) perform data-driven MHD simulations; (ii) compare the
simulations with observations; and, (iii) use the simulations to test
predictions of "the standard 3D model." For a sample of eruptive regions, the
project team will construct nonlinear force-free extrapolations from vector
magnetograms, about an hour before each eruption. These extrapolations will be
used to initialize the zero-beta MHD simulations driven by flow maps inferred
from spectro-polarimetric data using optical-flow methods that treat the
induction equation consistently. The team will also model a set of non-eruptive
regions as an important control: they will aim to demonstrate that their method
does not produce eruptions when none occurs in reality. They will use their
simulations to test the predictions of "the standard 3D model" regarding the
instability mechanism responsible for eruption (e.g., torus instability) and
mode of reconnection during the eruption (e.g., slipping reconnection). The
inclusion of control regions will indicate whether or not these features are
essential for an eruption to occur, and not just simply being present but remain
unimportant during the eruption process. The team will identify the instability
mechanism, sites and nature of reconnection in their
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, "the standard 3D model" of solar
eruptions has been tested extensively using MHD simulations with simple bipolar
magnetic fields. This three-year research project takes the important next step
to test the model under realistic conditions. The intellectual merit of this
work is to establish the viability of "the standard 3D model." The project also
aims to provide new physical insight into the basic mechanisms of magnetic
energy storage and release in the solar atmosphere, which are important in a
general astrophysical context. A novel aspect of the research project is the
significant amount of work devoted to validating the data-driven MHD
simulations; although this type of simulations is becoming increasing common in
recent years, their validation is typically of a secondary consideration and it
often relies on by-eye comparisons between EUV loops and field lines from the
simulation, for example. The project team will devote a significant amount of
time and effort to developing metrics for making quantitative comparisons
between simulations and observations, which is a necessary step for objective
validation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The anticipated results of this three-year
project will be of interest to the space weather community: an improved
understanding of solar eruptions will also improve our predictive capability for
these events. The methodology and metrics for comparing numerical simulations to
real observations that will be developed as part of this project will be of
general use to the solar community; the project team will make their tools
available to the broader community online. All their project data will be made
available to the public too. The team also plans to organize a special session
at the SHINE Workshop in the last year of the project focused on critically
assessing the 3D standard model using different MHD models. The research and EPO
agenda of this project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in
discovery, learning, diversity, and interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.