* 1841550
* EAGER: Algorithmic Approaches for Developing Markets
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Nicole Immorlica, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

Markets are systems that allocate scarce resources to individuals, coordinate
aggregate behavior, and determine societal outcomes. Research on the design of
markets has impacted the FCC spectrum auctions, the National Residency Matching
Program, and school choice programs, among others. The goal of this project is
to bring similar fruit to bear on so-called developing markets that primarily
serve poor and disadvantaged participants. The project will use two distinct
markets, each with their own theoretical and practical challenges, as examples
of this research agenda. The first is an agricultural market in Uganda. The goal
of this market is to find an efficient set of trades among subsistence farmers
and buyers. The second is an insurance market in Thailand. The goal of this
market is to build a system of lending and borrowing for villagers. In addition
to improving the lives of those who are impacted by developing markets, found
all over the world, the project will provide opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students to participate in the research, as well as a rich
interdisciplinary interaction between theoretical computer scientists and
development economists.

Developing markets present unique challenges to a market designer, and present
an opportunity to advance the state-of-the-art in market design. The primary
challenge is an informational one: due to technological constraints, the
designer has significantly less knowledge of and access to the underlying
economic environment than is typically assumed. Populations in these markets
often have urgent need for access to capital, while also being highly
transitory. Both these factors push markets to clear rapidly. This, however,
sacrifices market thickness and so degrades the quality of market outcomes. This
project considers techniques to address this, including allocation schemes that
incorporate stochastic assumptions about market participants. A secondary
challenge concerns the need for simplicity and transparency. Given that, such
populations are understandably suspicious of outside interventions, and lack
access to technologies that help them optimize their strategies within a market,
the mechanisms in this project will be designed to be easy to comprehend and
easy to play, including restricting the design space to a subclass of mechanisms
that closely approximate the optimal one.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.