* 1841227
* Developing an Educator's On-ramp to Facilitate More Effective Undergraduate Teaching of Tectonics: Middletown, CT - January 2019
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Phillip Resor, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Luciana Astiz
* 06/30/2020
* USD 23,924.00

Over the last two decades a widespread effort has been mounted to transform the
undergraduate teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) in order to more effectively educate all students and at the same time
increase recruitment and retention of STEM majors needed for the future
workforce. This transformation includes a move from primarily lecture and
content-based teaching to more interactive and inquiry-based courses. In the
geosciences one of the leading agents of change has been the U.S. National
Science Foundation (NSF) supported On the Cutting Edge professional development
program. From 2002 to 2012 this program offered more than 100 professional
development workshops that reached ~20% of geoscience faculty. While this
program has had a significant impact on teaching practice in the geosciences,
statistics suggest a large percentage of geoscience faculty has yet to move
toward incorporating interactive teaching practices in their undergraduate
courses. Furthermore, the very success of this previous effort has led to a
voluminous collection (more than 5000 pages) of resources that can appear
overwhelming to new users. The goal of this project is thus to develop and
widely distribute a set of short, quick-start manuals for existing resources,
named on-ramp guides, to faculty members who teach courses related to plate
tectonics. These on-ramp guides will facilitate access to existing community
resources and adoption of more interactive and inquiry-based teaching. While
this effort stems from recommendations made in the recent tectonics community
vision document submitted to the NSF, principal investigators anticipate that
the resources they develop could easily be adapted to other geoscience
disciplines or STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite significant gains over
the last two decades, there remains a large percentage of geoscience instructors
who have yet to move toward incorporating engaged teaching practices in their
courses. The purpose of this project is to reach and enable a portion of faculty
members who teach courses related to plate tectonics but have not yet adopted
best practices of engaged pedagogy. Following recommendations made in the recent
tectonics community vision document, the principal investigators plan to develop
a set of six short, quick-start resources, named term on-ramp guides, that will
help facilitate access to and adoption of a more engaged and inclusive pedagogy.
Each ~2 page on-ramp guide will focus on a single geoscience education-related
topic and will include a short description of the topic as well as a list of
exemplary tectonics teaching activities with links to additional resources for
further exploration. The primary activities supported by the grant will be 1) a
preliminary virtual meeting to organize the twelve participants into teams and
to launch the development process, 2) a three-day writing workshop for teams to
meet face-to-face to write the on-ramp guides and prepare them for
dissemination, and 3) dissemination of the completed guides. On-ramp guides will
be published as web pages available through high-level links on the existing
geoscience education resource pages hosted by the Science Education Resource
Center (SERC) and disseminated as pdf files with active web links. The pdf
format will enable us to email the guides widely and have them hosted on web
sites other than those at SERC in order to enable more people to discover,
navigate, and use the available resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.