* 1841621
* EAGER: Robust, Low-power Strategies for Unattended Micrometeorological Buoy Deployments in Extreme Cold and Freezing Spray
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Scott Miller, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 07/31/2020
* USD 163,440.00

This project is for the testing/development of low-power methods to mitigate the
effects of ice and liquid water on the performance and data quality of air-sea
momentum and heat flux sensors. It utilizes cold chambers and wind tunnel
facilities to develop and test active deicing strategies that have been
successfully used in aircraft applications. The techniques will be adapted and
optimized for the low-power scenario of an overwinter buoy on Lake Ontario. If
successful, this approach could enable direct measurements of momentum, heat and
moisture from the lake into the atmosphere during the winter. Such measurements
are needed for better modeling and prediction of lake effect snow, which
frequently impact communities downwind of the North American Great Lakes,
causing loss of life, destruction of property and infrastructure, and commercial
and social disruption. Robust, low-power strategies to mitigate ice accumulation
on sensors and structures would also have broader applications beyond this
research application. This project will partially fund graduate students at SUNY
Albany and Penn State who will play an integral role in the testing, and thereby
receive valuable training and experience that is part of their graduate
education.

The overarching scientific goal motivating this project is to improve
parameterizations of lake-atmosphere momentum, heat, and moisture fluxes that
will lead to better lake effect snow forecasts. Direct measurements of fluxes
using the eddy covariance (EC) technique during the winter would be most useful
to develop/improve surface flux parameterizations, test research hypotheses, and
examine model performance under extreme forcing. To date, difficulties
associated with measuring turbulence and fluxes from power-limited platforms
during hard winter conditions have precluded collection of such data. As a step
toward developing the capability for EC flux measurements in these conditions,
this project will adopt a technique from the aviation industry and explore the
feasibility of using short, intense pulses of mechanical vibrations and/or heat
to dislodge ice or water from the instrument surfaces. These methods will be
tested under simulated freezing spray conditions. This de-icing method is
expected to be much more power efficient than simply heating the sensors to keep
them ice free. If successful, the method is intended to be deployed on buoys
with extra buoyancy and high righting moment to resist ice buildup on other
parts of the superstructure. The buoys would provide winter time measurements
from the ice-free parts of the Great Lakes. Successful demonstration of these
techniques will be published in the peer reviewed literature, enabling
application by other researchers focused on micrometeorology in extreme
environments, and, more broadly, applications where ice mitigation is critical
and available power is limited.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.