* 1841170
* RoL: Conference: DESYN-C3: An International Conference on Engineering Synthetic Cells and Organelles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Darko Stefanovic, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The International Conference on Engineering Synthetic Cells and Organelles will
be held near Albuquerque, New Mexico during the summer of 2019. The conference
focuses on synthetic biology, establishes the state-of-the-art of synthetic cell
technology, and identifies grand challenges and opportunities for future work in
this field. It features world leaders in synthetic cell technology from premier
US and international universities and national laboratories. The meeting
addresses the mission of NSF, which has been increasingly committed to
integrating the engineering sciences with the life sciences, encouraging
research and development in multidisciplinary areas, educating the next
generation of young scientists, and supporting cutting edge science to answer
current and future challenges as well as making sure US-based scientists are
globally engaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics of the conference will focus on
development of foundational technologies for creating synthetic cells. The
conference will hold sessions on five topics over 2.5 days in a single-track
format. The topics will be (1) strategies to create synthetic cells and
organelles; (2) spatial and temporal organization of synthetic cytoplasmic
structures; (3) sensing, signaling, and circuits; (4) molecular machines,
mechanics, and motility; and (5) implications of synthetic cell technology. The
conference proceedings, and a companion technology roadmap, will be published
subsequent to the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.