* 1841985
* Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) Evaluation Capacity Building Conferences (AGEP ECBCs)
* EDU,EES
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Leslie Goodyear, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 974,272.00

The Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) Evaluation
Capacity Building Conferences (AGEP ECBCs) project was created in response to
the NSF's Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program solicitation calls for conference
that are related to the AGEP program goal and objectives. The AGEP program seeks
to advance knowledge about models to improve pathways to the professoriate and
the successes of URM graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in
specific STEM disciplines and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP Alliance
awardees develop, implement and study, via integrated educational and social
science research, Alliance Models to transform the dissertator phase of doctoral
education, postdoctoral training and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions
within and across the pathway levels, of historically underrepresented
minorities (URMs) in STEM and STEM education faculty careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM achievement gap between URM
and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our universities and colleges
struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM faculty who serve as role
models and academic leaders for URM students to learn from, work with and
emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate and full professors
occupy 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year colleges and
universities, and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most research-
intensive institutions. This AGEP ECBCs project will advance knowledge about the
evaluation of initiatives, models and alliance activities that can be sustained,
institutionalized and scaled at US universities and colleges to advance URM
graduate students, postdoctoral scholars and faculty in STEM and STEM education
academic professions. The goal of the AGEP ECBCs project is to increase the
capacity of evaluators, who work with AGEP-funded Alliances and other awards, to
produce high quality, culturally responsive, contextually relevant, and
methodologically appropriate evaluations of award activities, outcomes and
impacts. The conference series will generate and support a collaborative network
of AGEP project evaluators, investigators, staff, graduate students and
postdoctoral scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to two conferences per
year, there will be webinars and other web-based support systems for the network
of evaluators, Principal Investigators and project team members. One conference
per year will be a pre-conference workshop at the American Evaluation
Association's (AEA) annual meeting, and the other conference will be a pre-
conference training at the Annual AGEP Research Conference. The AGEP ECBCs
project includes both evaluation components and a dissemination plan for broader
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.