* 1841119
* EAGER: Constraint Aware Generative Adversarial Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Xintao Wu, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Generative adversarial networks (GAN), which estimate the real data distribution
through an adversarial game, have achieved great success in image generation and
text generation. However, many decision models from real world applications are
trained on relational data that contains both numerical and categorical
attributes. Furthermore, real world applications often have legal or ethical
requirements on the generated data, e.g., discrimination free or privacy
preservation, or expect to generate complementary samples to their existing data
that may only contain normal samples. The research significantly improves the
applicability of generative adversarial networks from image/text data to
relational data with application requirements and contributes to the limited
base of knowledge in the area of using generative adversarial networks for
constraint aware relational data generation. The findings, tools, software code,
and curricular materials documents are disseminated to the research community,
IT industry, and users, which expects to help domain users generate constraint
aware data to meet their business needs.

This EAGER research develops novel techniques that enable the current generative
adversarial networks to generate realistic relational data with constraints. The
developed framework adds a decoder to the generator to generate both numerical
and categorical data and incorporates constraint terms into the objective
functions of generator and discriminator or introduces multiple discriminators
to enforce requirement constraints. The research adopts f-divergences to analyze
the convergence of the constraint aware GAN framework when complex constraints
are introduced. The research then focuses on developing under the unifying
framework two specific models, fair GAN for generating discrimination-free data,
and complementary GAN for generating negative samples when only positive samples
are available in the training data. The research conducts empirical evaluations
of the framework and two specific models in terms of accuracy and convergence,
implements and integrates the developed algorithms into TensorFlow, an open
source deep learning software system. The developed framework expects to advance
theoretical understanding of generative adversarial networks and the two
specific GAN models expect to improve the current research on fairness aware
learning and fraud detection. In particular, the fair GAN introduces the new
approach of fair data generation based on GAN as current fairness aware learning
research mainly adopts data modification. The complimentary GAN outperforms
existing one-class classification models for fraud detection by generating
complementary samples and enabling the trained discriminator to accurately
separate abnormal samples from normal ones.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.