* 1841910
* I-Corps: Factor graph computing for data-driven decision-making
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to
democratize the power of machine learning and predictive analytics to help non-
engineering business personnel realize the full value of their data. Enabling
this will drive better organizational decision making at all levels and the
creation of additional business value for commercial and governmental
organizations of all kinds, and of all sizes. Data-driven decisions using big
data analytics holds massive promise, but has largely remained unfulfilled
primarily because, in its current form, it is unaffordable to all but the most
technologically advanced organizations. Data-driven businesses have 5-6% higher
productivity and can potentially add $3 Trillion in value globally, per year. A
wide range of sectors, such as manufacturing, retail, finance, healthcare,
security, and governmental services will see significant commercial impact
including higher productivity, better utilization of resources, and the
acceleration of the deployment of new products, services, and technologies. By
enabling commercial and governmental entities to more effectively utilize their
data and resources, businesses and government agencies will increase their
productivity, more effectively utilize their personnel, improve their
competitiveness, and eliminate waste resources while increasing the flow of
products and services that benefit society at large. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on ground breaking technology meant to realize a
scalable, flexible and easy-to-use data-processing infrastructure. At the
highest level, building such a platform requires: (a) coming up with the right
abstraction or language that accommodates all sorts of computation at scale; (b)
implementing the architecture to realize such computation at scale; (c) the
ability to go from "sandboxing" or "prototyping" to a production environment
instantly; and (d) the ability to work in heterogenous data environments
instantly. We have put forth a novel computational language, called factor graph
computing. Such a computation framework is "Turing complete". Factor graph
computing allows for performing data transformation, predictive modeling, and
optimization at scale to enable data-driven decisions. Such a platform
eliminates the need for data engineering, provides flexibility to build
predictive models instantly, allows for seamless evolution by bringing in new
datasets in the mix, and requires minimal support to maintain the infrastructure
and allow for generating prescriptive decisions at
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.