* 1841948
* Collaborative Research: Development of a Carbon Seaglider for ocean acidification monitoring and inorganic carbon process studies
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Andrew McDonnell, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,330,193.00

The oceanic reservoir of carbon dioxide is large, dynamic, spatially variable,
and of critical importance to Earth?s climate, biogeochemical cycles, and the
health of marine ecosystems. At present, the partial pressure of carbon dioxide
(pCO2) is vastly undersampled throughout the oceans. This is due to conventional
sampling approaches that rely primarily on discrete water sample collections
from dedicated research cruises, underway measurements of surface ocean
properties from transiting vessels, or time series measurements from in situ
sensors on fixed moorings. This sparse sampling coverage greatly limits the
understanding of the spatial and temporal variability of carbon dioxide, the
processes that control its cycling, and how its accumulation in the ocean
impacts marine life via ocean acidification. The researchers will develop a
Carbon Seaglider that will, for the first time, be capable of autonomously
measuring pCO2 at high resolution throughout the water column. Once available to
the community, the Carbon Seaglider will advance the understanding of regional
and global carbon cycling, ocean productivity, ocean acidification, and the
ocean?s role in mitigating climate change. The Carbon Seaglider could also be
applied to remote monitoring of the chemical habitat of CO2-sensitive organisms
and thereby refine the understanding of ecosystem responses to ocean
acidification. Enhanced monitoring of subsurface waters is also important to
advance the early warning system for shellfish hatcheries and
fishermen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will develop an autonomous
Carbon Seaglider by integrating a robust, proven and highly accurate pCO2 sensor
(Kongsberg CONTROS HydroC CO2) into a highly capable, state-of-the-art
autonomous coastal underwater glider (Kongsberg Seaglider C2). The primary
products of this project will be a proven, science-ready pCO2-sensing Seaglider
that is commercially available for a variety of ocean observing missions. This
Carbon Seaglider will be accompanied by all of the software packages and
operational documentation necessary to ensure user-friendly operation and high-
quality data products. The new Carbon Seaglider will for the first time provide
the ability to autonomously conduct high-resolution and adaptively sampled pCO2
measurements throughout the water column and across large range of spatial and
temporal scales. Successful completion of this project will advance the Carbon
Seaglider system to its final form and one that is proven to work effectively
and reliably under a wide range of environmental conditions. This involves the
final integration of these proven components into a fully functional system,
optimization of its performance and operation, and rigorous developmental
testing, evaluation, and operational demonstration during scientific mission.
The proposed science mission in glacial meltwater affected Prince William Sound
challenges both the pCO2 sensing capabilities (i.e. dynamics and variations) as
well as the glider platform? capability (i.e. strong currents and density
gradients). If these demonstration experiments are successful, it would prove
that the Carbon Seaglider can be used for a variety of other scientific and
monitoring missions, most of which would involve operations in much less
demanding environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.