* 1841403
* Phase II I/UCRC Harvard: Center for Spatiotemporal Thinking, Computing and Applications (STCA)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2024
* Joshua Lieberman, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 08/31/2024
* USD 580,000.00

Everything happens at some place, some time. Through collaboration among George
Mason University, University of California at Santa Barbara, and Harvard
University, this project builds national spatiotemporal capacity and advances
education and research. This project aims to acquire superior knowledge of
spatiotemporal principles, build computational infrastructure capable of
processing big spatiotemporal data efficiently, develop insights on how to apply
these principles and capabilities to solve real-world problems, and implement
educational programs with state-of-the-art spatiotemporal curricula in order to
understand our world better, to respond to regional and global emergencies in a
timely way, and to prepare the next generation's workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;As a center, the three universities will collaborate with industry,
government agencies, and other organizations to form a leading national and
international consortium for building a comprehensive infrastructure base for
spatiotemporal thinking, computing, and application; conducting research to
develop spatiotemporal thinking and its methodologies; developing new
spatiotemporal technologies, solutions, datasets, tools, and software that will
be integrated with existing and future industry products and services; building
demonstrative applications for government agencies and organizations to improve
the impact and reach of this work; and formulating new educational methodologies
and materials to advance human knowledge for the public.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The center will be a platform for academia, industry, and agencies to
collaborate to achieve fundamental and discipline-wide results. Members from
academia will get unique opportunities to interact with industry and agencies to
understand real world problems and research needs. Industry members will be able
to access the research results and turn them into future products and services
to improve their competitiveness. Agencies will be able to apply the research
results, incorporating them into their operations for better efficiency. The
products, services, and operations will serve thousands to millions of end
users, from the public and K-16 to professionals.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research
results will be presented in international conferences or symposiums; published
in Geographic Information System (GIS) journals or books; shared as code
packages in GitHub (https://github.com/cga-harvard), posted on the center
website (https://www.stcenter.net/), and circulated as center published
newsletters, posters or flyers. Platforms developed by this project will be
publicly accessible (as approved by the sponsoring board
members).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.