* 1841599
* EAGER SitS:  Developing a Next Generation Modeling Approach for Predicting Microbial Processes in Soil
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Zoe Cardon, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2021
* USD 301,763.00

Microbes are the key organisms at the core of many of Earth's life support
systems. Over the last decade, great progress has been made in identifying the
species of microbes present in many environments. In addition, many of the genes
that control what these microbes do have been discovered. This research will
uncover how microbes control critical ecosystem services. This project will
develop a new modeling framework to combine information about microbial
activities with environmental data from sensor networks. This approach will
advance understanding of how microbes control cycles of elements and the flow of
energy on Earth. This work will create valuable tools for managing natural
ecosystems and industrial processes. The project will also support undergraduate
research as part of the Semester in Environmental Science program at the Marine
Biological Laboratory in Woods Hole, MA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most natural
microbial systems, details of microbial metabolic and regulatory networks will
remain unknown in the foreseeable future and are too complex to be folded into
models of climate, soil fertility for agriculture, or waste management. Rather,
development of a scalable biogeochemical modeling approach is critical for
detecting the principles by which complex soil systems operate under co-control
by microbes and environmental factors. This project will develop a flexible
framework for analyzing microbial biogeochemistry from the thermodynamic
perspective of maximum entropy production (MEP). The work takes advantage of the
high diversity of microbial communities to enable thermodynamically-based
predictions about system-level biogeochemical response to global change. The
planned thermodynamically-constrained metabolic modeling approach will address
two key challenges associated with modeling microbial communities: (1) capturing
community self-organization and expression of metabolic function, and (2) re-
parameterizing reaction kinetics dynamically as microbial community composition
shifts in response to local environmental conditions. The distributed metabolic
network modeling approach features a minimal set of optimal control variables
that vary over time and space. These variables control stoichiometry and
thermodynamics of a distributed metabolic network as well as reaction rates. To
leverage existing modeling and experimental work for model-measurement
comparisons, the first phase of research will focus on a simplified network
including methanogenesis and methanotrophy. Ultimately, the goal is to integrate
sensor-derived information with diverse, known microbial capabilities
(constrained by thermodynamic principles), to predict shifting activities of
microbial communities in soils using far fewer parameters than would be required
with conventional modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.