* 1841629
* EAGER SitS: Quantifying the value of information for sensor placements to improve soil signals for agricultural water management
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Ashok Mishra, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2023
* USD 410,860.00

Given the reliance of global food security on robust agricultural water
management, there is a need to better inform and improve understanding of soil
moisture signals in different types of environments. Such signals are an
important input for agricultural water management. The lack of proper
understanding of soil moisture signals remains a persistent challenge in
sustainable agricultural management, especially during drought conditions.
Developing such an understanding is the subject of this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial heterogeneity and variability of soil
moisture greatly hinders the use of point scale in situ monitoring for capturing
the dynamics of this variable. Although remote sensing products are available to
provide soil moisture information, they are limited in providing only aggregated
information at coarse resolution and are often characterized by large
uncertainty, which is unsuitable for agricultural water management that requires
finer/local scale information. The robust design of soil moisture monitoring
(sensor) networks to be pursued by this project is targeted to ensure the
sufficient and adequate representation of data provided to stakeholders (e.g.
farmers and ranchers) so that they can make the most informed decisions possible
concerning their own water management needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.