* 1841480
* Scalable Cyberinfrastructure for Early Warning Gravitational Wave Detections
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Chad Hanna, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 09/30/2021
* USD 983,911.00

Recent advances in astronomical facilities have opened new windows on the
universe that extend observing capabilities beyond conventional telescopes.
Joint observations that combine telescopes, neutrino detectors, and new
gravitational wave detectors including the NSF-supported LIGO Observatory are
revealing aspects of the universe that are presently a mystery. Just recently,
signals from the collision of two extremely dense neutron stars - a merger known
as GW170817 - were detected by both conventional telescopes and gravitational
wave detectors. The event was detected first in gravitational waves, two seconds
later in gamma rays, after 10 hours in optical, ultraviolet, infrared, and much
later in x-ray and radio waves. From this single event, the world learned that
some short-hard gamma ray bursts indicate neutron star mergers, that these
mergers might be the origin of many elements in the periodic table such as gold
and platinum, that gravity and light travel at the same speed, and that
gravitational waves really could measure how fast the universe is expanding.
Despite what was learned, GW170817 left the world with many questions. What
object was formed afterward? Was it another neutron star? Was it a black hole?
Why was the gamma ray burst associated with GW170817 unlike anything else that
had been observed? Answering these questions, and conducting these kinds of
joint observations on a regular basis, requires significant computing and
software infrastructure (cyberinfrastructure).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
proposes to develop the cyberinfrastructure necessary to give earlier
gravitational event alerts to other astronomical facilities than is currently
possible, allowing researchers to collect as much data as possible about these
new types of celestial events. This project will fortify the streaming data
delivery of LIGO by producing sub-second data delivery to a streaming early
warning search for neutron star mergers. Substantial automated monitoring and
feedback will ensure the entire system operates without manual intervention. The
project will capitalize upon existing NSF investments in cyber-infrastructure
for real-time gravitational wave analysis and will significantly augment the
data delivery and automation layer for detections which is presently a
bottleneck and failure mode. Using gravitational waves to provide an early
warning for robotic telescopes will significantly enhance the scientific utility
of LIGO data and significantly facilitate multi-messenger astrophysics. This
proposal will promote the progress of science in two of the National Science
Foundation's 10 Big Ideas: "Harnessing the Data Revolution" "Windows on the
Universe: The Era of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.