* 1841715
* EAGER:  Does host specificity drive species diversification of fungal endophytes?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ryoko Oono, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 208,779.00

This project will study the ecology and evolution of a group of microscopic
fungi that live inside plant leaves (called endophytes), but do not appear to
cause harm to their plant hosts. Endophytic fungi are one of the most diverse
groups of fungi yet remain poorly known overall. A critical barrier to
understanding how endophytic fungi evolve is the lack of a well-characterized
model endophyte species and a foundation of basic knowledge about its biology,
global distribution, evolutionary history and genome characteristics. The goal
of this project is to develop this foundational knowledge for the most common
endophytic fungus of pine trees, the genus Lophodermium. Researchers will use
phylogenetic and comparative genomic methods to test how the endophytic species
have diversified in relation to their plant hosts and their environment. Results
will lead to the discovery and description of endophytic fungal species new to
science and new techniques that will accelerate the characterization of others.
Broader impacts of the research will yield new insights for conserving cryptic
biodiversity and facilitate the discovery of novel fungal biochemicals, such as
antibiotics and enzymes for biofuel production. Researchers will train graduate
and undergraduate students, including members of under-represented groups, in
diverse disciplines ranging from evolutionary ecology and bioinformatics to
molecular engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate the
first integrative, global phylogenomic study of Lophodermium (ca. 100 species;
Class Leotiomycetes, Phylum Ascomycota) to understand the diversity and
specificity of the plant-endophyte symbiotic interaction. This research will
address fundamental ecological and evolutionary questions concerning the origin
and diversification of fungal endophyte species, specifically addressing how
adaptations to different plant host species may lead to the speciation of
endophytes. Genomic and transcriptomic data of diverse Lophodermium species will
be generated to help identify underlying molecular signatures that have
contributed to speciation and adaptation to Pinus host species. The project will
also develop tools, such as in situ fluorescence probes, and cyber-platforms
that will transform the current approach to exploring, analyzing and
synthesizing the life history of cryptic endophytes. Project outcomes will
strengthen research infrastructure by building plant and microbial reference
collections as well as open-access software to speed research collaborations and
syntheses of taxonomic data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.