* 1841845
* EAGER: Toward Magnetic Manipulation of Nonmagnetic Objects
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Jake Abbott, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2020
* USD 256,739.00

Over the past decade, researchers have made significant advances on using
magnets to precisely move objects without any physical contact. However, the
objects are specially designed to be made mostly of ferromagnetic material so
that they can be moved by magnets. But what if it were possible to use magnets
to manipulate metal objects that contain no magnetic material at all, which is
common in many engineered devices? It is well known that moving magnets create
electrical fields that, in turn, can generate forces in metal objects through
the generation of eddy currents. The project explores how these forces can be
used to control the movement of such objects, enabling manipulation in
microgravity and undersea, and enabling new tools for scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project methodically characterizes the
physics of magnetic manipulation of nonmagnetic-but-conductive spheres (solid
and thin walled). For the time-varying magnetic fields used to generate eddy
currents in the spheres, rotating magnetic dipole fields are used, which are
generated by unique electromagnetic and permanent-magnet hardware platforms
developed by the Principal Investigator with prior NSF support. The project
characterizes eddy-current-based manipulation as a robotic-manipulation problem,
in order to determine how the number and placement of the dipole actuation
sources affects manipulability. The project tests the hypothesis that a sphere
can be manipulated with limited prior knowledge by learning the model?s
parameters while using guarded actions to avoid loss of control authority. This
joint learning and control problem is formulated as an information-theoretic,
active-learning problem to find informative samples for learning, subject to
unknown manipulation constraints imposed by the electromagnetic physics of the
system. Finally, the project includes a feasibility study in the practical
application of this phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.