* 1841921
* Society for American Archaeology Native American Scholarships Program
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Sara Gonzalez, Society For American Archaeology
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 114,505.00

Since the inception of archaeology in the Americas, Native Americans have been
the preferred subjects of scientific inquiry, classification, and
interpretation, as their cultures, items of cultural patrimony, and ways of life
were documented for perpetuity. Yet, Native Americans have been and continue to
be dramatically underrepresented in the field of archaeology. The Society for
American Archaeology recognizes the benefits of Native American and Indigenous
participation in archaeology and has, for the past two decades, developed a
Native American Scholarship Fund that supports training Native American and
Indigenous archaeologists. These scholarships help ensure that indigenous
knowledge and voices continue to become a more vibrant part of the fabric of
understanding American culture and past human experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lasting impact of these scholarships has already
impacted archaeology and the larger historic preservation community. For
example, many of the past recipients of the SAA's Native American Scholarships
indicate that their award enabled them to pursue careers in archaeology and in
several cases inspired them to create similar opportunities for future
generations of indigenous archaeologists to follow in their footsteps.
Scholarships awarded through this grant support both graduate and undergraduate
education and training in archaeology for Native American, Alaskan Native, and
Native Hawaiian students and community members and recipients are selected
through a competitive, criteria-based process. The funding provided by the
National Science Foundation will enable the SAA to continue their legacy of
supporting underrepresented communities within the field of archaeology as part
of their commitment to the "Statement on Diversity," which makes inclusiveness
an institutional and disciplinary goal. The SAA Native American Scholarship
program is among the most visible and tangible mechanisms to show that
archaeologists are invested in a future for their discipline that is fully
inclusive to Native peoples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.