* 1841092
* EAGER: Development of a Prototype Sensor Package to Quantify In-Situ Rates of Aquatic Carbon Cycling Processes
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Collin Ward, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 07/31/2021
* USD 294,072.00

In this project the researchers plan to develop a novel, new sensor package
capable of measuring rates of aquatic carbon cycling. In the coastal and open
ocean, rates of carbon cycling processes are not completely understood. This
project will pave the way for future full-scale development of the sensor
package that could substantially improve our confidence in the marine carbon
cycle measurements and predictions for how the ocean may respond to human
stressors in the future. The proposed work will advance the careers of two early
career scientists. In addition, they plan to recruit undergraduate students
through the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Summer Student Fellow Program,
the semester at WHOI program, and the Woods Hole Partnership
Program&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs will develop a prototype sensor package to
resolve technical challenges and conduct preliminary tests of the quantification
of photosynthesis rates, bacterial respiration rates and quotients, and
photochemical oxidation rates and quotients. The focus of this EAGER proposal
will be on overcoming critical technical challenges in order to develop this
prototype. The development work proposed will pave the road for future
development and testing of a full-scale, deployable in-situ device. If
successful they will develop a prototype of a first of its kind to sensing
system to simultaneously measure the in-situ rates of photosynthesis, microbial
respiration, and photochemical oxidation in any surface water. The risk areas
are in the pumping and plumbing systems and mitigation of biofouling. They have
been working on a number of ways to resolve these issues but will have to do a
lot of testing to see what works best.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.