* 1841466
* Phase II IUCRC at North Carolina State University:  Center for Dielectrics and Piezoelectrics
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Gregory Parsons, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 551,999.00

The Center for Dielectrics and Piezoelectrics (CDP) is a joint
industry/university cooperative research center (IUCRC) between North Carolina
State University (NCSU) and the Pennsylvania State University (PSU), with an
international affiliate site at The University of Sheffield. Dielectric and
piezoelectric materials, which can transduce and store energy, are ubiquitous in
modern electronics that underpin most transportation, communication, defense and
medical technologies. The goals of the CDP are to: 1. Improve the fundamental
understanding of dielectric and piezoelectric materials and their device
integration; 2. Discover transformative dielectric and piezoelectric materials
that support innovative technology advancements and transfer this technology to
support new products and processes; 3. Educate students and postdoctoral
scholars to become leaders in the research community and create long-term
technical impact; 4. Develop unique measurement, characterization, and modeling
infrastructure to support the industry; 5. Catalyze strategic coupling with
other organizations to expand scientific impact and technology transfer; 6.
Become the internationally recognized center of excellence in the science,
technology, and integration of capacitive and piezoelectric materials. At each
step, CDP faculty work closely with industry and national laboratory members to
advance the state-of-the-art in dielectric and piezoelectric
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CDP research develops new materials, new
metrology methods, new processing methods, and new scientific understanding of
dielectric and piezoelectric materials, including lifecycle analysis. The
research portfolio includes projects on: 1. Capacitors for extreme environments
to address the need for increased voltages and operation temperatures in
application areas such as automotive, power electronics, and aerospace/defense
systems; exemplary research topics include quantification of dielectric
degradation kinetics in the presence of humidity. 2. Piezoelectric materials
used in ultrasound and precision actuation applications, including research on
the role of inhomogeneous stresses on cracking and failure in multilayer
piezoelectric devices 3. High energy density capacitors for electric vehicles
and wearable electronics, including research on novel molecular-layer deposition
techniques for producing high-surface-area capacitors. 4. Dielectrics for low-
temperature and flexible substrates for foldable and stretchable electronics,
including novel approaches for printed dielectric devices. 5. Non-linear and
high frequency dielectrics for 5G communications, including high-reliability
integrated tunable capacitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.