* 1841019
* RUI:  Assessing Mechanisms for Organosulfate Formation in Secondary Organic Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Matthew Elrod, Oberlin College
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 394,671.00

A major goal of this project is to contribute to improving atmospheric chemical
models that are critical to the mechanistic understanding of the processes that
are relevant to air pollution and climate change. This effort focuses on
studying the production of secondary organic aerosol (SOA) related to the
presence of organosulfates in the atmosphere. This Research in Undergraduate
Institutions (RUI) project will support the education and training of
undergraduate students and help prepare them for future careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of this research are to:
(1) measure acid-catalyzed sulfate esterification rate constants for alcohol
derivatives of targeted volatile organic compounds (VOCs); (2) investigate
mechanistic details of the nucleophilic substitution of nitrate by sulfate
reaction for nitrate derivatives of targeted VOCs; (3) investigate mechanistic
details of sulfate radical addition to targeted olefinic VOCs reactions and
identify sulfate radical formation mechanisms for aerosol proxy solutions
irradiated by simulated solar irradiation; and (4) synthesize and characterize
with Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, organonitrate reactants and
potential organosulfate products relevant to the reactions
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable parameterization of the
important mechanistic aspects of the various processes studied and allow for the
determination of their potential importance under ambient atmosphere conditions.
The results will lead to more accurate modeling of organosulfate formation in
SOA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.