* 1841455
* Second Workshop for Women in Computational Topology (WinCompTop 2)
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Erin Chambers, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 11/30/2020
* USD 15,000.00

This award will support the participation of 10 US-based participants at the
Second Workshop for Women in Computational Topology (WinCompTop 2), during July
1-5, 2019. WinCompTop2 is a workshop that facilitates the formation of new and
lasting research collaborations between junior and senior women working in the
field of computational topology, a field that seeks to identify underlying
patterns and mathematical structure in data from areas ranging from medical
imaging to networks of sensor arrays. WinCompTop 2 is designed to grow the
network of women active in this field by providing both research opportunity and
a unique environment for mentoring, collaboration, and cohort building. This
type of event is critical, since despite numerous initiatives and undeniable
progress over the past few decades, gender imbalance in mathematics and computer
science remains significant. In particular, mathematics and computer science are
two of three disciplines with the lowest percentage of women attaining PhDs,
according to recent data collected by the National Science Foundation. There is
considerable evidence that conferences and workshops such as WinCompTop2, geared
toward women can and do make a significant impact, and participants report that
they see strong benefits from these workshops, which support collaborations,
broaden contacts, and raise visibility in the greater mathematical community.

The WinCompTop2 workshop fits under the broad umbrella of Research Collaboration
Conferences for Women, which the Association for Women in Mathematics encourages
and supports. The majority of the time at the workshop will be spent tackling
open problems in small working groups headed by established leaders in the
field. The schedule consists of long blocks of time for the working groups to do
research. At two or more points during the week, all participants will convene
and one member from each group will provide a brief summary of their team's
progress. In addition, there will be a poster session for graduate students and
early-career participants as well as other crucial networking and mentoring
opportunities between women at different points in their career as well as
between peer colleagues. These relationships will foster a supportive and
community-oriented atmosphere that is ideal for generating professional
connections and collaborations. The conference website may be found here:
https://maths.anu.edu.au/news-events/events/women-computational-topology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.