* 1841568
* EAGER SitS: Emergent Properties during Soil Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Susan Brantley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Soils sustain humankind. These earth materials form as water, air, and dead and
living organisms interact with rock material at Earth's surface. Soils form over
thousands to millions of years and yet soil can be lost to erosion over human
time frames. In this proposed work, innovative sensors and techniques will be
used to measure and understand how iron and oxygen are catalyzed by bacteria to
interact in soils, affecting the pathways where water flows in the subsurface.
The work will focus on soil formation at an NSF-funded observatory in
Pennsylvania - a Critical Zone Observatory - where a large effort is ongoing to
understand such processes. New scientific knowledge will be developed about how
micro-organisms change the chemistry of rock and break it open as it turns into
soil, and how this relates to subsurface water flow. At the same time, the new
techniques will provide new knowledge of societal relevance about how soil
forms, and will also be shown to many other faculty members, students, and
colleagues that visit the observatory, as well as members of the public through
interactions with a local museum. In addition, the observatory is the site of an
annual NSF-funded Geophysics field course where the two techniques to be
deployed will be taught to an annual cohort of undergraduate students drawn from
under-represented groups and community colleges.

With high-risk experiments using novel deployments, biogeochemical reactions
will be explored with respect to how they relate to zones of lateral water flow.
Two techniques will be investigated over month- to year-long deployments: the
first will measure microbial activity (chronoamperometry) and the second will
measure the effects of water-induced changes in volume of rock materials (time-
lapse seismic monitoring). Both techniques are still in their infancy because
they depend on new sensor technologies and state-of-the-art interpretations. The
deployment of these techniques together in a location where many other
measurements have already been made will guarantee the highest likelihood of
success.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.