* 1841527
* Collaborative Research: Community Planning for Scalable Cyberinfrastructure to Support Multi-Messenger Astrophysics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Kelly Holley-Bockelmann, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* William Miller
* 09/30/2019
* USD 20,075.00

Multi-Messenger Astrophysics (MMA) is an exciting new field of science that
combines traditional astronomy with the brand new ability to measure phenomena
such as gravitational waves and high-energy neutrino particles that originate
from celestial objects. MMA was galvanized when the collision of two neutron
stars (labeled GW/GRB 170817A) was detected last year by multiple large science
instruments including the NSF-funded Laser Interferometer Gravitational-wave
Observatory (LIGO), its sister gravitational wave observatory VIRGO in Italy,
NASA's Fermi gamma-ray telescope in space, and many other optical and radio
telescopes world-wide. These multiple measurements of just one event improved
our estimate of the speed of gravity to phenomenal precision, confirmed that
neutron star mergers are the origin of the heavier atomic elements, and gave us
a measurement of the radii of neutron stars to about one kilometer accuracy.
Over the next decade, LIGO will identify dozens of such events per year. In
parallel, the NSF-supported IceCube neutrino observatory at the U.S. South Pole
Station and other neutrino and cosmic ray observatories are detecting high-
energy cosmic rays from distant cosmological sources; and the new NSF-led Large
Synoptic Survey Telescope and upcoming radio astronomy facilities will come
online to survey the skies with unprecedented speed and depth throughout the
Universe. While each kind of astronomical observing system will bring
fascinating new discoveries, it is in their combination - through MMA - that
transformative new insights into some of the most fundamental questions about
the Universe can be realized: What is the nature of the highest-energy cosmic
particle accelerators? What are the properties of cold and hot bulk matter at
supra-nuclear densities? How do black holes form and evolve, across their full
range of masses, and throughout cosmic time?&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The promise
of Multi-Messenger Astrophysics can be realized only if sufficient
cyberinfrastructure is available to rapidly handle, combine, and analyze the
very large-scale distributed data from all the types of astronomical
measurements. This project seeks to carry out community planning for scalable
cyberinfrastructure to support MMA. The primary goal is to identify the key
questions and cyberinfrastructure projects required by the community to take
full advantage of the substantial investments in current facilities, and to
realize the enormous potential of the multiple imminent next-generation projects
over the decade to come. Two products of the project will be: 1) a community
white paper that presents an in-depth analysis of the cyberinfrastructure needs
and the opportunities for collaborations among astronomers, computer scientists,
and data scientists; and 2) a strategic plan for a scalable cyberinfrastructure
institute for multi-messenger astrophysics laying out its proposed mission,
identifying the highest priority areas for cyberinfrastructure research and
development for the US-based multi-messenger astrophysics community, and
presenting a strategy for managing and evolving a set of services that benefits
and engages the entire community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project advances
the objectives of the National Strategic Computing Initiative (NSCI) and the
objectives of "Harnessing the Data Revolution" and "Windows on the Universe, two
of the 10 Big Ideas for Future NSF Investments.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure in the
Directorate for Computer &amp; Information Science &amp; Engineering and the
Division of Astronomical Sciences and the Division of Physics in the Directorate
of Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.