* 1841870
* Observational and Theoretical Investigations Related to Hydrometeor Settling in Turbulent Air
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Eric Pardyjak, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 591,559.00

Numerical weather and climate models are sensitive to descriptions of how fast
frozen precipitation falls. Many models still use calculations that are rooted
in measurements taken nearly 50 years ago. This award will provide up-to-date
information on precipitation fall speed, including the impact of turbulence. The
work will be accomplished using a new instrument called the Airborne Particle
Imager which is designed to measure 3D velocity and take high resolution
photography of the individual particles. The main broader societal impact of the
award will be the confirmation or improvement upon the assumptions made by
numerical models, which will potentially lead to improved weather forecasts. The
lead researcher has provided significant public outreach through snowflake
imagery, and the new instrument should improve upon those images. The instrument
also has potential interdisciplinary and technology transfer uses. In addition,
the award will provide education and training opportunities, including support
for a female military veteran.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans an
observational and theoretical project to improve understanding of how the
turbulent atmosphere affects the fall speed of precipitation. A central aspect
of the project will be the development of the Airborne Particle Imager (AIP)
which is an update to the current Multi-Angle Snowflake Camera (MASC). The AIP
will minimize ambient flow disturbance and add 3D velocity measurements to the
MASC's existing capabilities. The AIP will be deployed during the 2019-2020
winter in the Complex Hydrometeor Aerial Locomotion and Image Capture Experiment
(CHALICE) with other instruments to relate particle type, orientation, and
motions to the degree of ambient turbulence. The observations will be compared
to numerical models and past studies to explore the hypothesis that particle
settling speed is slowed in low turbulence and accelerated in high turbulence
situations, with increased deviation of particle orientation from the
horizontal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.