* 1841652
* EAGER SitS: Photonic Sensor Platform for Point of Interest Soil Sensing
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Supratik Guha, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,999.00

Despite the importance of soil for food production, botany, water cycles, and
environmental science, most information about soils remains inadequate. A
leading constraint for better understanding of the subterranean environment in
more detail is that current tools like collecting and analyzing soil core
samples are costly, invasive, and slow. This proposal describes the development
of a small, low-cost, high-sensitivity photonics based sensor platform which
will be initially targeted to the detection of critical nutrients in the soil
such as nitrate. These sensors will be able to operate noninvasively, buried
underground with real-time sensing capabilities. Developing low-cost and high-
sensitivity underground detection will enable visualization of previously
mysterious processes in soil which nonetheless underpin critical aspects of life
on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic physical, chemical, biological
changes that soil undergoes are not well understood today and this, in turn has
implications for plant science, environmental science and food security.
Developing understanding in these areas and building accurate predictive models
require fine-grained knowledge of soils (in the vadose zone) in space and time.
Present soil sensing capabilities do not meet these needs. In particular there
is a lack of adequate sensing technologies that are field deployable, accurate
and cheap. This proposal describes the development of a general sensing platform
for subterranean analytes based upon micro-fabricated photonic structures which
are exquisitely sensitive to changes in the local environmental refractive index
with a particular focus on measuring micronutrients important for soil and plant
science. These lithographically-fabricated photonic structures are made on
silicon/silicon oxide using photo- or electron beam-lithography and therefore
compatible with a wide array of surface functionalization chemistries. The use
of photo- or electron beam-lithography ensures that the sensor design is both
highly-reproducible and imminently scalable. To couple high affinity and
specificity to this generalized detection platform, small peptides will be
designed to bind inorganic analytes such as nitrate and phosphate with high
specificity. Biomimetic sensing of inorganic analytes can achieve both high
sensitivity and high specificity by engineering small peptide chains which mimic
the binding sites of naturally-observed proteins. Thus far, this strategy has
been used in metal sensing and remediation, but it has not been extended to more
challenging sensing of weakly-interacting inorganic ions, nor has it been
coupled with a detection platform compatible with soil sensing. The proposed
sensing platform is general to a wide range of analytes. In the proposed work we
will use nitrate detection as an example to demonstrate its sensing capability
because nitrate is the most important micronutrient in soil. But in the meantime
we will also apply the same peptide designing approach to develop peptides that
are sensitive to other analytes such as phosphates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.