* 1841358
* Collaborative Research:  Understanding Compact Binary Star Formation with the First Gravitational Wave Detections
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* Emanuele Berti, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 06/30/2020
* USD 315,667.00

The first detection of gravitational waves (GW) by the LIGO observatory was from
the collision of two black holes (BH), which are considered a type of compact
binary stars. This has opened up a new window in astronomy, enabling a deeper
understanding of the physics of relativity through the study of merging BHs, the
objects that bend space and time the most. Since these interactions are so
complicated, powerful computer simulations are needed to interpret the science.
A collaboration between research groups at the University of Mississippi and
Pennsylvania State University will develop and run computer models to better
understand the formation and development of compact binary star systems and to
more effectively use the rich information from gravitational waves to probe
these systems. A related effort is the development of methods to use GW in the
future to study dark matter. The research team will also promote scientific
literacy by providing astronomy lectures, demonstrations, and hands-on
activities to school children and adult citizenry in economically disadvantaged
communities in the state of Mississippi and the commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

The investigators will carry out two closely related projects to model the
gravitational wave astrophysics of compact binary systems. The first project
concerns the astrophysical information that can be extracted from the
characteristic signature imposed on a gravitational wave signal due to the spin
and the orbital precession of coalescing black hole binaries. The team will
introduce spin dynamics into compact binary evolution models and track the
evolution of BH binaries from formation through merger, including effects such
as an initial supernova kick, mass transfer and spin-orbit coupling. An offshoot
of this work is to investigate bounds on ultra-light bosonic dark matter though
its possible GW signature. The second project will involve inferring compact
binary population models from a catalog of gravitational wave observations. The
team will put together a database of evolutionary models and work to distinguish
between the predicted observables of the various models. Goals include
understanding the distribution of BH masses, spins, and merger rates and the
properties of the stochastic GW background. The principal investigators will
mentor a graduate student and postdoctoral researcher and plan to organize two
workshops on strong gravity and binary dynamics and to lecture at international
graduate schools on work related to the proposal.