* 1841368
* EAGER: Perceptions of Fairness and Justice in AI Software for Talent Acquisition
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Lynette Yarger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2021
* USD 225,054.00

Perceived fairness and justice in job recruiting and hiring are influenced by
several factors. Some factors are the consistency of the decision-making process
across people and time, timely and informative feedback, propriety of the
interview questions, and the extent to which pre-employment tests appear to
relate to the job requirements. These factors come together to influence
decisions about recruiting and hiring and are being made increasingly with the
help of artificial intelligence (AI). In this project, a sociotechnical frame is
applied to explore perceptions of fairness and justice of AI-supported talent
acquisition algorithms. the investigator will elicit and analyze perceptions of
human resources personnel, African American job seekers, and AI software
designers. The outcomes will be used to inform the design of bias recognition
and mitigation procedures and technologies for both humans and the algorithms
being used.

The intellectual merit of this exploratory study is the development of
qualitative instruments and metrics that can be used to measure perceptions of
algorithmic fairness and justice. The research approach extends a theory of
procedural rules for perceived fairness of selection systems by using a three-
pronged approach comprising job seekers who are under-represented in the IT
industry, human resource professionals who manage the talent acquisition
process, and IT professionals who design AI software with fairness as the core
value in product design and development. Perceptions using scenarios are
examined as well as the actual experiences of jobseekers who are affected by
these decisions. This research contributes to an assessment of algorithmic
fairness at a time when there is currently little insight into how historically
marginalized populations might perceive or be adversely affected by AI systems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.