* 1841128
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding Public Attitudes About Citizen Security
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2021
* Jessica Zarkin Notni, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 18,900.00

To face the challenge of public safety provision, states have opted for two
different approaches: democratization of policing or militarization. When it
comes to democratization, some states have employed measures to involve citizens
in co-participation in matters of security, with the objective of bringing
citizens closer to police forces. Other states, however, have opted for
militarizing their provision of security, separating citizens even farther from
the police. In these last 30 years, militarization has been easier than
democratization because in some countries, citizens trust the military more than
they do the police, even in countries where military dictatorships took place.
This study examines whether separating citizens from those who provide their
security also distances citizens from other parts of the state. The decision to
either democratize or militarize citizen security affects what citizens think
about and do in relation to state institutions, impacting citizen-state linkage.
Importantly, the way politicians speak about citizen security affects the
different ways decisions of policing are taken and how citizens also make their
minds about it. Thus, this study has a broader impact in showing how, from
rhetoric to decision-making to implementation, the way politicians approach
policing will ultimately forge citizens' investment in political participation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to several debates in political
science. First, it directly speaks to the burgeoning literature on policing by
examining how politicians' decisions and rhetoric on security provision directly
impact the linkage between citizens and the state. This study argues that said
impact is reflected in citizen attitudes towards democratic and militarized
security as well as their participation in security co-production. Second, it
contributes to the literature on state capacity and governance by better
theorizing the connection between preferences in security decision-making,
institutional capacity, and citizen attitudes and behavior. Third, it adds to
the literature on militarizing law enforcement by taking a novel approach to
militarized security from the citizens' perspective and focusing on how
attitudes towards militarizing or democratizing law enforcement change. Lastly,
it adds to the literature on political participation by testing whether
achieving security co-production relies on other types of political
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.