* 1841696
* ERA-CAPS: Meiotic recombination in plants (MEIOREC): The effect of chromosome axis remodeling on recombination outcomes in large-genome plants.
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Wojciech Pawlowski, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 07/31/2023
* USD 719,259.00

This project examines how the structure of chromosomes affects meiotic
recombination in maize, a model plant species as well as a major crop. Meiotic
recombination is a process of exchanging parts between chromosomes during sexual
reproduction. This exchange is the main source of new genetic variation in the
progeny. Thus, it is a major force behind species evolution and extremely
important in plant and animal breeding. Despite their importance, recombination
events are not evenly distributed along chromosomes. In many plant species with
large genomes, including most crops, recombination does not happen in large
portions of the genome and predominantly takes place near chromosome ends, which
creates a major obstacle for plant breeding. Developing ways to increase
recombination will provide access to a much higher number of allele
combinations, and lead to more efficient breeding approaches. This information
will be transferable to other crop species. To understand how chromosome
structure affects where recombination takes place on chromosomes, this project
will use biochemistry and state-of-the-art microscopy. The project is part of a
US-European Union scientific collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to elucidate how the chromosome axis, a proteinaceous structure
that organizes chromatin into chromosomes, affects the landscape of meiotic
recombination in maize. Meiotic recombination is initiated by the formation of
double-strand breaks (DSBs) in chromosomal DNA, some of which are subsequently
repaired as crossovers (COs). In large-genome plants, including maize, COs are
few and their distribution is heavily biased, with most of them located near
chromosome ends and very few in centromeric and pericentromeric regions of
chromosomes. Why COs are formed in specific chromosome regions is poorly
understood. There is, however, evidence that the chromosome axis plays a major
role in this process. To examine the role of the chromosome axis in CO
formation, this project will (i) elucidate chromosome axis behavior during
meiotic prophase using live imaging, (ii) utilize super-resolution microscopy to
investigate how DSB repair proceeds in the context of the chromosome axis using
wild-type plants as well as mutants with altered versions of axis proteins, and
(iii) examine the dynamics of interactions between chromosome axis proteins and
proteins involved in DSB repair and CO formation using proteomics approaches.
About one-third of the maize genome and one-fifth of genes are in
pericentromeric regions, which show, on average, 20-fold less recombination than
the more-highly recombining distal chromosome regions. Developing ways to
increase recombination in pericentromeric regions will provide access to a much
higher number of allele combinations, and lead to more efficient breeding
approaches. This project is part of the EU-USA ERA-CAPS project "Meiotic
recombination in plants (MEIOREC)".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.