* 1841324
* Topological and Rigorous Computational Methods for High Dimensional Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Leland Jameson
* 01/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

The conference 'Topological and Rigorous Computational Methods for High
Dimensional Dynamics' is to be held on April 1 - April 30, 2019&lt;br/&gt;in
Centre des Recherches Mathematiques (CRM), Canada. The revolution of
computational and data driven science is well underway. However, mathematically
rigorous frameworks for processing the output of this science is lagging. This
is of serious concern since these same computational and data driven techniques
are having immediate impacts on the private and social sectors of society. It is
essential that within the new generation of mathematicians there are researchers
capable of addressing these issues. Through the tutorials, junior researchers
will be introduced to rapidly developing concepts, techniques, and computational
tools designed to address these challenges. Through the workshop lectures they
will be made aware of the latest developments in the field.&lt;br/&gt;Of equal
importance is that their presence will allow them to interact with leaders in
the field, to begin to develop connections with researchers from across the
world, and ideally to begin research projects that lay the foundations of new
techniques for rigorous understanding of the complex nonlinear systems of
interest today and in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide
support for junior researchers from the USA to participate in a month long
special program at the Centre des Recherches Mathematiques (CRM) entitled
Topological and Rigorous Computational Methods for High Dimensional Dynamics.
The activities will take place from April 1 - April 30, 2019 and consist of
tutorials, workshops, and time for collaboration. The research activities of the
CRM program focus on two topics. The first theme is how to effectively and
rigorously identify invariant structures in infinite dimensional dynamical
systems, for example those generated by partial differential equations. The
second theme is how to extract robust information from poorly resolved dynamical
systems, for example when only partial or coarse data is
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference website: &lt;br/&gt;http://www.crm.ma
th.ca/crm50/en/activities/2019-activities/topological-and-rigorous-
computational-methods-for-high-dimensional-dynamics/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.