* 1841346
* EAGER: Three-wave mixing techniques to study and utilize nuclear quadrupole coupling effects in chiral molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Garry Grubbs, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2020
* USD 72,770.00

Many molecules in nature, particularly biological molecules, exhibit a
handedness in their geometric structure. This is to say two molecules can have
the same number and kinds of atoms and geometric arrangement, but they are
mirror images of each other, as are one's left and right hands. This
"handedness" in chemistry is referred to as "chirality." In chemical
measurements, distinguishing between the "hands"- known as enantiomers- and
quantifying the amounts of each can be a difficult technological challenge. This
difficulty can limit our ability to synthesize and separate a given enantiomer.
In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) and Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Programs of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Garry Grubbs II of the Missouri University of Science and
Technology is using advanced microwave spectroscopy techniques to determine the
type and concentration of enantiomers present in a sample. Microwave
spectroscopy provides information about molecular structure based on how fast
they can be made to rotate by the microwave radiation. Professor Grubbs
hypothesizes that "handedness" of a molecule can be determined if that molecule
contains a very heavy atom like bromine or iodine. The nuclei of these heavy
atoms contain arrangements of electrical charge that can make the rotations of
the overall molecule reveal more about its structure in a microwave experiment
than it would otherwise. If Professor Grubbs' hypothesis is correct, there may
be new paths toward faster and more accurate synthesis and monitoring of chiral
systems, which is particularly important to pharmaceutical research. The project
is also training graduate students in currently unexplored areas of physical
chemistry using state-of-the-art instrument design as well as new quantum theory
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on utilizing the recent
discovery of microwave three-wave mixing in chiral systems on nuclear electric
quadrupole coupling interactions. These experiments are designed to establish,
for the first time, experimental data and theoretical understanding for nuclear
spin-based methodologies for identifying and quantifying enantiomeric species in
mixtures. Microwave three-wave mixing involves utilizing rotational transitions
involving excitation along two molecular axes while detecting along the third
axis, creating closed-loop transition energy pathways very similar to a three-
level maser system. Electric dipole-forbidden, quadrupole-facilitated
transitions occur when off-diagonal nuclear electric quadrupole interactions are
on the order of the molecular rotation constants and follow the same closed-loop
pathway. These are then leveraged using microwave three-wave mixing because of
the technique's sensitivity to phase rather than energy of traditional microwave
spectroscopy, allowing for the determination of the off-diagonal sign in a
singular experiment for the first time as well as insight into the enantiomer in
question. Isotopic substitution spectra analysis are then used to validate the
veracity of the experimental results. In addition to the technological and
educational impacts, this research may expand the reach of, and molecular
information offered from, microwave spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.