* 1841034
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Residents' Interactions with the State
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/2020,12/31/2022
* Henry Hale, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 12/31/2022
* USD 18,885.00

This research project seeks to better understand the link between power-sharing
and target-communities' sense of attachment to the state. Conventional wisdom in
political science indicates that power-sharing institutions can foster loyalty
to the state among certain target groups, such as ethnic minority citizens.
However, existing studies have found inconclusive evidence. Additionally,
existing research has yet to identify mechanisms linking power-sharing and
attachment to the state. This research seeks to address these gaps. Based on an
original dataset of household survey and qualitative interviews with local
residents and civil servants, it examines power-sharing at the local level of
government. Its contribution to the literature lies in a careful tracing and
elucidation of the interactions between the target citizens and the state via
its agents (the civil servants) and how these interactions shape citizens' view
of and attachment to government. This work will inform policymakers that the way
in which public service is delivered in a micro-level interaction between
citizens and local agents of the state has consequential implications for the
way some residents view government institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research project seeks to answer to the following questions: (1) what shapes
ethnic minority citizens' sense of attachment to the state?, and (2) why has the
state been more successful in winning over a sense of attachment from members of
some ethnic minority groups than other groups? To answer these questions, it
takes a multi-method approach and uses an original dataset, consisting of
household survey data and ethnic minority groups' actual level of representation
at various levels of government. It proposes to test a set of hypotheses through
regression analysis, and builds on existing literature on power-sharing, but
takes a novel approach that focuses on power-sharing at the local -- rather than
national -- level of government. Empirically, it goes well beyond showing
correlation between the dependent and independent variables of interest; it
estimates the effect of power-sharing with ethnic minorities at the national,
regional, and local levels of government on their attachment to the state and
addresses why and how the effects occur.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.