* 1841426
* Planning IUCRC at Case Western Reserve University: Center on Data Science for Materials Reliability and Degradation (MDS-Rely)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Laura Bruckman, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Case Western Reserve University (CWRU) and the University of Pittsburgh (Pitt)
are planning to form a new IUCRC named the Center on Materials Data Science for
Reliability and Degradation (MDS-Rely). The primary goal of MDS-Rely is to apply
data science-informed research to better understand the reliability and lifetime
of essential materials. This IUCRC builds on established centers at both
locations focusing on Energy Materials, Advanced and Additive Manufacturing, and
in Data Science and Analytics. Recent advances in materials data science have
the potential to transform this field in creating new technologies that enable
unprecedented lifetimes, durability in extreme environments, and understanding
of various degradation and failure mechanisms. Our established relationships
with industry and our multidisciplinary capabilities in protocols, modeling, and
applications are key to taking on this grand challenge of long-lived
technologies. MDS-Rely will engage a diverse cohort of students, and develop
broad data science capabilities to respond to employers' needs. MDS-Rely will
harness relationships between industry and academia to make headways in applying
data science to materials development, design, and reliability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MDS-Rely will include three Thrusts: (1) Enhanced
Reliability Study Protocols, (2) Modeling &amp; Service Life Prediction, and (3)
Reliability and Degradation Applications. Thrust 1 will focus on designing data
informed experimental studies of materials and developing a data science-based
experimental design with both non-destructive and destructive evaluations to
monitor material degradation. Thrust 2 will focus on degradation and reliability
modeling of materials and will encompass graph-based network modeling, machine
learning, image analysis, and time-series analysis. Data analytic pipelines will
be created to inform future analysis. These models will give insight back to the
design of data informed experimental studies. Finally, Thrust 3 will inform
materials design choices for different stress conditions by understanding the
main contributors of degradation in a material system. This will also allow for
much more rapid material selection in the material choice portion of a system
design. The workshop meetings further define specific projects to direct respond
to industry needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.