* 1841464
* Physics and Astrophysics of Compact Binaries
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Emanuele Berti, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 197,867.00

In September 2015 Advanced LIGO made the first detection of the gravitational
waves emitted from the merger of two black holes. In the near future, a network
of Earth-based and space-based gravitational-wave detectors will observe binary
systems composed of black holes and/or neutron stars over a wide range of masses
and mass ratios. To realize the groundbreaking potential of gravitational-wave
astronomy we must go beyond detection, extracting as much information as
possible about the physics and astrophysics of the sources. This is the main
theme of this project, that will study how Earth-based and space-based detectors
can constrain the astrophysics of binary formation and further our understanding
of strong-field gravitational physics. This award will support the gravitational
physics group at the University of Mississippi, a leading research center
located in a geographically and economically disadvantaged region, where
engagement in the basic sciences is below national average. The project will
strengthen collaborations between the gravitational physics community and the
larger astrophysics community at a crucial time for the nascent field of
gravitational-wave astronomy. The PI will train students and a postdoc in a
highly interdisciplinary field that requires expertise in general relativity,
astrophysics, data analysis and high-energy physics. The students and postdoc
will benefit from interactions with a large international network of world-
leading experts in gravitational physics.

The PI will study the astrophysical information that can be extracted from the
spin-induced precession of black-hole binaries; explore the possibility to
constrain binary formation scenarios using Earth-based and space-based
gravitational wave detectors; study ultra-relativistic black-hole collisions as
"numerical experiments" probing the limits of Einstein's theory; investigate the
problems of absorption, scattering and superradiance in black-hole physics; and
study whether compact objects can be used to reveal possible strong-field
deviations from the predictions of general relativity. The long-term goals of
this proposal are: (1) to explore the scientific payoff of the first
gravitational wave observations: what can we learn about fundamental
gravitational physics, and how will compact binary detections contribute to our
understanding of the Universe? (2) to improve our theoretical understanding of
compact objects, whether isolated or in binaries, in general relativity and in
modified theories of gravity. The PI's group is part of the European Union-
funded Research and Innovation Staff Exchange (RISE) Action "Strong Gravity and
High-Energy Physics" (2015- 2020), which includes 8 nodes in Europe, the United
States, Canada and Japan. This network will ensure that the students and
postdocs funded by this proposal will be trained in a vibrant international
environment.