* 1841494
* Planning IUCRC at LSU &amp; Agricultural and Mechanical College:  Center for Innovations in Structural Integrity Assurance (CISIA)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Michael Khonsari, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2021
* USD 15,000.00

Louisiana State University (LSU) and Louisiana Tech University (LA Tech) propose
to establish the Center for Innovations in Structural Integrity Assurance
(CISIA). Structural integrity and reliable life prediction of infrastructure and
mechanical components have relevance in every public and private sector, ranging
from oil &amp; gas to aerospace to construction to energy processing industries.
In addition to fundamental research for establishing linkages between material
properties, infrastructure performance, and structural integrity ?which is
beyond the scope of most industrial R&amp;D organizations of today? the academic
and industrial members of CISIA will work in concert to produce engineers who
are trained in state-of-the-art facilities to utilize modern methods of
structural health monitoring and analysis. These engineers will join a highly-
qualified and productive workforce that significantly enhances the global
competitiveness of U.S. industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LSU site focuses on
structural integrity and materials innovation, with emphasis on multiscale
materials characterization/testing and multiscale physics-based
modeling/simulation, to conduct research on component fatigue, wear, life-time
assessment, and non-destructive accelerated testing. By integrating validated
diagnostics, machine learning, and data-driven decision making, CISIA will be
well-positioned to elucidate and translate the links between new materials,
manufacturing processes, service histories, and their collective impact on
reliability across all U.S. industrial sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.