* 1841437
* Planning IUCRC at SDSMT:  Center for Solid-State Green Electric Power Generation and Storage (CEPS)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Zhengtao Zhu, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The NSF IUCRC Center for Solid-State Green Electric Power Generation and Storage
(CEPS) is based on long-term partnerships between universities, industry,
national laboratories, and state and federal institutions. The Center seeks to
provide solutions for safe, high efficiency, and eco-friendly sustainable solid-
state energy storage. This all-solid-state energy storage technology is
important for portable, automotive, space, and military applications. The
prospective Center will conduct research to expand the fundamental scientific
knowledge related to charge transfer in solid state applications. This research
will enable, facilitate, and advance the design, synthesis, and manufacturing of
the all-solid-state glass-ceramic materials used for solid-state energy storage.
The faculty associated with the Center will also mentor young scientists
providing a broad multidisciplinary educational experience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The prospective Center focuses on advancing understanding
of fundamental mechanisms that take place in novel super-fast solid-state glass-
ceramic conductors under electric transient conditions and correlation of these
mechanisms. New knowledge and scientific contributions to the field of solid-
state ionics will be generated through the following: 1) Mechanisms of micro-
and nanostructural evolution of novel nano-architectures at atomic scale; 2)
Understanding mass and charge transfer mechanisms by in-situ operando studies;
3) Self-charging mechanisms within intrinsically integrated solid-state energy
storage multilayer structures involving perovskite solar cells; 4) New
miniaturization technology leading to safe, human-friendly, and long-lasting
solid-state energy storage systems for medical applications; and 5) Solid-state
energy storage integration into green power generation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.