* 1841780
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC)
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Ranadip Pal, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 07/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The Fifth International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling,
Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC 2018) will be held in Washington, D.C., August
29, 2018. The workshop will be organized in conjunction with the 9th Association
for Computing Machinery (ACM) Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational
Biology, and Health Informatics (ACM-BCB 2018). CNB-MAC 2018 is a continuation
of the first, second, third and fourth CNB-MAC workshops in 2014, 2015, 2016 and
2017, which have been successfully organized in conjunction with ACM-BCB 2014
(in Newport Beach, CA), ACM-BCB 2015 (in Atlanta, GA), ACM-BCB 2016 (in Seattle,
WA) and ACM-BCB 2017 (in Boston, MA) respectively. The continuing partnership
with ACM-BCB will enhance the visibility of the workshop and attract researchers
from various disciplines across engineering, computer science, statistics,
biology, and medicine. This project will provide travel support for eight
graduate students to attend CNB-MAC 2018, present their latest research
findings, and actively engage in interactions with other researchers in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CNB-MAC 2018 aims to provide an international
scientific forum for presenting recent advances in computational network biology
and boost the awareness of the importance of rigorous mathematical modeling in
transforming big biomedical data into reproducible and meaningful scientific
knowledge. One of the missions of CNB-MAC that is of foremost importance is to
foster next-generation scientists in the emerging field of computational network
biology. The workshop aims to offer research talks to provide future research
directions for participating graduate students and post-doctoral researchers,
especially women and minorities. Utilizing this award, CNB-MAC 2018 will provide
travel awards to encourage graduate and undergraduate students to participate in
the workshop and present their latest research
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.