* 1841482
* Planning IUCRC at Indiana University:  Center for Environmental Sustainability through Insect Farming (CEStIns)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Andrea Liceaga, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 01/31/2020
* USD 14,926.00

Food demand from the growing human population is expected to increase 100% over
the next 40 years; however, predicted growth in agriculture production will fail
to meet demand by ~40%. The inability to meet future food demands places more
pressure on the one billion individuals currently underfed and living in
substandard conditions throughout the world. These limitations will manifest
into amplified social pressures such as, but not limited to, increased rates of
disease, demand for land and water resources, and a lack of agricultural
entrepreneurship, which only further weakens the global economy. A sustainable
method (i.e., practical and economical) for remediating agricultural waste,
while producing high value protein is essential to the long-term health of
ecosystems and agriculture. One solution is the utilization of insect farming to
convert organic wastes, which will potentially produce alternate resources of
monetary value for the farmer. Insect farming can produce enormous amounts of
protein and lipids that can be used in a variety of commodity settings (e.g.,
feed production, compost, biofuels, human food in some cases). Additionally,
this production of alternative protein sources is less environmentally straining
than most currently used methods in terms of reduced arable land, water usage
and reduced emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center for Environmental
Sustainability through Insect Farming (CESTIns) will be comprised of three sites
(Indiana University-Purdue University in Indianapolis [IUPUI], Texas A&amp;M
AgriLife Research [TAMU], and Mississippi State University [MSU]), with each
site specializing in a specific area of research. The IUPUI site will be focused
on the genetics and genomics of the insect systems, evaluating the heritability
of traits, a determination of the genetic contribution to traits, protein and
other nutrients' extraction methods, and the public's perception and attitudes
towards insects as food and feed. IUPUI will work with the other sites to
integrate research thrusts across the three sites with MSU and TAMU focusing on
insect biology, microbiology, and engineering and feed trials. Through this
research, new knowledge and technologies that fill critical scientific and
industrial gaps that relate to the insect farming as related to livestock and
aquaculture production. Further, all three sites will work with strains produced
by Industry as well as strains developed internally as a means to optimize mass
production. Laboratory and field-based experiments will also engage
interdisciplinary expertise in microbiology, engineering, chemistry, food
science, physiology, and vertebrate biology with cutting edge
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.