* 1841031
* SBIR Phase I:  A  Plasma Heat Engine for Efficient Production of Fusion Energy
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Richard Nebel, TIBBAR PLASMA TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,780.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project technology has potential to be transformative in power
generation. The ultimate goal of this project is to produce aneutronic fusion
energy in a system that is small, simple and inexpensive. This system will
produce power that is as clean as renewable energy while simultaneously removing
the need for energy storage that is required for intermittent sources like wind
and solar power. It utilizes new, innovative physics which has not been
incorporated in fusion devices before.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to study a plasma-based fusion device which has two rings that
oscillate in the axial and radial directions. The rings will be confined in an
axial harmonic oscillator potential. The two rings collide with one another
axially when both rings have their maximum axial velocities. Fusion occurs
primarily from the relative velocities of the rings, not from the thermal energy
in the plasma. This will allow for the use of advanced aneutronic fuels. The
primary goal of the phase I is to evaluate the theoretical feasibility of this
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.