* 1841800
* CAREER: Teaching Machines to Design Self-Assembling Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Andrew Ferguson, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 05/31/2020
* USD 90,001.00

TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education in the understanding and design of
self-assembling biomaterials. Self-assembly of structured aggregates by the
spontaneous organization of their constituent building blocks is prevalent in
the natural world, and is an attractive route to fabricate artificial materials
with desirable properties that cannot be easily produced by other means. The
design of building blocks programmed to self-assemble custom materials is a
grand challenge in materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, the PI
will integrate statistical mechanics theory with nonlinear machine learning
algorithms to establish a new theoretical and computational approach to
understand and program the self-assembly of nanostructured biomaterials. Using
these tools, the PI will extract from molecular simulations the pathways and
mechanisms by which building blocks self-assemble into structured aggregates.
This methodology overcomes a key scientific challenge by integrating
thermodynamics and kinetics in a unified framework that identifies both what
stable aggregates form (thermodynamics) and how they assemble (kinetics and
mechanisms). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collective order parameters unveiled by
this approach are good descriptors of the slow dynamical motions driving
assembly, and present a natural parameterization for kinetically meaningful free
energy landscapes that link building block properties to collective assembly
behavior. By "sculpting" the landscape topography through rational manipulation
of building block structure and chemistry the PI's group will program the
assembly of desired structures that are thermodynamically stable and kinetically
accessible (design).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will apply a new approach to
three technologically important self-assembling biomaterials: 1) "patchy
colloid" polyhedral clusters for small molecule encapsulation, 2) ultra-short
peptide mineralization templates for silica nanotubes for controlled drug
release, heavy metal ion adsorption, and catalysis, and 3) antimicrobial peptide
amphiphile nanostructures for antibiotic resistant bacteria. This work will
establish new basic understanding and control of materials assembly, and
accelerate development of new structural and functional biomaterials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integrated education and outreach plan incorporates
the scientific outcomes into education and outreach, and supports graduate
training, undergraduate research, and mentoring of underrepresented minority
groups. The PI will create a new materials science course to equip the next
generation workforce with computational tools, support undergraduate students in
performing portions of the work, and promote the recruitment, retention, and
success of students of color through mentorship of minority students and high
school outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NONTECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a theoretical and
computational research program to design microscopic building blocks with the
ability to spontaneously self-organize into materials with desirable properties.
This way of making materials is known as "bottom-up self-assembly", as opposed
to more familiar "top-down" manufacturing. Imagine if it will be possible one
day to design molecules with just the right shape and properties so that shaking
them in a flask spontaneously self-assembled a solar cell! In this work, the PI
will combine ideas from the fields of thermodynamics and machine learning
(sometimes known as artificial intelligence) to establish a new tool to allow
computers to learn both what structures can be formed by a particular building
block, and how they assemble. The PI will then flip this problem to use our tool
to help reverse-engineer building blocks to assemble custom materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's group will apply these tools to the design of
three useful biological materials: 1) micron-sized particles possessing
directional sticky patches that assemble polyhedral clusters to hold and deliver
small molecules, 2) short peptides that assemble networks to template the
synthesis of silica nanotubes for drug delivery, cleanup of heavy metal
pollutants, and catalysis of chemical reactions, and 3) longer peptides that
assemble into nanometer sized rods that can kill antibiotic resistant bacteria
such as the MRSA "superbug".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports an
integrated research and education program in which the scientific results from
this work will enrich and enhance undergraduate and graduate classes, and high
school outreach activities. Undergraduate students will directly participate in
the scientific research by working with the PI during the summer months. The PI
will also design and teach a new class providing hands-on experience in the
computational materials modeling, analysis, and design, and maintain his
commitment to promote the recruitment and success of students of color through
mentorship of undergraduate and graduate minority students.