* 1841112
* Phase II IUCRC at University of Southern Mississippi Center for Science Center for Marine Fisheries (SCeMFiS)
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Eric Powell, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,206,156.00

The Science Center for Marine Fisheries (SCeMFiS) uses academic and commercial
finfish and shellfish fisheries resources to address scientific problems
limiting sustainable fisheries. SCeMFiS reflects both a continuing expansion of
industry-supported research in an era of increased science rigor in management,
and the importance of synergistic collaboration between academics, industry, and
regulatory agencies in complex management decisions. Phase II will focus
research efforts on: (1) precautionary management that maintains quotas below
sustainable levels, thereby limiting economic value and jobs, (2) the influence
of climate change on sustainable management and long-range planning, (3)
resolution of multiple use conflicts (both spatial and over multi-decadal time
frames) between fisheries and energy production, and (4) ecosystem management
with a focus on forage fish and ecosystem trophic structure. SCeMFiS will
develop essential biological data on fish stocks; improve models of sampling
design, population dynamics, and fishery performance; evaluate trends in stock
structure and their relation to genetics, physiology and sexual dimorphism; and
improve approaches to fishing to reduce discards through gear innovation and
modifications in fleet deployment. SCeMFiS offers the convergence of
capabilities from a range of oceanographic and marine biological disciplines
that is essential to meet the challenges faced by fisheries management.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-decadal evolution in fisheries management has
formalized the criteria for sustainability and developed numerical models to
achieve this goal; but success is limited by insufficient information on fish
and shellfish stocks and insufficient development of numerical applications to
meet challenges posed by rapid climate change that continues to expose the
limitations of present-day data resources and assessment, exacerbating the gap
between data availability and data resource needs. SCeMFiS' capabilities
encompass the range of oceanographic, fisheries, and marine biological
disciplines essential for addressing the data resource and analytical challenges
faced by modern-day fisheries. SCeMFiS fosters basic and applied research in the
community dynamics, ecology, and environment of the continental shelf. Examples
include obtaining the first age-frequency distributions for the US ocean quahog
stock, the oldest living non-colonial animals, the first benthic survey east of
Nantucket to identify a range shift in surfclams produced by climate change, a
software package for evaluation of the adequacy of survey sampling design, and
basic biological data on forage fish such as menhaden. These examples show the
nexus between applied research directed at basic questions of fishery management
and basic research directed at understanding the pelagic, demersal, and benthic
realms of the continental shelf.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.