* 1841523
* Phase I at IUCRC TTU:  Center for Wind Hazard and Infrastructure Performance (WHIP)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Jean-Paul Pinelli, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 01/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

The United States is annually impacted by windstorms, causing large numbers of
fatalities and injuries and severe damage to residential, commercial, and
industrial buildings as well as to power, communication, transportation, water
and other lifeline systems. Insured property losses exceeded $300 billion over
the last twenty years while total losses are estimated to be twice that number.
The goal of the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for
Wind Hazard and Infrastructure Performance (WHIP) is to enhance the resiliency
of buildings and infrastructure against hurricanes, tornadoes, and other
windstorms. Findings generated from WHIP Center research and implemented by its
industry partners will contribute to community resiliency against wind hazards
while enhancing the economic competitiveness of the U.S. and the well-being of
its citizens. Students will interact with industry partners, understand their
needs, and obtain both academic and professional training. The WHIP Center will
be promoted and grow in size and impact by attracting additional industry
members and collaborating institutions. It is envisioned as a national center
that will address multiple thrusts in the National Windstorm Impact Reduction
Program (NWIRP). The concept of disaster resiliency will be advanced among
industries, government agencies, and the public at large through publications,
and social media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WHIP Center will adopt a broad-based
approach aimed at serving its members, who are concentrated in the insurance,
risk modeling, and construction industries. Its major research themes are: a)
wind hazards assessments; b) estimation of exposure and vulnerability of
buildings and infrastructures; and c) improvement of community resilience.
Within these themes the Industry Advisory Board (IAB) will select the projects
based on their priorities and the Center?s faculty specialties and expertise.
Texas Tech University (TTU), as one of founding sites of the WHIP Center, has
had an ongoing wind related research program for forty-eight years and supports
a broad array of facilities including Ka-band mobile radars, 200m met tower,
low-rise test building, wind tunnel, tornado simulator, and debris impact
facility. The projects will leverage these facilities along with analytical
models to build a strong linkage to fundamental research and technological
innovation. Dual-Doppler radar and in-situ anemometry can measure and validate
microscale surface winds in landfalling hurricanes. Fragility curves generated
from tornado simulator could be quickly transitioned into design standards and
building codes. Aerodynamic database of wind tunnel data would help formulating
probability distributions of pressure on building components for differentiating
wind-water damage in hurricanes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.