* 1841336
* Collaborative Research:  EAGER SitS:  Automated Imaging Platform for In Situ Sensing and Analysis of Roots, Fungi, and Soil Solution Chemistry
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Rebecca Neumann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 12/31/2022
* USD 109,528.00

Understanding how plant roots and soils interact is critical to proper
management of global water, carbon, and nutrient cycles. Studying processes that
occur below the soil surface, however is challenging. Getting the necessary
information can be laborious and usually means disturbing the soil. Developing
inexpensive methods to study soil without disturbing it is crucial for effective
soil management. This project will develop a new soil sensor system that can
automatically detect changes in roots and soil chemistry with little soil
disturbance. This new sensor will use affordable, commercially available
components, and will automatically collect and process data. The system will
allow direct comparisons of root activity and soil chemistry, which is currently
not possible in the field. Final designs and software will be made publicly
available to help other scientists advance understanding of roots and soils.
This project will also engage undergraduate students in research and data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop the new sensor system, project
researchers will modify and combine two existing technologies: minirhizotrons
(clear plastic tubes installed in the soil that allow repeat imaging of plant
roots) and planar optodes (two-dimensional optical sensors that fluoresce at
varying intensities based on the dissolved concentration of the chosen analyte).
Outside sections of standard acrylic minirhizotron tubes will be impregnated
with chemical-sensitive dyes, enabling side-by-side imaging of roots and analyte
concentrations along the length of the minirhizotron tube. Field application of
minirhizotrons and planar optode technology is currently limited by the size and
cost of imaging equipment and the cost of labor associated with image collection
and analysis. The developed system will address these shortcomings by using 1)
an automated camera system, built with off-the-shelf components, that will be
small enough to fit in the inside of minirhizotron tubes and capable of imaging
both roots and analyte concentrations, and 2) open-source software, developed by
project researchers, to automatically collect, process, and analyze image data.
The system (hardware and software) will be tested and refined based on
performance in two contrasting environments, a remote thermokarst bog in Alaska
and an easily accessible production agriculture field in
Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.