* 1841271
* EAGER: CRA-W Programs for Partnerships in the BPCnet Pilot
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Erik Russell, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,676.00

The Computing Research Association's Committee on the Status of Women in
Computing Research (CRA-W) proposes a project to pilot mechanisms that allow
individual computer science and engineering (CSE) researchers to partner with
its most successful flagship programs: Distributed Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (DREU), Collaborative Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(CREU), and Discipline-Specific Workshops (DSWs). These programs have helped to
increase the numbers and successes of women and members of underrepresented
groups who earn advanced degrees and pursue CSE research careers in academia,
industry, or national labs. To date, they have been run with a relatively small
group of dedicated volunteers from the CSE research community. Now CRA-W aims to
expand the reach of those programs by involving more CSE researchers as
partners. The proposal is in response to and in alignment with the effort
undertaken by the Computer and Information Systems and Engineering (CISE)
Directorate to increase and support the broadening participation in computing
(BPC) activities among more of its awardees (NSF DCL
17-110).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRA-W's DREU, CREU and DSW programs have operated
successfully and at-scale for many years. This work will engage a broader set of
CISE-funded researchers in their operation. A researcher on a CISE-funded
project , for example, could partner to send and/or receive a DREU student for a
summer research project, or to support a CREU research team from their own
university or a neighboring university, college or community college, or to host
or contribute in some substantive way to the organization of a new DSW. This
project will prepare the programs and their operational infrastructure (e.g.
applications and management software) for the greater scale (both operationally
and in terms of evaluation) that the new CISE effort is expected to
require.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by NSF INCLUDES, which
focuses on catalyzing the Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM) enterprise to collaboratively work for inclusive
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.