* 1841506
* Phase I IUCRC at Maryland:  Advanced Mammalian Biomanufacturing Innovation Center (AMBIC)
* ENG,EEC
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2021
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 11/30/2021
* USD 449,999.00

Biopharmaceuticals, such as insulin or cancer-targeting antibodies, are life-
saving medicines that are 'bio'manufactured from biological sources, including
genetically-modified living cells. Importantly, these complex molecules cannot
be manufactured by automated synthetic chemical processes. Instead, they can be
biomanufactured by cells optimally grown in bioreactors. The Advanced Mammalian
Biomanufacturing Innovation Center (AMBIC) is developing enabling technologies,
knowledge, design tools and methods that fast-track advances in
biomanufacturing. AMBIC is an industry-led consortium of companies, academic
institutions, and federal agencies that is addressing biomanufacturing-related
challenges by injecting solutions that enhance speed, reliability,
predictability, and product quality (including safety and efficacy), while
maintaining flexibility and potentially lowering cost. There are three main
research thrusts within AMBIC: (i) understanding industrially-relevant biology
so that manufacturing practices can leverage this emerging knowledge to control
biological processes for optimal biopharmaceuticals production, (ii) advanced
process monitoring and control systems that enable streamlined and effective
manufacturing operations, and (iii) creating consensus industry-wide best
practices and standards to most effectively utilize manufacturing inputs so that
products will readily pass regulatory inspection and review. In this way, the
health and security of the US are positively impacted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; As
AMBIC investigators develop new and enhanced production processes, cell lines,
cell growth media, and process analytical technologies, a state-of-the-art
bioprocessing suite within the University of Maryland (UMD) Site and joint with
the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) will be used as a
recognized testbed. AMBIC researchers will also work with Maryland's Center of
Excellence in Regulatory Science and Innovation (M-CERSI), a regulatory science
research center joint with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Scores of
biopharmaceuticals companies have biotherapeutics products that are regulated by
the FDA and rely on standards and measurements enabled by NIST. The UMD Site
helps to integrate these federal agencies into the AMBIC center. The UMD Site
will also bring powerful new analytical methodologies including wireless real
time process data acquisition and in situ product measurement tools for
embedding into advanced reactor control methodologies. Perhaps most importantly,
a diverse set of students from a variety of academic backgrounds (chemistry,
materials science, chemical and bioengineering, process control) working to
advance manufacturing practice will be readily accepted by the industry and will
be the catalyst for its future. As AMBIC grows, owing to many participants
throughout the US working together to chart the future, it will be a focal point
for U.S. biomanufacturing for the next two decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by the following Programs:&lt;br/&gt;Cellular &amp;
Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical Biochemical
Environment and Transport (CBET) - Engineering (ENG)
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;Systems and Synthetic Biology Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) - Biological Sciences Directorate
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.