* 1841517
* Phase II IUCRC Michigan State University:  Center for Identification Technology Research
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Arun Ross, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 09/30/2024
* USD 402,424.00

The Center for Identification Technology Research (CITeR) is an Industry-
University Cooperative Research Center (IUCRC) focusing on the development of
technology, such as biometrics, for the automated recognition of individuals.
Application domains for this technology include cybersecurity, border security,
healthcare, banking, law enforcement, forensics, access control, autonomous
vehicles, consumer electronics, e-commerce, robotics, e-voting and national ID
cards. CITeR seeks to strengthen the fundamentals of Identity Science whilst
addressing practical challenges encountered by operational systems in the field.
Besides embracing a cutting-edge research agenda, CITeR will also engage in
various educational and outreach activities to a diverse audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michigan State University (MSU) will expand the research
portfolio of the Center for Identification Technology Research (CITeR) by
leveraging the expertise of its faculty in multiple areas including AI, machine
learning, computer vision, security, forensics, biosensors, mobile computing,
autonomous vehicles, genomics, and medical imaging. To facilitate this, MSU will
work with industry and government stakeholders whose partnership will be
instrumental in furthering the frontiers of human identification technology.
This collaborative framework will broaden CITeR's leadership role in
transitioning biometric research into practice and influence the development of
policies, including those related to the security and privacy of personal
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The active involvement of graduate and undergraduate
researchers will ensure the development of a strong workforce in identification
technology - consisting of visionaries, leaders, educators, researchers,
professionals, and administrators. Collaboration with experts from other fields
such as forensics, anthropology, nanotechnology, literary neuroscience,
bioinformatics, and health sciences, will expand the domain-of-influence of the
technology and create novel opportunities for inter-disciplinary research and
education. MSU researchers involved with the Center will promote the
participation of underrepresented groups in research and education by launching
new programs. In addition, researchers will be encouraged to showcase their
findings to middle school and high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CITeR
products such as research portfolios, peer-reviewed publications, public-domain
software, datasets, and opinion articles will be maintained at the following
URL: https://citer.clarkson.edu/. This website will also host resources such as
tutorials about the technology; demos and videos to enhance public awareness of
the technology; information about various CITeR-related activities, including
community programs; and schedules of lab tours to engage school students with
the technology. The website will also facilitate focused dialogues with
stakeholders in order to further the impact of CITeR. This is expected to
generate an ecosystem where the technology intersects with the community in a
useful manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.