* 1841960
* Spray 2.0: Development and technology transition of a next-generation underwater glider
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Daniel Rudnick, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,475,106.00

Underwater gliders are autonomous underwater vehicles that profile vertically by
changing buoyancy while flying horizontally on wings. In the hands of a few
expert groups, underwater gliders have proved to be fully operational. However,
the technology is challenging for new users, limiting the impact of underwater
glider observations on ocean sciences. The overarching goal of this proposal is
to develop a next-generation underwater glider that will be accessible to a
wider range of users. A critical step toward this goal is the transition to
commercial production, sales, and customer support. An objective of this effort
is to fashion a seamless transition from development to commercial availability.
The anticipated outcome is a commercially available and supported Spray 2
underwater glider, with lowered barriers to entry for new users, and higher
levels of support, documentation, and user-level software tools. This will
reduce the set of skills necessary to successfully operate the glider, and
improve research outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A number of technical objectives
will guide the development of the Spray 2 underwater glider. One of the factors
holding back the wider use of gliders is the relative difficulty of service. A
recurring issue with gliders, as with all oceanographic instruments, is the need
for minor refurbishment and repair in the field. An objective of this effort is
to ease servicing by making such components as batteries and sensors simpler to
swap. Efficiency for gliders is surely achieved through missions with greater
endurance. An objective is to enhance performance as measured by range through
water. First-generation underwater gliders were designed to achieve long
duration missions by limiting drag through a streamlined shape, and by moving
slowly. The requirement for a smooth shape puts limitations on the sensor
payload. Next-generation gliders will make the ability to carry sensors more
central to their design. An objective of the development is to create a modular
approach to the integration of new sensors, and to allow sensors to occupy
locations on the glider with access to clean flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.