* 1841882
* Collaborative research:  Calibration of deep-sea coral paleoproxies for nutrients, carbonate ion, and temperature
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Robert Sherrell, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 03/31/2023
* USD 240,654.00

The ocean exchanges heat, moisture, and carbon dioxide with the atmosphere and
plays a large role in earth's climate, both in the past and present day. This
project seeks to understand and quantify physical and chemical properties of the
deep ocean in the past by developing geochemical tools to analyze trace elements
in the fossil skeletons of deep-sea corals. This approach has the potential to
reveal how critical regions of the deep ocean changed in nutrient and carbon
content, as well as temperature, over the last glacial cycle, in ways that have
not been possible previously. The project will be carried out in collaboration
with Spanish colleagues in Barcelona, who are experts in the maintenance of
deep-sea corals in aquarium culture. The research team will grow living cultures
of the solitary coral species Desmophyllum dianthus over a period of months to
years, while carefully controlling the chemical composition and temperature of
the seawater in which they grow. By calibrating the composition of the calcium
carbonate skeletons of these organisms relative to tightly controlled seawater
properties in the laboratory and in the modern ocean, the researchers will
develop quantitative relationships that enable analysis of well-dated fossil
corals and inference of the properties of the seawater in which the ancient
corals grew. Such fossils can be collected from the sea bottom and dated. Large
collections have been archived from the waters around New Zealand, a critical
region for ocean-atmosphere interactions. Knowing the seawater properties from
archived and new seawater measurements in this region will allow the principal
investigators to test the conclusions found in the lab against relationships
seen in corals growing in the natural ocean. The goal is to develop tools to
establish the degree to which atmospheric carbon dioxide was controlled over the
last glacial cycle by ocean productivity and gas exchange. The project will
support a PhD student and facilitate international exchange in addition to
training K-12 teachers. Overall, the project contributes to technical expertise
development in the US and will allow an improved understanding of how our
changing ocean affects global climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
collaborative project, a chemical paleoceanographer and a marine
microgeochemistry expert will collaborate to carry out an extensive laboratory
experiment that will take advantage of a large (&gt;150 individuals) collection
of living D. dianthus, currently in culture at the Institut de Ciencies del Mar-
Barcelona under automatically-controlled seawater chemistry and temperature.
Laser ablation ICP-MS micro-geochemical techniques will be used to calibrate
precisely the skeletal P/Ca (nutrient), Ba/Ca ("nutrient-type"), U/Ca (carbonate
ion) and Mg/Li (temperature) proxies, and to investigate their secondary
sensitivities to pH, feeding rate, calcification rate, and temperature. A
previously unexploited collection of live-collected (dredged) D. dianthus
corals, harvested over a broad range of hydrographically well-characterized
subtropical and subantarctic waters around New Zealand, will also be analyzed
for these proxies. The project will thus result in complementary laboratory and
field-based calibrations of these new geochemical paleo-proxies, that can then
be used in future efforts to analyze precisely dated collections of fossil
corals. The unique set of samples from ongoing culture experiments and open-
ocean archives, combined with the capabilities of a state-of-the-art laser
ablation ICP-MS system and precision micro-milling techniques, will reduce
significantly the uncertainties in calibrations for an important set of D.
dianthus-based paleoproxies. This work will serve as a cornerstone for future
coral paleo-reconstruction studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.