* 1841752
* I-Corps:  Scalable Storage of Whole Slide Images and Fast Retrieval of Tiles for Next-Generation Image Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Praveen Rao, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 04/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is pivoted
around the emerging whole slide imaging market segment in digital pathology. The
digital pathology market is predicted to reach over $800 million by 2025. The
motivation of this project stems from the gigabyte size of whole slide images
(WSIs), which are digital images of glass slides produced at near optical
resolution. With rapid increase in the number of WSIs produced by hospitals and
pathology labs, the storage and management of WSIs has become an urgent problem
to tackle for next-generation image analytics. The commercial viability of the
project can significantly impact researchers, medical professionals, software
developers, and IT staff who wish to manage large number of WSIs using modern
cluster computing and big data techniques. Thus, next-generation image analytics
(e.g., using deep learning) for automatic detection and analysis of cellular and
morphological features in human tissues can be performed faster on large numbers
of WSIs. The potential societal benefit of the project includes enabling
improved diagnosis of diseases by pathologists using next-generation image
analytics and the creation of a tech startup leading to new jobs. This project
will provide training to two Ph.D. students from underrepresented groups in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on a software
technology that aims to solve the fundamental problem of scalable storage of
WSIs and fast retrieval of tiles using a commodity cluster and big data
techniques. The value proposition of the technology is efficient and cost-
effective storage of large-scale WSIs and fast retrieval of tiles to enable
next-generation image analytics for human disease diagnosis. The technology
encompasses intelligent data partitioning using space-filling curves, in-memory
data structures, and effective organization of tiles to enable fast retrieval of
tiles during image analysis. It employs space-efficient storage formats to
maximize storage efficiency. On an average, it required a few seconds to
retrieve a single tile on 80 WSIs using a 16-node cluster. Therefore, we believe
next-generation image analytics on WSIs (e.g., using deep learning) can run
faster on large number of WSIs, which can consume terabytes of storage, through
faster access of image tiles. As the technology relies on commodity hardware and
open source software, it is cost-effective and can be easily deployed as a
product or a service. The technology has the potential to advance the state-of-
the-art in WSI storage and management using a big data
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.