* 1841061
* Measurement of Negative Mentoring in Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Erin Dolan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Undergraduate research experiences are known to foster students' personal and
professional growth. Prior studies have demonstrated that positive mentoring
experiences have positive effects on undergraduate researchers. However, the
prevalence and impact of negative mentoring experiences have not been
systematically investigated. Such experiences would be expected to have
detrimental impacts on the undergraduate researchers. This project aims to
develop, test, and use new survey instruments to measure the incidence and
impact of negative mentoring on undergraduate researchers in the life sciences.
Analysis of the results will provide information about the frequency of negative
mentoring, its effects on undergraduate student researchers, and possible
actions to reduce or prevent it. This project will also provide insights on the
effect of negative mentoring on undergraduates from backgrounds that are
historically under-represented or under-served. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to accomplish three major goals: define a construct of negative
mentoring in undergraduate research, produce a valid and reliable measure of
negative mentoring in undergraduate research, and conduct a preliminary
investigation of the impacts of negative mentoring. Following established
guidelines for developing new psychological measures, the project will begin by
interviewing a diverse group of undergraduate student researchers who have
experienced negative mentoring. Analysis of their responses will define a
construct of negative mentoring in undergraduate research. A large pool of
undergraduate students nationwide will take a draft survey based on this
construct. Results of this survey will provide preliminary insight into the
effects of negative mentoring and helping to inform refinements of the survey
instruments. Administering the refined survey instrument to undergraduate
student researchers nationwide will increase understanding of the impact of
negative mentoring on undergraduate research outcomes. This project has the
potential to yield insights and produce tools that could help improve the
quality of undergraduate research mentoring. This project will also test
interventions aimed at reducing or preventing negative mentoring and its
impacts. These results can contribute to improving undergraduate research
experiences so that their potential to build STEM talent and broaden
participation in STEM can be realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.