* 1841750
* Gravitational Effects on Rotating Stars and Deep Water Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Yilun Wu, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2021
* USD 102,214.00

This project aims to investigate several important mathematical questions
arising in the study of fluid flows that are significantly influenced by
gravity. Two major sources of these questions are models of rotating stars and
galaxies, and models of deep water waves in the ocean. The study of equilibrium
shape and density distribution of rotating stars is a classical question in the
history of mathematical physics. Early efforts beginning in the eighteenth
century were devoted to finding ellipsoidal shapes with constant density. In the
twentieth century, major progress was made by solving equations describing
compressible fluids, thus allowing a more realistic model of stars with variable
gaseous density. The mathematical method used to construct such solutions
involves putting the same amount of gas in different shapes and density
distributions, and finding one with the least physical energy. However, such a
method only provides proof for existence of solutions, without delivering too
much information on the shape of the star, or how the solution varies as the
rotation speed of the star varies. In this project, the investigator aims to
provide new existence proofs using a different method, which involves
continuously deforming the shape of a round, non-rotating star to arrive at a
rotating star solution. The new method is intended to return information about
shape and dependence on rotation speed. For deep water waves, the investigator
will study certain important model equations that describe internal waves below
the ocean surface as well as spectacular phenomena in the atmosphere, such as
the "Morning Glory" cloud seen in northeastern Australia. The internal waves
described by such models have practical significance; for example, internal
waves can interact with surface ocean waves to produce rogue waves that can
damage or destroy ocean vessels or fixed structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the project aims to prove existence of rotating star solutions to
the Euler-Poisson and Vlasov-Poisson equations, using an implicit function
theorem type perturbation technique. Apart from proving detailed analytical
estimates involving spaces adapted to the problem, the investigator will need to
study the linearized operator by proving a vanishing theorem about a certain
integro-differential equation for functions in the kernel. The research will
study continuation of the solution curve to faster rotation speed using
topological degree arguments, and discover possible breakdown mechanisms of the
solution curve. In addition, the investigator plans to examine the phenomenon of
mass bound on rotating white dwarf solutions to the Euler-Poisson equations,
using both variational methods and spectral analysis. For models involving deep
water waves, the project will explore the completely integrable aspect of the
Benjamin-Ono equation. Building on previous work, the investigator will study
existence, uniqueness, and asymptotic properties of the Jost solutions proposed
in the Fokas-Ablowitz inverse scattering transform. These questions are closely
related to the continuous spectrum of certain singular integral perturbations of
the derivative operator.