* 1841978
* AGEP National Research Conference 2020: Sustaining, Institutionalizing and Scaling AGEP Alliance Models and Initiatives
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Bennett Goldberg, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Leddy
* 12/31/2022
* USD 498,958.00

The AGEP National Research Conference 2020 was created in response to the NSF's
Alliances for Graduate Education and the Professoriate (AGEP) program
solicitation (NSF 16-552). The AGEP program seeks to advance knowledge about
models to improve pathways to the professoriate and the successes of URM
graduate students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty in specific STEM disciplines
and/or STEM education research fields. AGEP awardees develop, implement and
study, via integrated educational and social science research, Alliance Models
to transform the dissertator phase of doctoral education, postdoctoral training
and/or faculty advancement, and the transitions within and across the pathway
levels, of historically underrepresented minorities (URMs) in STEM and STEM
education careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the nation addresses a STEM
achievement gap between URM and non-URM undergraduate and graduate students, our
universities and colleges struggle to recruit, retain and promote URM STEM
faculty who serve as role models and academic leaders for URM students to learn
from, work with and emulate. Recent NSF reports indicate that URM STEM associate
and full professors occupy 8% of these senior faculty positions at all 4-year
colleges and universities, and about 6% of these positions at the nation's most
research-intensive institutions. This AGEP National Research Conference will
advance knowledge about initiatives that can be sustained, institutionalized and
scaled at US universities and colleges to advance URM graduate students,
postdoctoral scholars and faculty in STEM and STEM education academic
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference convening will bring together
hundreds of AGEP and non-AGEP awardees, as well as graduate students who are
conducting relevant research. The goals of the conference are: (1) This
conference will disseminate, adopt and adapt research findings, tools, and
program resources generated by AGEP Alliances; (2) Participants will
intentionally identify strategies within their institutional context that will
position AGEP-funded projects for sustained impact and institutional change; and
(3) Participants will engage in an innovative conference format that supports
their learning, builds their connections to colleagues across the AGEP Alliance
network, and creates a foundation from which they can take future action at
their institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two and half-day conference is
scheduled for March of 2020, in Boston, MA. In addition to research panels,
keynote addresses, and a poster session, there will be experiential learning
sessions designed to advance knowledge about the institutionalization,
sustainability and scaling of AGEP Alliance Models and their associated
initiatives. The proposed work includes both evaluation components and a
dissemination plan for broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.