* 1841704
* EAGER: Color, Vision, and Species Delimitation in the Jewel Beetles: From Opsin Proteins to Spectral Color
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Bodo Wilts, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,997.00

Vision has evolved multiple times within animals, but the processes driving this
evolution are only partially understood. This project investigates the evolution
of vision within beetles, the most diverse groups of life on the planet. Many
beetles are known to be significant agricultural pests and understanding how
these organisms perceive their surroundings and find mates may provide new
methods for controlling their spread. Jewel beetles (family name Buprestidae),
otherwise known as the metallic wood-boring beetles, are a large group of
charismatic insects that have captured the eye of artists, jewelry makers, and
scientists alike due to their broad diversity of iridescent coloration. Jewel
beetles also possess members of significant economic importance, most notably
the Emerald Ash Borer - an introduced pest species that is rapidly destroying
large numbers of ash trees in the U.S. Little is known about the genealogy of
jewel beetles, how color vision is achieved within the group, or how the
brilliant shell colors are formed. This project will reconstruct genealogical
relationships within the group using DNA sequence data and then use a novel
combination of experiments to better understand the physiological functions of
their visual proteins (opsins). Undergraduate and graduate students will be
trained in diverse field and laboratory approaches, including molecular,
phylogenetic, and physiological methods. A learning module based on results from
the research will also be developed for high school AP Biology courses in line
with state education standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jewel beetles are some of
the most well-known insects, but phylogenetic relationships within the group are
poorly understood. This research project will use transcriptomic data to
reconstruct phylogenetic relationships to provide the evolutionary framework
necessary to investigate the molecular components of color vision (e.g., opsin
proteins). The sensitivity of these visual proteins will then be tested through
expression in a model organism, Drosophila melanogaster, and morphological
analyses will be used to explore how colors and patterns on the exoskeleton are
formed. Using this novel combination of visual pigment protein transcriptomics,
ectopic visual pigment expression in HEK cells and Drosophila melanogaster, and
analysis of cuticular color, this integrative project will provide new insights
into the evolution of vision in a poorly known, yet agriculturally important,
group of beetles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.