* 1841419
* EAGER SitS:Smart Long-Lived Biosensors for Soil Monitoring Using Engineered Spores
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Sylvia Daunert, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 12/31/2022
* USD 356,998.00

This collaborative project between the University of Miami and the University of
Florida centers on the manufacture of novel rugged, inexpensive, long-lived
sensors to safely, quickly, and reliably monitor chemical and microbial
characteristics of soil for improved soil health and crop growth. These sensors
are based on engineered bacterial spores that emit light only when they detect
the presence of harmful chemicals and/or microorganisms in soil. These sensors
can serve as an alarm to agricultural workers to protect crops from these
threats. The sensors could potentially be employed widely in agricultural fields
via commercialization of the newly created technology. The researchers will use
the results of this project to attract and train students from diverse
backgrounds in engineering. If successful, this project will provide a valuable
tool to protect soil health, and in turn, help ensure the food security of the
Nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop sensors for
detecting dynamic chemical and microbial changes in soil, changes which are
critical for understanding soil ecosystems and improving soil health. Whole cell
biosensors (WCBs) for analytes in endospore-forming bacteria will be developed
and deployed in soil to monitor chemical and microbial characteristics. The use
of spores as storage elements provides a new means of preserving, packaging,
transporting, storing, and using WCBs in both mild and extreme environments the
field and remote locations with no easy access to laboratories. Three objectives
will be undertaken to achieve the goal of the project. The first objective is to
prepare WCBs for target analytes, followed by transformation into spore-forming
bacteria. These biosensors will be employed in simulated agricultural fields to
monitor soil chemical characteristics. For the second objective, existing WCBs
for quorum sensing molecules will be incorporated into endospore-forming
bacteria. The resulting biosensors will be used for determining a microbial
fingerprint and optimized to monitor changes in the soil microbial ecology. The
final objective is to validate the use of spore-based biosensors for soil
monitoring under variable conditions in a simulated agricultural field with
different types of soils. After sensing, sporulation will be induced, and the
sensing spores will be kept dormant until there is need for another detection
cycle. The spore sensor platform, along with state-of-the-art detection, will
yield transportable, cost-effective, easy-to-use, remotely addressable or in-
situ field tests. The spore sensors (1) are useful as tools for detection of
soil chemical/microbial characteristics; (2) can incorporate WCBs for analyte
detection; (3) are portable and rugged, capable of withstanding soil changes;
(4) require no special conditions for storage and use; (5) can be buried in soil
and respond to analytes when desired; (6) can be prepared at low-cost in an
efficient facile manner; and (7) provide a platform for preparation, storage,
transport and use of WCBs for monitoring the health of soils and plants growing
in agricultural soil ecosystems. The research lends itself to education of K-12,
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in interdisciplinary
research. Research progress will be disseminated through publications and
presentations at conferences. Graduate students from diverse backgrounds,
including those from underrepresented ethnic and socioeconomic groups, will be
trained to effectively communicate to a global audience through presentation of
core ideas in non-technical language. The spore sensors will be used to attract
students to the STEM field through presentations in schools, museums, and
science fairs. A site visit at an agricultural farm and use of sensors on-site
will be incorporated in a Bionanotechnology course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.