* 1841520
* Phase II I/UCRC [George Mason University]: Center for Spatiotemporal Thinking, Computing and Applications.
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2025
* Chaowei Yang, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/28/2025
* USD 2,476,834.00

We live in a four dimensional world with three spatial dimensions and one
temporal dimension. Understanding the nature of the spatiotemporal dimensions
integratively will help us better prepare for challenges facing us in the 21st
century and beyond: a) responding to climate change with better climate
simulations, b) mitigating asteroids' impact to our home planet like the
dinosaur-killer, c) resolving political disputations with spatiotemporal
understanding of the culture, boundaries, history, and future of relevant
nations, and d) equipping our future leaders with spatiotemporal thinking
capability and decision support tools. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Following the
success of Phase I spatiotemporal Industry-University Cooperative Research
Center (IUCRC) investigation as a collaboration among George Mason, Harvard, and
the University of California-Santa Barbara, the second phase of the center will
move forward with the mission to 1) build a national and international
spatiotemporal infrastructure; 2) develop, with industry and agency members, new
spatiotemporal technologies, solutions, tools, and software that will be easily
integrated with existing and future industry products and services; 3) improve
human intelligence by developing a set of spatiotemporal thinking methodologies
built into K-16 curriculum; and 4) improving human capabilities in responding to
grand scientific and engineering challenges. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Outreach
will be conducted to maximize the broader impacts: 1) collaborating closely with
more than four active members each year to develop relevant methodologies and
technologies; 2) disseminating research results to industry and government
agency members and through publications for adoption and broader impacts. 3)
working with leading associations to broadcast the research results and recruit
new members; 4) developing new course material and curriculum within existing
degree programs and broadcast for wider adoption; 5) continuing our diverse
traditions to include minorities and other underrepresented groups in this STEM
field; 6) making all results open source to benefit relevant domains nationally
and internationally.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The center will post all information
on an official website (https://www.stcenter.net/) and two content management
portals accessible through the official website. A project management website
will be utilized to share all project reports, working papers, presentations,
posters, and publications. The data and research results produced will be
integrated into the center's operational community cloud
(http://sites.cloud.gmu.edu/sthcp/index.php) to be maintained as a sustainable
resource for the center for long term sustainability. Source code developed in
the center will be open to the public using github.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.