* 1841301
* EAGER SitS:Multimodal gas sensor for in situ methane and carbon dioxide detection in Arctic soils
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Xiangqun Zeng, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2021
* USD 294,536.00

The Arctic tundra contains a large amount of soil organic matter (SOM), and
approximately half of Earth's SOM is associated with permafrost in high-latitude
ecosystems. Arctic SOM has been undergoing thawing and accelerated microbial
degradation as temperatures increase, producing large amounts of active organic
carbon and greenhouse gases (e.g., carbon dioxide and methane). It is vital to
measure current levels of these gas emissions from the tundra accurately, as a
baseline for future measurements and for more accurate modeling of likely
effects from the increased warming of Arctic SOM. However, the Arctic tundra is
a complicated multi-phase system, and soil temperatures may stay below freezing
for eight months or more every year, making the detection of soil gas emissions
extremely difficult under field conditions. Current sensor technologies are
inadequate for making accurate measurements of greenhouse gases in Arctic soils.
This project will develop a low-cost, low-power multimodal sensor that can
provide spatially and temporally expansive, continuous in situ measurements of
dynamic changes of soil carbon dioxide and methane across the Arctic over time.
The envisioned sensor will be small, inexpensive, and will need little power for
operation. It can be deployed across wide areas to obtain soil gas data in
natural conditions and will enable near-real-time reporting of field measurement
data year-round. Data from these sensors will help advance knowledge in several
disciplines, such as understanding the influence of permafrost warming on Arctic
soil carbon release, and the fundamental biogeochemical or carbon cycling
processes in the Arctic ecosystem. That new knowledge will help facilitate the
development of new ways of managing soils and natural resources in cold
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be carried out by an
established interdisciplinary team with complementary expertise to develop the
new sensor technology to address challenges in Arctic soil gas analysis. The key
innovation is the use of ionic liquids (ILs) as a selective solvent and
electrolyte for the development of miniaturized multimodal electrochemical and
piezoelectric quartz crystal microbalance (E-QCM) sensors to measure soil gases
in situ. ILs possess unique solvent and electrolyte properties that make them
suitable for use under Arctic conditions where conventional sensing materials
would be subject to both physical and chemical changes. The project will (1)
Develop a multimodal E-QCM sensor and sensor array for methane and carbon
dioxide detection under Arctic conditions; (2) Characterize and validate these
sensor arrays using synthetic Arctic soils with known composition; and (3)
Develop a rugged sensor package for in situ field tests in natural Arctic soils.
The new sensors are expected to operate under Arctic conditions, simultaneously
monitoring both electrochemical and piezoelectric signals of soil methane and
carbon dioxide with the redundancy, sensitivity, and selectivity required for in
situ measurement of soil gases in Arctic tundra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.