* 1842431
* EAGER: GeoMedia Institute
* GEO,RISE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Doug Prose, EARTH IMAGES FOUNDATION
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2021
* USD 359,973.00

This project seeks to create a new geoscience outreach institute that will
generate broadcast documentaries and videos about geoscience research and
provide hands-on training in media production to geoscience students and
researchers. This project addresses the need to increase public awareness about
the importance and significance of geoscience research done by a diverse,
dynamic group of researchers, and also addresses the need to attract and retain
a more diverse population of young people to the geoscience fields by offering
hands-on media training to college students and faculty that will increase their
skills in public communication in this increasingly media-oriented world. The
PIs for this project are veteran earth science filmmakers Doug Prose and Diane
LaMacchia of Earth Images Foundation, who have produced eighteen successful
documentaries for broadcast on PBS and internationally, and many shorter
geoscience focused videos, set in locations on every continent. They have also
mentored a number of geoscience students in media production techniques; some of
these students have gone on to utilize these skills in professional positions.
In addition to creating a mechanism for developing and producing in a timely
fashion both professional broadcast documentaries and student/researcher-
produced videos about geoscience research this project will also provide a
unique incentive to students from diverse backgrounds to participate in
geoscience research projects and field camps/schools, and while in the field
receive intensive media training from the PIs. The trainees will not only have
the opportunity to contribute content to a broadcast documentary and their own
video production, they will learn a valuable skill in communicating science to
the public using advanced production techniques, which will increase their
competitiveness as they seek new positions, and ultimately broaden the number
and diversity of geologists who can skillfully document important and exciting
geoscience research activities and thereby increase the quality and quantity of
accurate, credible media products about geoscience topics that raise public
awareness of the relevance, importance, and need for geoscience research and
knowledge. Focusing on diversity of gender, ethnicity, and economic background
among the students and researchers participating in this project will have the
impact of providing participants of differing perspectives with a skill that
will permit them to more effectively and creatively apply and express those
diverse perspectives in their own work, ultimately increasing the number and
diversity of voices that reach the public with the impact of engaging a broader,
more diverse audience with authoritative, relevant geoscience
information.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This pilot project addresses the need for
earth scientists to communicate more effectively with the public in today's
increasingly media-oriented world by developing an efficient mechanism for
generating compelling broadcast documentaries and videos about geoscience
research and by providing hands-on training in media production to a diverse
group of earth science students and researchers. PIs Doug Prose and Diane
LaMacchia of Earth Images Foundation are veteran earth science filmmakers who
have produced eighteen successful documentaries for PBS broadcast, set in
locations on all seven continents, as well as many shorter geoscience videos. As
part of their educational mission, on recent film shoots the PIs have begun
mentoring geoscience and other students in video production techniques. The
goals of this EAGER are to: 1. Create a mechanism for efficiently documenting
relevant new and ongoing research activities being carried out by a diverse
group of researchers; 2. Produce in a timely fashion both professional broadcast
documentaries and student/researcher-produced videos about geoscience research;
3. Provide a unique incentive to students from diverse backgrounds to
participate in geoscience research projects and field camps/schools; 4. Offer a
unique opportunity to widen students' and researchers' skill sets as
geoscientists to include communicating science to the public using video
production techniques; 5. Broaden the number and diversity of geoscience who can
skillfully document important and exciting geoscience research activities and
produce high-quality videos for the public. One broad impact of this project is
to increase the quality and quantity of accurate, credible media products about
geoscience topics that reach the public at large and raise public awareness of
the relevance, importance, and need for geoscience research and knowledge. This
project is also designed to get young students interested in acquiring the
capability to produce high quality videos for public audiences, so that they
ultimately embrace the idea of sharing their unique knowledge of geoscience
concepts with the public as a component of their careers as professional
geoscientists. Focusing on diversity of gender, ethnicity, and economic
background among the students and researchers participating in this project will
have the impact of providing participants with differing perspectives with a
skill that will permit them to more effectively and creatively apply and express
those diverse perspectives in their own work, ultimately increasing the number
and diversity of voices that reach the public with the impact of engaging a
broader, more diverse audience with authoritative, relevant geoscience
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.