* 1842925
* 13th International Conference on Nitride Semiconductors, To Be Held July 7-12, 2019, Bellevue, Washington
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

The proposed project seeks financial support for enhancing graduate student
participation, especially those who will attend their first national meeting and
those who belong to the underrepresented groups at a Conference to be held from
July 7 to 12, 2019 at Bellevue Washington. The "13th International Conference on
Nitride Semiconductors" will focus on a variety of III-Nitride semiconductor
materials and devices. The Conference will host world-renowned experts from
leading institutions around the world. An exhibition of industrial expertise
related to nitride semiconductor research will also take place at the
conference. The conference will foster advances in the leading research of
electronic, photonic and magnetic devices. Examples of them include Light
Emitting Devices (LEDs, LEDs, Laser Diodes, UV, VIS, IR); Electronic Devices
(RF, THz and Power Devices); Photovoltaics, Energy Harvesting and Photo
Detectors Sensors; Actuators and Acoustic Devices. Processing, Fabrication and
Thermal Management; Bulk Growth; Epitaxial Growth; Nanostructures and Nano-
Devices; Optical and Electronic Properties; Defect Characterization and
Engineering; Structural Analysis; Theory and Simulation; and New Materials and
Device Concepts will also be addressed. In addition to technical talks, the
organizers have also planned several plenary talks as well as 20 invited talks
and two poster sessions. There will be short 4-hour courses focused on important
topics of III-N research, including X-ray diffraction of GaN-related materials
and simulation and modeling of GaN LEDs and HEMTs. The conference is expected to
play a key role in identifying new directions for research. Exposing the next
generation of researchers to these important disciplines is critical for
learning how the new science and technology of semiconductors are
developing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.