* 1842729
* SBIR Phase I:  Incubating A Fourth-Sector Ecosystem With A Scalable Educational Crowdfunding Platform
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Diane Sontum, LOCAL CROWD, LLC, THE
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is focused on demonstrating the feasibility of an
innovative crowdfunding process to effectively support and grow the fourth
sector economy at the local community level. This fourth sector economy, a blend
of three traditional economic sectors (public, private and nonprofit) is poised
to solve many of the world's most difficult and complex social problems;
however, this sector cannot work effectively without a supportive ecosystem that
enables the creation, funding, and operation of organizations within it. This
project proposes an innovative Fourth Sector Ecosystem incubator that brings a
coordinated suite of services to local communities to engage them, educate them,
and provide financial capital through a crowdfunding platform. This project will
engage four communities in a pilot study designed to engage and educate key
leaders, energize advocacy for fourth-sector growth, and catalyze fourth-sector
social enterprises by offering capital access through crowdfunding. The
validation of this grass-roots scalable educational and participatory incubator
will enable communities to support local for-benefit businesses who will improve
the quality of life in their communities, create jobs, and contribute to the
economy, leading to expansion of this model across the nation and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation inherent in this
educational platform is the synergy between the components of its scalable,
turnkey process to provide a catalyst for fourth-sector business growth.
Innovative components include a robust, secure crowdfunding platform,
educational training for community leaders and businesses in fourth-sector
principles, assessment methods to evaluate/provide continuous improvement of the
process, gamification that rewards fourth-sector-supporting behaviors; and
network-building processes. The goals of this research are to determine the
performance, design and educational training specifications that will address
the needs of all stakeholders (e.g., entrepreneurs, community leaders,
contributors), and demonstrate the feasibility of this platform through a pilot
study in four communities. Methods will focus on continuous evaluation and
feedback from stakeholders in the four communities to determine best methods to
teach communities to manage their incubators, activate their communities to
participate, achieve campaign success, demonstrate improved learning outcomes
from the training, and increase the density and reciprocity of networks in the
pilot communities. Surveys and data will be collected and analyzed to determine
the effectiveness of each component in the process, from planning to
implementation to assessment, as shown through survey results, expansion of
networks, and funding raised by fourth sector enterprises using the crowdfunding
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.