* 1842614
* SBIR Phase I:  Transforming Complex Utility Transaction Management
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Rob Norris, ENERGYXCHAIN, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is empowering the 68 million U.S. natural gas consumers
to know their transaction status in real time, have more and continual control
of their transactions, settle transactions in increments less than the
industry?s current monthly accounting cycle and enjoy an extremely high level of
security. Their transaction cost will be reduced and speed increased, freeing
industry capacity and resources to be employed elsewhere at greater value. This
innovation will allow others in the natural gas industry to better consider
transaction processes and themselves innovate - employing many minds on industry
efficiency. This innovation will also have application to other industries
characterized by multiple complex, multi-party transactions; particularly the
electric utility industry and possibly providing the catalyst for more extensive
deregulation and consumer control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project proposes to discover how to transform complex natural gas utility
transaction management processes using Blockchain innovations and related
technologies across production, transmission, distribution and consumption
functions. The United States utility industry has operated in its present
physical form for more than a century. Over the past four decades the industry
has evolved through various policy and regulatory actions to open transaction
participation to thousands of parties. During the past two decades, digital
technologies enabled transaction functions to talk to each other and perform
some functions automatically. Despite this progress, utility transaction
management processes are essentially those created decades ago. They still
require significant human intervention, remain highly segmented and employ
little digital intelligence and security technology available today. The various
technologies now supporting the industry?s seven step transaction processes will
be mapped, assessed for Blockchain technology application and then consolidated
into a single platform. The key challenge is to create transformative technology
integrating the numerous other existing technology applications and data
exchange formats and protocols without succumbing to customization which then
mutes the transformative nature of the innovation and renders it ineffective as
a platform to subsequent industry innovation by multiple
parties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.