* 1842712
* RAISE-EQuIP: Integrated Silicon Photonics Platforms for Scalable Quantum Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Arash Mafi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 12/31/2023
* USD 793,998.00

Quantum information processing (QIP) relies on the extraction, processing and
manipulation, as well as transmission and detection of information by exploiting
quantum properties of light and matter. QIP is expected to be used to secure and
scale-up multiparty quantum computations to tackle computational problems that
currently remain outside the reach of computers, such as large-scale molecular
simulations for materials design and drug discovery; or it can connect a network
of distributed quantum sensors for ultraprecise measurements with applications
to biological imaging, gravitometry, and position navigation-timing. In a
general landscape of QIP, quantum communications plays a special role, because
it can be used to implement a secure data transmission network, leveraging the
concept of quantum cryptography, where the security of transmission is
guaranteed by the basic laws of quantum physics. Over the last decade, there has
been tremendous progress in science and technology related to the generation,
manipulation, storage, propagation, and detection of photons for QIP. Much of
this progress has been focused on developing individual device components that
satisfy the rather stringent requirements of QIP at the single-photon level.
Integrating these individual components into a complete quantum-communication
system with optimized operation requires an interdisciplinary approach. The move
beyond individual discrete components necessitates a new paradigm that will
integrate various components on a single chip. The main vision of this research
is to push the frontiers of engineering in quantum technologies by implementing
a silicon-based integrated platform and exploring the interactions of quantum
devices in a quantum network. In addition to the advancement of the new science
and technology, a major outcome will be the exposure of undergraduate and
graduate students working on this project to a broad range of topics in an
interdisciplinary environment. This broad teaching/research experience is a
platform to train the highly skilled workforce of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This transformative project will
integrate novel devices for the generation, manipulation, propagation, and
detection of single and entangled photons for quantum information processing in
a silicon photonics platform that can be used to implement a large-scale quantum
communication network. This is a highly interdisciplinary project that brings
together expertise in materials science and engineering; semiconductor
fabrication, processing, and devices; superconducting device physics; classical
nonlinear and quantum optics; and optical communications to solve technical
challenges for the development and realization of a scalable integrated quantum
communication platform. The research covers both design and fabrication of
single-photon and entangled photon pair sources, single-photon detectors, and
integrated channels to manipulate photons, as well as experiments to
characterize the quantum nature of the photonic states for implementation in
viable quantum communication protocols. The proposed integrated platform is very
promising for implementation in a quantum communication system network, as well
as in development and realization of large-scale systems. The individual
components and devices that will be used in the proposed research are quite
novel and amenable to scalable integration using standard semiconductor device
processing technologies. Superconducting quantum-dot light-emitting diodes,
whose operation is based on Cooper-pair interband transition in a semiconductor,
will be developed to generate single- and pair-photon states. For single-photon
detection, traveling-wave superconducting nanostripe single-photon detectors
will be developed and integrated in the device platform. The on-demand
electrically driven photon sources, as well as single-photon detectors, will be
used along with passive silicon nitride waveguides, all integrated on the
silicon substrate, to study various scenarios for quantum information processing
implementations, such as characterization of path-entangled photons, multi-qubit
entanglement, quantum state tomography, and, potentially, as a proof-of-concept
for quantum communication protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.