* 1842708
* EAGER: Type I: Data-Driven Analysis of Correlations between Chemical Structure and Electrical
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* David Ginger, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/28/2021
* USD 144,779.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY This EAGER award supports research and education involving
a materials research - data science collaboration kindled at the MATDAT18
Datathon event focused on utilizing data analytics to amplify the capabilities
of microscopies for materials. New scientific tools such as new kinds of
microscopes are creating ever larger volumes of data, often in new formats. New
computer programs are needed to make this data accessible to scientists and to
allow researchers to gain the most insight from the acquired data. This project
will focus on merging data science tools with new forms of microscopy. As a
short, exploratory project, this research will develop open-source data-science-
based tools to allow researchers to make better use of data coming from a new
infrared microscopy method when applied to soft plastic electronic materials in
the presence of electron and ion charges so that these electronic materials can
be used as more effective bioelectronic transistors, sensors, and next-
generation computing elements. Importantly, the project will provide a graduate
student with advanced training at the interface between data science and polymer
materials science, while also providing mentoring opportunities for summer
undergraduate research students.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This EAGER award supports research and education involving a
materials research - data science collaboration kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon
event. The goal of this project is to merge data-science tools with new
nanoscale sub-diffraction infrared imaging capabilities to extract fundamental
structure-function relationships in complex polymer semiconductor films and
composites, particularly in the context of organic electrochemical transistors
(OECTs). OECTs are a promising platform for neural signal transduction and
biosensing applications in challenging aqueous environments. They typically
comprise a semiconducting polymer in contact with an ion source that serves to
modulate charge transport in the polymer. Currently, progress in the field has
been held up by a limited understanding of structure-function properties at the
nanoscale, particularly by a lack correlated chemical composition with ion and
charge transport. This project will use a new chemical mapping tool,
photoinduced force microscopy (PiFM), and correlated AFM data as a platform for
developing advanced data analysis methods that can quantify relationships among
nanoscale properties. The project will develop open source tools for handling
the complex hyperspectral data sets generated on polymers. Specifically, the
team will: (1) develop new methods for reliably discriminating chemical
components in soft conducting polymer systems using hyperspectral PiFM spectra;
(2) develop advanced regression beyond common linear methods to extract
quantitative structure-function relationships using correlated multimodal AFM
data cubes; (3) incorporate the methods developed into open source packages for
wider adoption in the AFM community. These results should open new doors to
enable broader advances in polymer bioelectronics and electronics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.