* 1842119
* EAGER: Facilitating International Collaboration to Advance Engineering Research
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Philip Weilerstein, National Collegiate Inventors and Innovators Alliance
* Standard Grant
* Sandra Cruz-Pol
* 09/30/2020
* USD 299,994.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) established the Engineering Research
Centers (ERC) program in order to advance collaborative, interdisciplinary,
innovative engineering research and education. Currently, one of NSF's
objectives for the ERC program is to explore how meaningful center-to-center
collaboration within the US and internationally may be expanded. Developing
opportunities for in-person, collaborative learning between US and international
research leaders and funding agency staff has the potential to increase such
collaboration through the identification and prioritization of common interests,
and through opportunities for relationship building across centers and agencies.
Ultimately, the goal of these efforts is to increase and enhance engineering
research.

Through this project, VentureWell will work with NSF and the ERC community to
explore and develop new approaches to international center-to-center
collaboration, specifically through convenings of the US and international
center-level engineering research communities, science agencies, and relevant
domain experts. VentureWell will bring continuity to these activities and work
closely with key stakeholders in developing and implementing a strategy for
exploring and developing approaches to increasing international center-to-center
collaboration. The workshops VentureWell will organize will advance
understanding of the conditions that enable increased international center-to-
center collaboration and identify efficient approaches and mechanisms to set the
conditions for fruitful collaboration and connections among these high-
performing science centers. Finally, VentureWell will summarize and synthesize
findings from these activities, including best practices, lessons learned,
successes, and challenges so that learnings from these activities can inform
future work.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.