* 1842086
* Educating the Next Generation of Quantum Computing Developers
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Brian La Cour, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,045,161.00

The NSF's Accelerating Discovery: Educating the Future STEM Workforce supports
efforts that can position the future STEM workforce to make bold advances in the
NSF Big Ideas (https://www.nsf.gov/about/congress/115/10bigideas.jsp). This
Accelerating Discovery project will support the Quantum Leap and the Work at the
Human-Technology Frontier Big Ideas by developing a research-focused
undergraduate program in quantum computing and quantum information science.
Quantum computing is one of the fastest growing technology fields to emerge in
the 21st century. Over the last thirty years, it has grown from an abstract idea
to demonstrated hardware rivaling the best supercomputers for selected problems.
This project is designed to educate the next generation of STEM workers for this
evolving field. It is critical to engage these students' interest early in their
careers before they are lost to more established fields. Without STEM workers
who are trained in quantum computing, our nation would be at a competitive
disadvantage compared to countries that are now investing heavily in these
areas. This project aims to recruit and prepare the next generation of quantum
computing developers. It will do so by building upon and expand a pilot program
begun in 2018 at The University of Texas at Austin to introduce incoming first-
year students to quantum computing and quantum information science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be conducted as part of the University of
Texas at Austin's successful Freshman Research Initiative, which provides
entering first-year students with a unique research-oriented learning
experience. Participation in the Freshman Research Initiative has been
demonstrated to improve student performance and increase participation of
students in STEM, including students from groups that are underrepresented in
many STEM fields. The project will build upon the success of the 2018 pilot by
developing a more comprehensive program that integrates the first-year student
experience with upper division coursework and senior projects. These courses and
experiences will be integrated into a certificate program in quantum computing,
which will provide graduating students with the training and formal recognition
needed to launch a career in quantum technology. This project will assess the
impact of the quantum computing education on student development and persistence
in the sciences, using assessment instruments and strategies developed for the
Freshmen Research Initiative. The goal of this assessment will be to determine
which specific aspects of the certificate program contribute most to improved
student performance in STEM majors. This project will produce a body of
instructional material and impact analysis focusing on early post-secondary STEM
students who have little-to-no prior knowledge of quantum physics or quantum
computing. The intended result is a unique program in quantum computing that can
be scaled to a national level. The curricular materials developed in the project
will be included in a Massively Open Online Course available through edX, to
support access to the public and adoption by other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.