* 1842567
* NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE) 2018 Grantees Conference, at  Westin Alexandria Hotel, Alexandria, VA, on December 6-7, 2018
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Robert Westervelt, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2019
* USD 113,013.00

The NSF Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSE) 2018 Grantees Conference is a
two-day annual event that brings together nanoscale educators, researchers, and
experimentalists from academia, government, and industry to highlight
information on the research and education activities funded by NSF NSE grants.
The primary goals are to promote dissemination of innovative research progress,
to facilitate research partnerships, and to identify future research directions.
Panel discussions will be moderated by NSF-funded researchers as well as NSF
Program Directors. The conference helps advance the goals of the NSF and the
U.S. National Nanotechnology Initiative. Conference materials are made available
to the global audience following the event at the website www.nseresearch.org,
along with archival information from previous events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSE grantees conference will foster interaction among academic, government, and
industry researchers in nanotechnology fields. Keynote presentations and
interactive panel discussions on the grand challenges in and convergence of
nanotechnology generate opportunities for creative interdisciplinary
collaboration. Identification and exploration of future trends in nanotechnology
and cyberinfrastructure enable researchers and industry to prepare to fully
capitalize on next-generation capabilities. The first day of the conference will
focus on Progress in Foundational Nanotechnology and Infrastructure. Topics will
include nanoscale modeling and simulation, the use of big data in nanotechnology
research, nanotechnological devices and systems, two-dimensional nano-materials,
and quantum phenomena in nanoscale systems. The second day of the conference
will focus on Progress in Grand Challenges and Convergence. Topics will include
the convergence of nanotechnology with a variety of other fields including
biotechnology, cognitive science, cyber and artificial intelligence fields, and
brain-like cognitive engineering systems. The second day will also include
discussions of education challenges and societal impacts of
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.