* 1842989
* Imaging the hydrous Tonga slab in the fastest and coldest subduction zone
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2022
* Songqiao Wei, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 204,269.00

When a tectonic plate descends into Earth's mantle along an oceanic trench - a
process called subduction - both solid rocks and water stored in major hydrous
minerals are carried into the deep earth. Most of the water will return to the
surface of Earth through volcanism when the minerals hosting the water break
down (dehydration) because of the high pressure and temperature encountered as
they descend deeper. Trace amounts of water stored in so called anhydrous
minerals may be preserved in the descending plate (subducting slab) to greater
depths and get involved in whole mantle convection. This process is called
Earth's deep-water cycle, which controls the water flux in Earth's interior.
After decades of seismic observations, numerical simulations, and
petrological/mineralogical experiments, it is generally agreed that slab
dehydration takes place at a few hundred kilometers depth below the seafloor.
However, a fundamental question remains unsolved: How deep can major hydrous
minerals be subducted? Hydrous minerals presumably can be preserved to greater
depths in a colder slab because dehydration reactions are controlled by
temperature and pressure. The Tonga slab, which is the Pacific Plate that
descends along the Tonga Trench, is believed to the fastest moving and coldest
slab on Earth. Therefore, imaging hydrous minerals and determining their maximum
depths in the Tonga slab, as an extreme case study, are critical to
understanding the water flux in subduction zones and estimating Earth's water
budget. This project will provide research opportunities for both graduate and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
study, the Tonga slab crust and uppermost mantle will be imaged by analyzing
converted and guided seismic waves from local earthquakes because these waves
are most sensitive to slab interface and internal structure. The data were
collected from a local broadband seismic array deployed in 2009-2010 in the
Tonga-Lau-Fiji region, and provide unprecedented constraints on local seismicity
and mantle structure of this subduction zone. The Tonga slab surface (upper
interface) position and relative locations of intermediate-depth earthquakes at
depths of 50-200 km will be refined. The high-resolution seismic structure of
the Tonga slab interior at depths of 50-300 km will be constrained by PS and
guided P waves, providing insights into the distribution of the subducted
hydrous minerals in this coldest slab. The results will help to test the
hypothesis that the Tonga slab, along with other similarly cold slabs in the
history of Earth, can carry hydrous minerals to depths greater than 250 km, or
even to the mantle transition zone. Verifying this hypothesis will have
important impacts on our understanding of the Earth's deep-water cycle because
direct evidence of a significant amount of water being subducted into the mantle
transition zone is still lacking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.