* 1842440
* EAGER: T1-iSDA - Bringing NAAT-like sensitivity to (nearly) instrument-free measurement of protein concentration
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Paul Yager, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 07/31/2019
* USD 99,722.00

Sensitivity matters in testing for the presence and concentration of many small
molecules and proteins; so does the length of time between capturing a sample
and getting the results of the measurement. As a consequence, there is a big
push to develop sensitive test for such molecules that can be made anywhere by
anyone and in a few minutes. This is true if you are trying to differentiate a
heart attack from indigestion, and if you are trying to measure pollutants in
the water supply, for two examples. Many of these molecules to be detected, or
"analytes", are not nucleic acids (DNA and RNA) and are therefore not detectable
by highly-sensitive nucleic acid amplification tests that can detect a few
copies of a target. New methods for sensitive protein detection use large
instruments, and must be in a well-funded laboratory. The overall goal of this
project is to enable measurement of low-concentration protein analytes rapidly
and at low cost anywhere, particularly in homes or in low-resource settings.
This project will combine in a single device low-cost low-sensitivity paper-
based lateral flow tests with signal enhancement using isothermal nucleic acid
amplification. This one-year project targets the development of this
ultrasensitive protein detection in a prototype low-cost easy-to-use platform
that will be suited to point-of use operation in low-resource labs and homes. In
the long run, the aim is to make the platform commercially available for a wide
range of protein detection problems not previously tractable because of the need
for a centralized laboratory and highly-trained personnel.

The aim is to combine three known technologies into a common platform that will
allow rapid detection of fewer than a million copies of a protein in a format
the combines: 1) lateral-flow immunoassay tests on nitrocellulose strips to
capture specific protein targets, 2) detection of the presence of the assembled
protein stack sandwiching the protein target by incorporating a nucleic acid
template attached to the detection antibody, 3) amplifying said template in situ
using an isothermal nucleic amplification method (iSDA) also embodied in a paper
system and supported by a simple heater on a printed circuit board, and 4)
detecting the amplification process by fluorescence in real time within the
paper using a cell phone and a black box containing two optical filters to cover
the camera?s flash and camera. Preliminary data has shown that the combination
of a common lateral flow immunoassay detecting an influenza nucleoprotein
protein with the iSDA can produce 10,000-fold enhancement of sensitivity of the
test. However, the 4 processes have not been combined in a cartridge format that
runs quickly and avoids poor rinsing of the labeled detection antibody (which
produces a false positive signal). The goal of the project is to integrate the
processes into a single rapid convenient sample-to-result prototype instrument
that will be simple to use for anyone familiar with modern smart phones. It will
take up no more desk space that a smart phone, should need no power other than
the battery of the phone to run multiple tests, allowing the device to run
anywhere, and to communicate data immediately to centralized facilities over the
internet.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.