* 1842984
* Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Farnoush Banaei-Kashani, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 07/31/2019
* USD 24,900.00

This award provides support for U.S.-based students to attend the 26th ACM
SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information
Systems, November 6-9, 2018 in Seattle, WA. The ACM SIGSPATIAL conference is the
world's premier research conference in Spatial Information and Geographic
Information Systems. The conference brings together researchers, developers,
users, and practitioners carrying out research and development in novel systems
based on geospatial data and knowledge, and fostering interdisciplinary
discussions and research in a wide set of disciplines and applications,
including computer science, geography, urban planning, land-use, and defense.
The ACM SIGSPATIAL conference seeks to support underrepresented students and in
particular to foster development on a new generation of researchers and
practitioners in the important area of Spatial Information and Geographic
Information Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ACM SIGSPATIAL International
Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems 2018 is the 26th event
in a series of symposia and workshops that began in 1993 with the aim of
bringing together researchers, developers, users, and practitioners in relation
to novel systems based on geo-spatial data and knowledge, and fostering
interdisciplinary discussions and research in all aspects of geographic
information systems. The conference provides a forum for original research
contributions covering all conceptual, design, and implementation aspects of
geospatial data ranging from applications, user interfaces, and visualization to
data storage and query processing and indexing. The ACM SIGSPATIAL conference
will feature research presentations, workshops, demonstrations, poster sessions,
and student-focused activities, including a student research competition, a
spatial computing competition, and mentoring by senior researchers. Proceedings
of the 26th ACM SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic
Information Systems will be available in the ACM Digital
Library.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.