* 1842736
* SBIR Phase I:  Bioengineered Recombinant Anticoagulant Heparin
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Charles Glass, TEGA Therapeutics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to develop an alternative source of
pharmaceutical heparin using engineered cultured mammalian cells. Heparin is a
widely prescribed anticoagulant (blood thinner), critical for surgical
operations and for patients that otherwise have risks of blood clotting. Over
300,000 doses are administered per year in the US alone. Currently, heparin is
prepared from animal tissues, primarily pig intestines in China, which has
regulatory agencies in the US and other countries concerned. For one reason,
heparin manufacturing is difficult to regulate in China as evidenced by the
heparin adulteration crisis in 2008 that led to allergic reactions and over 250
deaths worldwide. In addition, there is concern that the Chinese pig population
will not be able to keep up with the increasing demand. The FDA is considering
reintroducing heparin produced from beef cattle as an alternative source,
however, bovine heparin is still subject to complications involving animal
tissues and it has different anticoagulant properties, which complicates dosing.
The current proposal develops cell-based production in which the entire supply
chain can be under GMP control and scalable as needed with no dependence on the
number and health of an animal population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual
merit of this SBIR Phase I project is to genetically engineer cells to produce a
heparin product that can be manufactured for pharmaceutical use. Cellular
production can be entirely under GMP control, and cell engineering provides
opportunities to produce heparin with improved properties. A survey of
clinicians that use heparin overwhelmingly identified heparin induced
thrombocytopenia (HIT) as a serious detrimental side effect. HIT can lead to
blood clots, stroke, heart attack and loss of life and limb. Treatment is
complicated and expensive. HIT is an allergic reaction caused when heparin binds
to a specific protein in the blood called platelet factor 4 (PF4). PF4 binding
depends on elements of heparin structure that are not involved in heparin's
anticoagulant activities. Through cell engineering, heparin molecules with an
altered structure will be produced that have reduced affinities for PF4, while
maintaining potent anticoagulant properties. In addition, heparin has
demonstrated efficacy in other areas such as inflammation and cancer that are
not involved in blood clotting. Through cell engineering, heparin structures
also could be tailored for these additional
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.