* 1842543
* EAGER: Understanding the Dynamics of Past, Present, and Future Climates on Subseasonal to Multidecadal Timescales Based on Operator-Theoretic Techniques for Dynamical Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Benjamin Lintner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2022
* USD 164,162.00

This project explores the application of Koopman evolution operators to the
study of climate variability. Koopman operators were derived in the early 1930s
and used to prove an important theorem on the behavior of idealized dynamical
systems. But they remained largely unknown beyond dynamical systems theory until
the early 2000s, when their usefulness for complicated, data intensive problems
was recognized. Since that time they have been applied in such data-driven
applications as fluid flow, stability analysis in power networks, the
development of financial trading algorithms, and brain activity research. Like
these applications, climate research is often data-driven and involves analysis
of a complex system, thus Koopman operators could be a valuable addition to the
climate research toolkit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted here applies
the Koopman operator framework to three problems in climate dynamics: 1)
Understanding the variability and structure of El Nino in paleoclimate and
current climate; 2) decadal-scale variability in the climate system and its
implications for predictability; and 3) dynamics of the South Pacific
Convergence Zone (SPCZ) across multiple timescales. Research in these areas
typically relies on methods such as principle component analysis to characterize
variability in terms of spatial patterns and their time evolution. But these
methods yield statistical characterizations that are not dynamically based and
may not be optimal for relating the variability patterns to underlying dynamical
processes. Koopman operators directly express the dynamics of the system, thus
they may prove more insightful for understanding how the dynamics of the climate
system give rise to the forms of variability that we
observe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts through its potential
to enhance understanding of the climate system and thus improve the guidance
available to stakeholders and decision makers concerned with climate impacts. In
addition, the Principal Investigator (PI) works with the Rutgers Research in
Science and Engineering (RiSE) program, through which he hosts undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups. The project also provides support and
training for a postdoctoral research associate, thereby providing for the future
workforce in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.