* 1842957
* SBIR Phase I:  Impedance-Based Battery Health Management for Large Format Lithium-Ion Battery Packs
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Steven Chung, Rejoule Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 05/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is the advancement of
battery technologies. The race for the perfect battery is intensifying due to
growing global demand for both the electric vehicle (EV) and stationary storage
industries. The search is on for new ways to improve energy and power density,
reduce charging time, and extend battery life. The project will create a
diagnostic tool that provides an unprecedented glimpse inside the battery and
has the potential to accelerate scientific understanding of how batteries age. A
more accurate assessment of battery degradation in real time can inform on-board
algorithms, can improve overall battery pack efficiency, and has major cost
saving impacts for automakers and stationary storage users. This predictability
enables more cost-effective warranty management, improved charging and safety
algorithms, and ever more efficient battery pack designs. Having a sense of
remaining useful life also enables the battery to be re-used in a secondary
application - creating new business opportunities while a new revenue stream
making batteries more sustainable. Ultimately, this reduces costs for both
consumers and manufacturers, and contributes to greener use of resources for
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project unlocks key insights for large-format lithium batteries. Today?s
battery management systems (BMS) do not track a battery?s actual degradation
metrics so it cannot forecast remaining useful life. This makes it hard to
predict the ?cliff?, a sudden and steep drop in capacity near a battery?s end of
life. This forces battery makers to overdesign battery systems to reduce chances
of premature failure before the warranty expiration. The proposed research
employs electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) onboard a BMS. EIS is a
diagnostic tool that measures battery impedance - something only possible in a
lab setting today. Tracking impedance unlocks a lifetime of degradation data and
helps battery engineers better understand the long-term degradation behavior of
high voltage battery packs. The project will focus on 1) minimizing the required
hardware to measure impedance of each cell in a series-connected battery pack,
and 2) reducing the down-time associated with the impedance measurement. The
proposed innovation blends a unique hardware architecture with wide-bandgap
semiconductors and adaptive charge-control algorithms to minimize hardware size.
These help to reduce overall system cost and unlocks orders of magnitude
improvement in hardware scalability over existing EIS
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.