* 1842718
* EAGER: 2D Nanomaterials-Bioreceptor Hybrid Optoelectronic Biosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Ashok Mulchandani, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 149,999.00

Sensitive, selective, rapid, cost-effective detection of chemicals and
biological molecules is critical in many sectors of society. The goal of this
project is to develop a novel biosensor consisting of optoelectronic transducer
(a device that converts light to an electronic signal) composed of two layers of
nanomaterials graphene and molybdenum disulfide coupled with biological sensing
molecules. When molecular targets are present in liquid samples, the biological
molecules will sense them and the transducer will provide a readout signaled by
a change the optoelectronic properties of the device. The proposed device will
find a broad spectrum of applications critical for society, such as diagnosing
diseases, monitoring food, water and environment quality and safety and
personal/homeland security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Affinity-based
biosensors are analytical platforms that detect analytes through specific
interactions between analyte targets and recognition molecules. Current
affinity-based biosensor require a label for quantification. The lack of an
ideal label and tedious/time consuming protocol are major limitations of the
current affinity-based biosensors. Field-effect transistors (FET)-based
biosensors are an alternative for alleviating these limitations. The proposed
research will develop a novel all two-dimensional layered van der Waals (LVDW)
nanomaterial-bioreceptor hybrid optoelectronic biosensor for detecting
chemical/biological molecules with ultrahigh sensitivity, exquisite selectivity
and label-free analysis. The proposed optoelectronic device will be a photogated
FET transducer made from single-layer of 2D transition metal dichalcogenide
(TMD) molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) semiconductor as channel/gate, single-layer
graphene as source and drain electrodes and a red LED as photons supplier. The
MoS2 channel will be functionalized by bioreceptor specific for the target
analyte. The analytical figures of merits, i.e. sensitivity, limit of detection,
selectivity, speed, reproducibility, stability, etc., will be established. The
sensing of avidin as target with biotin as receptor will be used as a model
system for this EAGER project. Intellectual merits of the research program
include a novel biosensor consisting of optoelectronic transducer composed of a
heterostructure of two-dimensional nanomaterials graphene and molybdenum
disulfide coupled with a red light LED and interfaced to biological sensing
molecules that is expected to revolutionize the designs and performances of FET-
based label-free affinity biosensors platforms. Broader Impacts of the project
would be a new paradigm in label-free affinity-based biosensors for highly
sensitive, selective, rapid, cost-effective, facile and in-field multiplexed
detection of chemical and biological molecules. The proposed sensing platform is
expected to find applications in medical diagnostics, food safety and quality,
environmental monitoring, homeland/personal security, etc. This research will
help increase (i) US technological competitiveness; (ii) develop a globally
competitive STEM workforce; (iii) increase participation of women and
underrepresented minorities; and (iv) contribute to undergraduate and graduate
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.