* 1842423
* SBIR Phase I:  Optimizing an autonomous point of care medical robot to improve central vascular access
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Robert Dunki-Jacobs, XACT MEDICAL, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,993.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project enables key proof points
behind the novel concept of a hand-held medical robot, i.e. use of a medical
robot to autonomously perform a task during which neither the robot not the
patient is fixed in space. The potential outcome of this project is a
comprehensive line of robotic ultrasound transducers that enable a variety of
interventional point-of-care robotic applications by enhancing the skills of a
multitude of clinicians. As a result, many technically challenging critical
procedures will no longer be restricted to solely highly trained experts.
Applications include central vascular access (pediatric and adult), biopsy,
regional anesthesiology, precision extraction (e.g. thoracentesis), and
precision injections (e.g. orthopedic biologics), creating an addressable market
exceeding $2 billion. Benefits of man-machine teaming using hand-held medical
robots include faster, simpler procedures that can be performed by a much
broader group of clinicians, reduced medical complications and patient
discomfort, and improved hospital infrastructure utilization, ultimately
benefitting both clinical outcomes and total costs of care. Significant insights
and implications for other man-machine teaming applications may also result from
this project, with potential for robotic applications well outside of the
medical realm.

The intellectual merit of this project centers on demonstrating the feasibility
of first-of-kind hand-held robotic capabilities for autonomous needle placement.
This project builds on two existing layers of innovation. First is the ability
to use real-time ultrasound data to send a needle precisely to a point in the
body. This differs significantly from other imaging modalities that require
multiple images from different orientations integrated "off line." Next, this is
an autonomous and powered system. Once a user selects a target, the needle path
is calculated and the needle is advanced automatically. This project builds the
third level of innovation through its research objectives - creating the real-
time ability to i) recognize and track the target as an object, and ii) make
automatic robotic corrections to maintain that target during user or patient
movement or changes in target characteristics. The research involves novel image
recognition and tracking technology and very precise novel sensing and control
loop technology that interact in real time to maintain targeting accuracy in a
dynamic environment. The anticipated technical result is to enable a non-expert
clinician to reliably enter a clinically challenging "small" central blood
vessel in a pediatric patient model with an introducer needle.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.