* 1842013
* Computer Science Innovation Roadtrip
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Nathan Gebhard, Roadtrip Nation Ltd.
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 05/31/2021
* USD 1,100,000.00

Roadtrip Nation LTD (RTN) will produce the Computer Science (CS) Innovation
Roadtrip, which will leverage RTN's multimedia content deliverables, evidence-
based educational resources, and peer-to-peer student engagement strategies in
order to increase the number and diversity of the nation's underrepresented high
school students interested in pursuing computer science education and computing
careers. At the same time, this project aims to shift perceptions among adult
stakeholders, broadening their views on computing and the computing workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Founded in 2001, RTN is an award-winning media and
education organization that empowers students to define their own roads in life
through a public television series, live campus events, an online content
database, and innovative educational resources that serve an audience of 14
million students each year. The CS Innovation Roadtrip will focus RTN's content
development and programmatic capacity on highlighting the stories of diverse
individuals who are driving innovation across the computing disciplines. These
interviews, conducted by students, will be produced by the RTN production team
for distribution across a variety of media and education networks, including
RTN's documentary series on public television (presented by KQED), the Roadmap
to Careers tool in collaboration with The College Board (reaching all Scholastic
Aptitude Test and Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test takers), and via a
partnership with the National Center for Women and Information Technology
(NCWIT) Alliance network. Where appropriate, the educational materials and
approaches developed as part of the CS Innovation Roadtrip will map to the
Computer Science Teachers of America educational standards, Next Generation
Science Standards, Common Core State Standards, and the Advanced Placement
Computer Science Principles curricular framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.