* 1842183
* EAGER: Assessing Influence of News Articles on Emerging Events
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Zoran Obradovic, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

There is growing interest in mining social media streams for early detection of
(important) events, like crisis detection (and response) and predicting social
unrest. Social media and news articles play an important role in documenting
daily societal events. News outlets host social media platforms that facilitate
users to engage in debating daily news topics. For example, the social networks
at NY Times, The Guardian, and Washington Post have more than 130,000 users
each. Together, they constitute a considerable segment of the varied opinions of
society at large. The objective of this project is to assess the feasibility of
leveraging the trend of past social response to news articles observed over a
few hundred social media streams to detect the emergence of new important
social, economic, and political events. The project benefits multiple segments
of society, such as social scientists and policy makers, because the results of
the proposed project provide tools to predict important real-life events using
indicators observed on social media. The educational component of the project
includes the involvement of graduate and undergraduate students' training and
research and the incorporation of research projects and results in appropriate
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The difficult and high risk problem addressed in
this project is that of transforming the streams of social media chatter at
hundreds of news outlets into data signals from which to mine those signals
foretelling the imminence of an (important) event, and to develop sound
predictive analytics on top of those signals. &lt;br/&gt;This project seeks
creating a proof of concept that works with a few hundred social communities
from news outlets. Specific aims consist of (i) developing methods for automatic
data collection and (ii) efficient predictive modeling at that scale. The
results (e.g., software tools) are made available to benefit researchers in
academia and industry. Free, open-source software for implementing the developed
techniques will be distributed to enhance existing research
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.