* 1842085
* EAGER: Developing an Equity-Driven, Collaborative, Inquiry-Based Online Computer Science Option for Credit Recovery and Incarcerated Youth in Urban Settings
* CSE,CNS
* 10/15/2018,09/30/2021
* Steven McGee, The Learning Partnership
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,983.00

The Learning Partnership in collaboration with Education Development Center
(EDC), the Chicago Public School District (CPS) and the Chicago Alliance for
Equity in Computer Science (CAFECS), proposes to address a significant and
urgent need for CPS to provide an online version of the Exploring Computer
Science (ECS) program. ECS is designed to introduce students to the breadth of
the field of computer science through an exploration of engaging and accessible
topics. Its success in CPS led CPS to become the first major city to enact a
high school computer science (CS) graduation requirement. An implication of that
policy is that students who fail their CS class will need to make it up in order
to graduate. This proposed work will use a Researcher Practitioner Partnership
(RPP) approach to begin the development of an online version of ECS that can be
used for credit recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An analysis of student ECS course
failure shows that the typical CPS student who will need to recover the CS
credit is most likely to be a 10th, 11th or 12th grade Hispanic or African
American male student with low academic performance and relatively high rates of
absences. The very strong ECS focus on equitable and culturally relevant
approaches to pedagogy, the strong partnership that already exists between the
Learning Partnership, CPS, and CAFECS, the paucity of existing research on how
to support online credit recovery, and the urgency of developing credit recovery
options for current students, all combine to provide a unique opportunity to
develop an online version of ECS that builds on our knowledge of how best to
support for struggling, urban CS students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of
existing research on credit recovery represents a significant risk. However, if
the project team is successful, this model has the potential for high reward: a
high-quality option for students seeking credit recovery, as well as those who
are incarcerated or homeless, or otherwise struggle to have an equitable
experience to that of their peers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.