* 1842056
* CAREER: Advancing theory of Resonant Inelastic X-ray Scattering for Materials In- and Out-of-Equilibrium
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Steven Johnston, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2024
* USD 504,553.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum materials are at the forefront
of materials research. In many cases, the remarkable properties of these
materials derive from a subtle interplay between their electronic, magnetic, and
structural properties. Over the last two decades, resonant inelastic x-ray
scattering has emerged as a powerful experimental tool in this context, owing to
its ability to simultaneously probe all of these properties in a single
experiment. But this capability comes at a price, as these experiments are
challenging to interpret without sophisticated theoretical models; there is an
urgent need for new theoretical tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports computational and theoretical research and education aimed at obtaining
a better understanding of resonant inelastic x-ray scattering techniques and
their application to several novel quantum materials. The goal of the project is
to develop new theoretical approaches and computer codes for modeling resonant
x-ray scattering experiments. The research team will apply these methods to
address several open questions in quantum materials, working in collaboration
with experimental researchers. This project will provide advanced theoretical
tools for modeling resonant x-ray scattering experiments that are broadly
applicable to a wide range of quantum materials, thus contributing to our
understanding of these systems and accelerating future
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's educational component focuses on
increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities in advanced physics
research. Approximately 30% of college-aged US citizens are members of racial
minority groups, but these groups are drastically underrepresented in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, with the largest disparity occurring
in physics. The PI will spearhead the establishment of a Bridge Program at the
University of Tennessee, Knoxville in partnership with the American Physical
Society Bridge Program and the NSF-sponsored Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation Program. These activities will help create an alternative
pathway into a physics graduate program for students who would not otherwise
apply to or enroll in graduate school. This project also supports undergraduate
and graduate research opportunities in physics with a focus on advanced
computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strongly correlated quantum materials realize a
wide range of scientifically and technologically significant phases of matter.
In many cases, the functional properties of these systems derive from the
interplay of their spin, charge, orbital, and lattice excitations. In this
context, resonant inelastic x-ray scattering (RIXS) has become a powerful tool,
capable of simultaneously accessing all of these excitations in a single
experiment. But RIXS experiments are difficult to interpret without theoretical
models. Moreover, the recent development of pump-probe or time-resolved RIXS
experiments has created an urgent need for new theoretical tools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education towards
the development of new theoretical frameworks for modeling equilibrium and time-
resolved RIXS experiments. The primary goals of this project are to extend
state-of-the-art numerical methods like the density matrix renormalization
group, quantum Monte Carlo, and embedded cluster techniques to model equilibrium
RIXS experiments and then integrate these same approaches into new theory for
time-resolved RIXS experiments. The research team will apply these methods to
address several open problems. Examples include: 1) identifying fractionalized
quasiparticle excitations in quantum spin liquids and understanding their
dynamics both in and out of equilibrium, 2) determining the specific roles of
the collective magnetic and lattice excitations in correlated quantum materials,
and 3) establishing how RIXS provides a unique way of answering these questions.
Many of these questions will be addressed in the context of ongoing experiments
at free electron laser facilities like the Linac Coherent Light Source. This
project will provide an advanced framework for understanding RIXS experiments
that are broadly applicable to a wide range of quantum materials, thus
contributing significantly to the understanding of these systems and
accelerating future discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's educational
component focuses on increasing the participation of underrepresented minorities
in advanced physics research. Approximately 30% of college-aged US citizens are
members of racial minority groups, but these groups are drastically
underrepresented in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics, with the
largest disparity occurring in physics. The PI will spearhead the establishment
of a Bridge Program at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville in partnership
with the American Physical Society Bridge Program and the NSF-sponsored
Tennessee Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation Program. These
activities will help create an alternative pathway into a physics graduate
program for students who would not otherwise apply to or enroll in graduate
school. This project also supports undergraduate and graduate research
opportunities in physics with a focus on advanced computational
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.