* 1842054
* EAGER: GreenDataFlow: Minimizing the Energy Footprint of Global Data Movement
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Tevfik Kosar, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alejandro Suarez
* 08/31/2022
* USD 407,595.00

This project fills an important gap in the understanding of data transfer energy
efficiency. The models, algorithms and tools developed as part of this project
will help increase performance and decrease power consumption during end-to-end
data transfers, which should save significant quantities of resources (estimated
to be gigawatt-hours of energy and millions of dollars in the US economy alone).
The applicability and efficiency of these novel techniques will be evaluated in
actual applications, in a collaborative partnership with
IBM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores options for minimizing the
energy-use footprint of global data movement. The effort is focused on saving
energy at the end systems (sender and receiver nodes) during data transfer. It
explores a novel approach to achieving low-energy end-to-end data transfers,
through application-layer energy-aware throughput optimization. The research
team investigates and analyzes the factors that affect performance and energy
consumption in end-to-end data transfers, such as CPU frequency scaling, multi-
core scheduling, I/O block size, TCP buffer size, and the level of parallelism,
concurrency, and pipelining, along with the data transfer rates at the network
routers, switches, and hubs. How these parameters decrease energy consumption in
the end systems and networking infrastructure, without sacrificing transfer
performance, are assessed. The project will create novel application-layer
models, algorithms, and tools for:&lt;br/&gt; - predicting the best combination
of end-system and protocol parameters for optimal data transfer throughput with
energy-efficiency constraints; &lt;br/&gt; - accurately predicting the network
device power consumption due to increased data transfer rate on the active
links, and dynamic readjustment of the transfer rate to balance the energy
performance ratio; and &lt;br/&gt; - providing service level agreement (SLA)
based energy-efficient transfer algorithms to service providers. &lt;br/&gt;The
models, algorithms and tools developed as part of this project will help
increase performance and decrease power consumption during end-to-end data
transfers, saving significant quantities of resources. Since the tools focus on
the application layer, they will not require changes to the existing
infrastructure, nor to the low-level networking stack, and wide deployment of
the developed system should be readily attainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.