* 1842685
* ERA-CAPS:  Collaborative Research:  Role of Extracellular Vesicles in Plant-Microbe Interactions
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Roger Innes, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 07/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Pathogens can decimate crop plants and are a major threat to food security.
Understanding how plants and microbes interact will help researchers develop
tools and resources to avoid crop damage and reduce the spread of disease from
pathogens. Recently, scientists have discovered microscopic bodies in the spaces
between plant cells, and these so-called extracellular vesicles (EVs) are
thought to play a role in signaling between microbes and host plants. Although
well studied in animals, how EVs function in plants is not fully understood. To
understand their function, new biochemical techniques were developed and it was
found, surprisingly, that EVs contain "stress response" proteins, and carry
small molecules (sRNA), which are known to shut down (or silence) genes. The
project tests the hypothesis that plant EVs may carry and transfer these
important sRNA signaling molecules between microbes and plant hosts. The team
will also study how plant EVs are produced, and how plants and pathogens
exchange EVs. The outcomes of the research will provide key knowledge to improve
plant disease resistance, with long-term practical outcomes for society.
Notably, controlling disease spread will improve food security while reducing
production costs and use of environmentally harmful fungicides. Understanding
the role of EVs could yield targets for engineering resistance to pathogens and
will advance analytical methods for studying how molecules are transferred
between host plant and pathogen. Educational impacts will be achieved through
interdisciplinary training of students and post-doctoral scientists in the area
of plant - microbe interactions and in computational biology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus specifically on EVs
from Arabidopsis, plus a model legume, Medicago truncatula (a relative of
alfalfa), with pathogen analyses focused on Colletotrichum, a genus of fungi
that include many highly destructive species, and Phytophthora, a genus of
oomycetes that includes P. infestans, the causal agent of the Irish potato
famine. The work will be done in these species because there are significant,
existing genetic and molecular resources and background work, including from the
European partners of the project. The questions to be addressed by this project
include whether EVs are a primary mechanism for transfer of information between
plants and their fungal pathogens? What are the contents of the EVs? How are the
EVs transferred and delivered? Ultimately, the project will address whether
altering the contents of the EVs has a significant impact on plant-fungal
interactions. The project will characterize phenotypes of plants and potentially
fungal and oomycete strains altered in their EV contents. Project members will
be trained broadly in plant and fungal interactions, small RNA biology and
genomics, cell biology and microscopy, and computational methods through
individual and group projects in the analysis of the localization, biogenesis,
and biochemistry of EVs. The results will have broad impact though
interdisciplinary training and will promote national security by contributing
basic knowledge to improve plant disease resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.