* 1842545
* Experimental study of bluff-body stabilized highly turbulent premixed flames using pre-vaporized liquid fuels
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Baki Cetegen, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2022
* USD 334,400.00

This project is an experimental investigation of highly turbulent premixed
flames for propulsion applications. High level of flow turbulence is a common
feature of many propulsion systems to generate high power in a small space.
Scientific knowledge of flame interactions with high turbulence is still
lacking. This study will contribute to better understanding of flame-turbulence
interactions using key jet fuels. The team will conduct this research to provide
high quality experimental data for public use. Technical potential benefits of
this research will be better design of combustion systems for stable operation
and pollutant reduction. High-efficiency and low-pollution combustion systems
will benefit both environment and health. This project also contributes to the
development of highly-skilled workforce by training advanced doctoral degree
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to improve the
fundamental understanding of flame stabilization and lean blowoff
characteristics in bluff-body-anchored premixed flames in highly turbulent flow
(with turbulence intensities up to 40% in the approaching flow and turbulence
Reynolds numbers up to 8,100). An inverted conical flame configuration with a
disk-shaped flame stabilizer will be employed. State-of-the-art laser
diagnostics (particle image velocimetry and simultaneous planar laser induced
fluorescence of hydroxyl and formaldehyde) will be utilized to measure the flame
structure/flowfield interactions, enabling the understanding of high-turbulence
combustion regimes that have not been fully explored before. The resulting
experimental data will also be utilized for validation of high fidelity
numerical simulations using large eddy simulation (LES) methodology. New
experimental data for pre-vaporized liquid fuels are used to document and
develop a comprehensive understanding of lean blowoff phenomena in premixed
combustion as it relates to highly turbulent flow, bluff-body recirculation zone
flow dynamics, and flame-flow interactions. These data will also include the
flame properties in the higher turbulence regimes of corrugated flamelets and
reaction sheets without the need for piloted flames.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.