* 1842139
* RAPID: Airborne LiDAR and Hyperspectral Observations to Support Ecological Characterization of Wildfire Affected Areas in Partnership with BB-FLUX
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2018,04/30/2020
* Rainer Volkamer, Battelle Memorial Institute
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 04/30/2020
* USD 183,508.00

This project will assess the above ground biomass burned during specific
wildfires in the Western US during the 2018 fire season. This effort is in
support of another NSF-supported project, BB-FLUX (Biomass Burning Flux
Measurements of Trace Gases and Aerosols), that is focused on measuring wildfire
emission fluxes. Sensors will be flown on the Airborne Observation Platform
(AOP) of the National Ecological Observatory (NEON) to quantify the area and
above ground biomass burned during wildfires. The project results will help
improve understanding of the risk to human and ecosystem health associated with
emissions from wildfires. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this effort
are to: (1) Collect post-wildfire burn data with the NEON AOP to support
research on wildfire emission and ecosystem relationships; (2) Process the
collected NEON AOP data through to the standard set of NEON data products that
will provide the basis for estimating the area burned and total fuel burned; and
(3) Enhance above ground biomass (AGB) estimation algorithms through fusion of
downward-looking laser altimetry (LiDAR) and optical hyperspectral (HS) airborne
measurements, using existing publically available NEON data that closely matches
the ecosystems captured (northern temperate forests), providing BB-FLUX emission
models with high accuracy estimates of AGB (fuel burned). Existing NEON
collections in northern temperate forests will be used as candidate sites to
develop an enhanced algorithm for predicting biomass using fusion approaches
between LiDAR and HS observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership of the
NEON AOP and the BB-FLUX campaign represents a novel synergy between previously
disparate observation systems that introduces an inter-disciplinary approach for
relating wildfire emission characteristics to the local ecosystems. The general
advancement of improved AGB estimates have broad implications for ecological
sciences, forestry, agriculture and environmental
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.