* 1842538
* EAGER: Data-driven Koopman Operator Techniques for Chaotic and Non-Autonomous Dynamical Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Dimitrios Giannakis, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to develop data-driven Koopman methodologies for analyzing and
identifying spectral properties of coherent patterns and predicting their
dynamical evolutions in dynamical systems with both oscillatory modes and
continuous spectrum as well subject to secular trends. Koopman operators were
derived in the early 1930s and used to prove an important theorem on the
behavior of idealized dynamical systems. But they remained largely unknown
beyond dynamical systems theory until the early 2000s, when their usefulness for
complicated, data intensive problems was recognized. Since then, the idea of
Koopman operators in combination with machine learning algorithms has been
applied to various problems in fluid dynamics, stability analysis of power
networks, the development of financial trading algorithms, and brain activity
research. Like these applications, climate research is often data-driven and
involves analysis of a complex system, thus Koopman operators could be a
valuable addition to the climate research toolkit. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advances in pattern extraction and predictive capabilities for complex systems
stemming from this project will have great impacts in the field of nonlinear
dynamical systems and will be applicable to various disciplines that deal with
time-evolving phenomena, from climate science, fluid dynamics, to neuroscience
and economics. The project will contribute towards STEM workforce development
through the training of a postdoc and new course development for on data-driven
dynamical systems modeling at Principal Investigator's home
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance machine learning
techniques and spectral Galerkin methods for identifying Koopman eigen-
frequencies and eigenfunctions of complex dynamical systems that are subject to
both stochastic forcing and external forcing (such as the Earth's climate
system) from time series and spatiotemporal data without knowledge of the
underlying governing equations and boundary conditions. The team will apply the
data-driven methods to climate simulations of El Nino Southern Oscillation to
study the interactions of natural variability and forced response of the climate
system. This will demonstrate the ability of the methods to reveal and predict
many aspects of the temporal evolutions of dominant modes in data, which cannot
be achieved from conventional covariance-based
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.