* 1842077
* Collaborative Research: Community College Accelerated CyberCorps Pilot Program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* John Sands, Moraine Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 791,964.00

Sinclair Community College (SCC; OH), Brookdale Community College (BCC; NJ) and
Moraine Valley Community College (MVCC; IL) propose to increase the placement of
highly qualified cybersecurity professionals in government positions for the
Community College Cyber Pilot Program (C3P). This proposed project is in
alignment with the National Defense Authorization Act of 2018. Through cohort-
based learning, SFS scholars at each of the four-partner colleges will
collaborate on activities and events, including student skills competitions,
certification preparation workshops, visits to local federal agencies, and
participation in job fairs. Experiential learning will allow students to gain
skills from real cybersecurity vulnerabilities and attacks experienced by
businesses and organizations. SCC is designated as a National Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense 2-Year Education (CAE-2Y) and MVCC is an Advanced
Technical Education (ATE) National Resource Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
program will be based on several successful adult learning practices: cohort
learning, experiential learning, competency-based education, and one-on-one,
holistic student support. The objectives are to: 1) research, develop, and
document new strategic roles community colleges can play in increasing the
number of cybersecurity professionals employed in government sectors; 2) build
effective collaborations between educational institutions, business, industry,
and government; 3) prepare 24 Scholars For Service (SFS) to help meet government
need for highly qualified cybersecurity professionals; 4) disseminate best
practice models designed for replication by other colleges across the country,
including: new protocols for conducting prior learning assessments to assist
veterans in applying their education and experience to cybersecurity
disciplines; and best practices for recruiting, selecting, and supporting non-
cybersecurity Bachelor degree students through cybersecurity education programs
(cohort models and success coaching).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this
project is provided from the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) and NSF
Scholarships in STEM (S-STEM) programs, reflecting alignment of the project with
major emphases of the ATE program on involvement of community colleges and the
S-STEM program on financial and co-curricular support for high-achieving
students with demonstrated financial need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.