* 1842369
* EAGER: ISN: Unraveling Illicit Supply Chains for Falsified Pharmaceuticals with a Citizen Science Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Marya Lieberman, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2022
* USD 420,906.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will advance the
national health, welfare, and prosperity by studying ways to detect and disrupt
the supply networks for falsified pharmaceuticals and illicit drugs. Falsified
pharmaceuticals harm hundreds of thousands of patients in the developing world,
as well as injuring Americans when they penetrate the U.S. pharmaceutical
supply. Illicit drugs, such as opioids, are the cause of more deaths in the U.S.
than automobile accidents or gun violence. Analyzing pharmaceuticals using
traditional methods is time-consuming and expensive, so producers and
distributors often escape discovery. This research will utilize an inexpensive
paper analytic device (PAD) in the form of a test card that can be deployed by
community health workers and ordinary citizens, that is capable of detecting
active ingredients and fillers in a pill or powder within 5 minutes. By swiftly
identifying of the types of fillers used, counterfeit pharmaceuticals or illicit
drugs in several different locations can be linked, and researchers can begin to
reverse engineer the supply chain to identify the source of the product and its
distribution channels. Effective deployment strategies for test cards will be
developed, and data visualization tools can then be provided to enable local
regulatory agencies to act quickly to trace and disrupt suppliers of falsified
medicines or illicit drugs. The project will involve both graduate students,
focused on detection of fake medicines and supply chain vulnerabilities in low
resource settings, and undergraduates, focused on detection of supply chains for
illicit opioid drugs. The research will lead to models that describe the
movement of products through the supply chain, suggesting pinch points or
critical pathways that could be used to shut down distribution of the illicit
products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the partnership between an analytical
chemist and an operations researcher, this project will allow for timely
collection and analysis of post-market pharmaceutical samples to detect a wide
range of illegal practices and harmful medicines or drugs drugs. The PAD gives
fast but imperfect data via the cell phone network; from an operations
engineering perspective, the system offers new opportunities to dynamically
retarget sample collection, optimize logistics of confirmatory analysis and
interactions with regulatory authorities, and model how illicit products enter
the pharmaceutical supply chain. The project will test these strategies in real-
world settings. Samples of essential medicines will be collected by covert
shoppers in Kenya, Malawi, and Bangladesh, and tested with PADs. Integrating
methods from operations engineering, the project will test approaches for
detecting active ingredients and fillers, determine the incremental value of
different types of samples for understanding the supply chains of falsified
medications, and examine innovative sampling methods that respond dynamically to
early reports of bad quality products. The research will lead to models that
describe the movement of the products through the supply chain. Students
involved in this project will test samples of street drugs in a police drug lab
and classify them into batches according to active ingredient and filler
content, with the goal of deducing how many producers are active in the supply
chains for these illegal products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.