* 1842042
* Pilot Study for a Cyberinfrastructure Center of Excellence
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ewa Deelman, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2021
* USD 3,884,346.00

NSF's major multi-user research facilities (large facilities) are sophisticated
research instruments and platforms - such as large telescopes, interferometers
and distributed sensor arrays - that serve diverse scientific disciplines from
astronomy and physics to geoscience and biological science. Large facilities are
increasingly dependent on advanced cyberinfrastructure (CI) - computing, data
and software systems, networking, and associated human capital - to enable broad
delivery and analysis of facility-generated data. As a result of these cyber
infrastructure tools, scientists and the public gain new insights into
fundamental questions about the structure and history of the universe, the world
we live in today, and how our plants and animals may change in the coming
decades. The goal of this pilot project is to develop a model for a
Cyberinfrastructure Center of Excellence (CI CoE) that facilitates community
building and sharing and applies knowledge of best practices and innovative
solutions for facility CI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The pilot project will explore
how such a center would facilitate CI improvements for existing facilities and
for the design of new facilities that exploit advanced CI architecture designs
and leverage establish tools and solutions. The pilot project will also catalyze
a key function of an eventual CI CoE - to provide a forum for exchange of
experience and knowledge among CI experts. The project will also gather best
practices for large facilities, with the aim of enhancing individual facility CI
efforts in the broader CI context. The discussion forum and planning effort for
a future CI CoE will also address training and workforce development by
expanding the pool of skilled facility CI experts and forging career paths for
CI professionals. The result of this work will be a strategic plan for a CI CoE
that will be evaluated and refined through community interactions: workshops and
direct engagement with the facilities and the broader CI community.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is being supported by the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure in the Directorate for Computer and Information Science and
Engineering and the Division of Emerging Frontiers in the Directorate for
Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.