* 1842929
* SBIR Phase I:  Integrated Onboard Charger and Auxiliary Power Module for Electric Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Zeyu Zhang, AmpX Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to develop the first
low-cost and integrated onboard charger and auxiliary power module for electric
vehicles, facilitating deployment of next-generation electrified transportation
systems. It is noteworthy that there are more than 250 million registered
passenger vehicles in the U.S. Over 40% of greenhouse gases and 70% of emissions
come from the transportation sector, and transportation is 99% dependent on one
source of fuel: petroleum. Mainstream adoption of electric vehicles is essential
if the U.S. is to gain energy security and substantially reduce carbon
emissions. The electric car industry has passed its tipping point; however,
electric vehicles are still in the very early stages of development. Like early
computers, the pieces that make up an electric car are large, heavy, costly and
unable to efficiently communicate amongst themselves. The proposed technology
not only reduces the volume, cost, and weight of onboard chargers for electric
vehicles, but also enhances their efficiencies, and enables bidirectional
operation to support future Smart Grid functionalities. This project will lead
to creating jobs once the technology matures toward
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will lead to design and development of an innovative
integrated and bidirectional onboard charger for electric vehicles. Currently,
all the upcoming and commercially available electric vehicles are equipped with
an individual onboard charger to charge traction batteries and an additional
auxiliary power module to power auxiliary loads. These converters are heavy,
bulky, costly and need to communicate over a variety of controller area
networks. The intellectual merit of this project is in the innovative topology,
design, control, development, packaging, and validation of the first charger
which integrates an onboard charger and an auxiliary power module. This SBIR
Phase I project involves the design of the converter, investigation and design
of the controller, design and implementation of the electromagnetic interference
filter stage, creating the schematics and layout, thermal management,
reliability analyses, enclosure design, and final alpha prototype assembly and
verification. This important work will (1) lead to theoretical advancements in
the design, control, and integration of power electronic converters, (2) involve
interdisciplinary research in power electronics, control, packaging, and thermal
management, and (3) lead to commercialization of the first integrated onboard
charger and auxiliary power module for electric
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.