* 1842387
* Advanced Polymeric Tissue-Mimicking Materials and Phantoms for Evaluation of Multispectral Photoacoustic Imaging Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Jesse Jokerst, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Randy Duran
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasound is a powerful tool to
image diseases including cancer, orthopedic disorders, and heart function. One
limitation of ultrasound is that it suffers from low contrast between the region
of interest versus the background tissue. Therefore, there is a wide body of
research into a special kind of ultrasound known as photoacoustic imaging.
Photoacoustic imaging uses light to generate sound only in the area of interest.
This increases the contrast. Unfortunately, photoacoustic ultrasound is not yet
approved for widespread use in people. This might be partially due to a lack of
standardization devices and methods to validate the novel imaging equipment that
is needed for photoacoustic imaging. Therefore, this proposed work will create
specialized plastic objects with known optical and acoustic properties suitable
for calibrating and standardizing photoacoustic imaging equipment. This proposal
combines expertise from academia and the Food and Drug Administration to create
test objects and methods that will be useful to instrument manufacturers and
physicians. The resulting test objects will improve knowledge of how to best
create photoacoustic imaging instrumentation and might also streamline
regulatory approval of this equipment. In turn, this will increase patient
access to this important imaging technique to ultimately advance the national
health and quality of life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoacoustic imaging provides deep tissue imaging
similar to ultrasound but with enhanced optical contrast and additional
functional and molecular imaging capabilities. However, no standardized
performance test methods or phantoms exist for photoacoustic imaging system
evaluation unlike mature techniques (ultrasound, MRI, CT). The fundamental
limitation is a lack of materials to simultaneously simulate tissue properties
over a broad range of optical wavelengths and acoustic frequencies. This leaves
investigators, instrument manufacturers, and regulatory agencies without clear
strategies to evaluate device safety and effectiveness. This proposed work will
create stable, biologically relevant imaging phantoms with well-characterized
optical absorption/scattering coefficients, acoustic impedance, etc. that
broadly simulate tissue over a wide range of optical wavelengths and acoustic
frequencies. A literature search and laboratory study will identify suitable
materials such as polyacrylamide hydrogels or novel polyvinyl chloride plastisol
formulations. Intrinsic properties will be measured using well-validated
spectrophotometry and acoustic pulse transmission methods and equipment at FDA.
Once the phantom material formulations have been optimized, we will construct
phantoms in several specific configurations to evaluate image quality metrics
such as spatial resolution, penetration depth, etc. These novel phantoms will
then be used with three photoacoustic systems with substantially different
operating parameter ranges (e.g. optical wavelengths). Image quality metrics
will be compared between devices to elucidate performance trade-offs between
systems and the overall impact of system design choices and phantom properties
on performance. The goal is to produce phantoms with 6-month stability that
spectrally mimic hemoglobin and deoxyhemoglobin and contain targets that enable
image quality testing. The outcome will be a well-validated tissue-mimicking
phantom to support device developers and inform regulatory decision-making
including use as potential FDA Medical Device Development
Tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.