* 1842394
* SBIR Phase I:  Next-Generation Capillary Electrophoresis with Mass Spectrometry for Biopharmaceutical and Biomedical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Oluwatosin Dada, GMJ TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will be the development of a robust capillary
electrophoresis instrument with mass spectrometry detection for biomedical
research, biopharmaceutical development, clinical diagnostics, and system
biology. Capillary electrophoresis (CE) is a powerful liquid separation
technology with remarkable potentials for bioanalysis. It was the workhorse tool
for the completion of human genome project that, in part, led to the DNA
sequencing market. A CE system with both optical and mass spectrometry detection
will enable a deeper understanding of molecular dynamics governing biochemical
processes, such as protein expression, deregulation, and interaction with other
biochemical species, which could lead to breakthroughs in drug development,
early diagnosis, and treatments for deadly human diseases such as cancer,
diabetics, and neurodegenerative disorders. The proposed technology will offer
benefits to biopharmaceutical drug development companies by increasing the
efficiency of product characterization for quality improvement. It also will
allow efficient routine proteomics analysis and other bioanalytical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I
project is to develop a next-generation capillary electrophoresis with
electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (CE-ESI-MS) for protein
characterization. CE-ESI-MS allows high efficiency separation and
characterization of several biochemical species including proteins. However,
leveraging the intrinsic advantages of CE-ESI-MS has been difficult due to lack
of robust, easy-to-use instrumentation, which has made adoption for routine
applications uncommon. This research will develop and evaluate a novel CE-ESI-MS
instrument for protein characterization. The proposed instrument will employ
original innovations to overcome the limitations of the incumbent technologies
and exceed their capabilities. A novel fluidic nanoport for sample and buffer
manipulation will be developed to allow analysis from 1 microL or less sample
volume. The nanoport will employ a fully automated design with less operator
intervention. This will be useful for sample-limited applications such as in
clinical analysis. In addition, the instrument will utilize a hybrid
electrospray ionization interface for simultaneous optical and MS detection,
which no existing technology offers. Combining CE's ultrahigh efficiency with
robust quantitative characteristics of optical detection and the molecular
identification of mass spectrometry will be a powerful tool for bioanalysis.
This combination will represent a significant advancement over the state-of-the-
art and enhance the means of interrogating proteins and their biochemical
functions in biological samples. The proposed innovations will significantly
enhance the robustness and capabilities of CE-ESI-MS for fast, efficient, and
deep bioanalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.