* 1842049
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Eocene Shark Paleoecology and Climate Modeling to reveal Southern Ocean Circulation and Antarctic Glaciation
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Sora Kim, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 356,707.00

The Earth's climate has changed through time and during the Eocene Epoch (56 to
34 million years ago) there was a transition from 'greenhouse' to 'icehouse'
conditions. During the Eocene, a shift to cooler temperatures at high latitudes
resulted in the inception of polar glaciation. This in turn affected the
environment for living organisms. This project looks to uncover the interaction
between biological, oceanographic, and climate systems for the Eocene in
Antarctica using chemical analysis of fossil shark teeth collected during past
expeditions. The combination of paleontological and geochemical analyses will
provide insight to the past ecology and ocean conditions; climate models will be
applied to test the role of tectonics, greenhouse gas concentration and ocean
circulation on environmental change during this time period. The study
contributes to understanding the interaction of increased atmospheric carbon
dioxide and ocean circulation. This project also seeks to improve diversity,
equity, and inclusion within the geosciences workforce with efforts targeted to
undergraduate, graduate, postdoctoral, and early career
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal is to elucidate the processes
leading from the Eocene greenhouse to Oligocene icehouse conditions. Previous
explanations for this climate shift centers on Antarctica, where tectonic
configurations influenced oceanic gateways, ocean circulation reduced heat
transport, and/or greenhouse gas declines prompted glaciation. The team will
reconstruct watermass, current, and climate fluctuations proximal to the
Antarctic Peninsula using geochemical indicators (oxygen and neodymium isotope
composition) from fossil shark teeth collected from Seymour Island. The approach
builds on previous shark paleontological studies, incorporates geochemical
analyses for environmental reconstruction (i.e., temperature gradients and ocean
circulation), and tests hypotheses on Earth System dynamics using novel global
climate model simulations with geochemical tracers. This project will advance
global climate modeling capabilities with experiments that consider Eocene
tectonic configuration within isotope-enabled climate model simulations. A
comparison of geochemical results from Eocene climate simulations and empirical
records of shark teeth will reveal processes and mechanisms central to the
Eocene Antarctic climatic shift.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.