* 1842447
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Long Term Cultural Ties Across Environmental Zones
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Lars Fehren-Schmitz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2021
* USD 30,777.00

Humans have the unique ability to adapt and live in a wide variety of
challenging environments. Groups living at high altitudes, like in the Peruvian
Andes, experience not only physiological challenges but also significant
environmental limitations that have the potential to drastically affect
productive subsistence practices. In addition to these challenges, ancient
populations were subjected to varying levels of influence of large-scale
political entities such as the Inca Empire, and/or post-contact colonialism,
which likely changed traditional subsistence patterns, community organization,
and cultural practices. This project will investigate how individuals as well as
communities were able to adapt in order to mediate the effects of environmental
challenges and political/cultural changes. The proposed research will address
questions surrounding how these challenges affected people's ability to subsist,
how changes in political structure altered community organization and cultural
practices (i.e. site usage and mortuary practices), and whether there were
changes in population composition at the archaeological site of Marcajirca from
the Late Intermediate Period (LIP) through the Early Colonial Period (ca.
1000-1640AD). The goal of this research is to complement the work of and provide
valuable resources to local archaeologists who are beginning to construct a more
detailed picture of human habitation in previously under-researched
environments.

Dr. Fehren-Schmitz and Mrs. Washburn will utilize a combination of stable
isotope (Carbon and Nitrogen) and ancient DNA analysis in order to explore
changes in socioeconomic and subsistence patterns. The use of either stable
isotope analysis or aDNA can be seen in bio-archaeological projects throughout
the Andes; however, it is not common practice to utilize a combination of both
methodologies, which if not done has the potential to limit the scope of
research projects because each set of data has usable limitations. By combining
these two methodologies, this project can address questions of how environmental
challenges and cultural/political stability or change ultimately affected
community organization and daily life. Moreover, unlike other regions of South
America, the under-representation of human aDNA data from within this region
inhibits the ability to fully reconstruct South American population density,
history and interaction, as well as the impact of European colonization. The
data collected for this research will provide key information that will
potentially shape fundamental understanding of long-term population development
in the Andean highlands.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.