* 1842132
* Collaborative Research: Community College Cyber Pilot Program (C3P)
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Tony Coulson, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2022
* USD 749,869.00

This project from Whatcom Community College (WCC), in collaboration with
California State University San Bernardino (CSUSB) will run an apprenticeship-
like, cohort-based program known as the Community College Cyber Pilot (C3P)
Scholars Program. The aim is to place highly qualified cybersecurity
professionals in government positions, in alignment with the National Defense
Authorization Act of 2018. This project will explore pathways for non-
traditional students and veterans to enter the cybersecurity field and
successfully complete a cybersecurity program and secure gainful employment in
the field. In this case, the term "non-traditional student" refers to those who
do not hold a prior technical degree but do hold a bachelor's degree. The long-
term goal of the project is to build the institutional capacity required for
community colleges to independently run successful SFS programs, as well as to
increase the diversity of the student population in cybersecurity programs and
the number of cybersecurity professionals in federal employment. WCC and CSUSB
both have designations as Centers of Academic Excellence (CAE) Cyber Defense;
furthermore, WCC runs CyberWatch West, the regional cybersecurity education
consortium, while CSUB currently has an active CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed C3P Scholars Program
will run across six pilot colleges, including WCC, and a total of 30 students
will receive scholarships. The C3P project has the following goals to be
accomplished over a three-year timeframe: (1) Develop a replicable model program
for C3P, expanding the SFS CyberCorps(R) program to community colleges; (2)
Recruit pilot colleges and deliver faculty/institutional SFS capacity building
academy covering critical program and institutional components; (3) Support C3P
cohorts in recruitment and retention of 30 highly qualified students to
participate as SFS scholars in the C3P program; (4) Provide guided pathway for
SFS Scholars including assessing work readiness through a series of assessments
related to NICE work roles and usage of an e-portfolio system for students to
document their skills for potential employers; (5) Increase the number of cyber
professionals working in federal jobs; and (6) Expand the number of potential
community college PIs and institutional capacity for effective grant/fiscal
management for the SFS program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this project
is provided from the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) and NSF Scholarships
in STEM (S-STEM) programs, reflecting alignment of the project with major
emphases of the ATE program on involvement of community colleges and the S-STEM
program on financial and co-curricular support for high-achieving students with
demonstrated financial need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.