* 1842922
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: MATDAT18 Type-I: Development of a machine learning framework to optimize ReaxFF force field parameters.
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Adri van Duin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 09/30/2020
* USD 140,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARIES. This award supports continued collaboration of materials
researchers with data scientists kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon event. Recent
advancements in technological devices, such as smart phones, batteries, and
solar cells, are consequences of the discovery and application of novel
materials. Computer simulations of systems of atoms could be insightful in
predicting and discovering new materials. Simulations based on quantum mechanics
are computationally expensive and prohibitive for all but for systems of a few
atoms. Simulations involving a much larger number of atoms can be done using
molecular dynamics which utilizes models for the interactions between atoms.
ReaxFF is one such interaction model which can also describe chemical bonding.
Currently, more than a thousand academic groups and companies are using ReaxFF
to model systems of atoms. It takes many parameters to fully specify a ReaxFF
model. These parameters control the interactions between atoms and must be
individually optimized for different types of materials. Due to the
prohibitively large number of possible combinations of parameters, this
optimization process is time consuming and complex, and consequently limits the
applicability of ReaxFF. A procedure that can produce optimum parameter sets
within a reasonable time will facilitate novel material research by accelerating
the investigation of underlying physics and chemistry on the scale of atoms.
Recent developments in machine learning are promising in terms of solving such
high dimensional global optimization problems. The goal of this study is to
develop a procedure that will enable fast and high-quality force field
development using machine learning models and make this procedure accessible to
all current and future ReaxFF users.

The results of this project can also be applied to other large-scale multi-
objective optimization problems and can have impacts on many scientific
disciplines that involve large and complex data. The developed machine learning
code and optimization procedure will be shared with researchers through the
Materials Computation Center at Penn State University and GitHub. Some outreach
programs will be conducted for educating the next generation of materials
scientists, data scientists and statisticians. The research teams will create
diverse environments in their laboratories in terms of race, gender and national
origin. The research will also provide an excellent opportunity to recruit
students from underrepresented groups to participate in projects at the
interface between materials science, data science, and statistics and is highly
relevant to societal needs.

TECHNICAL SUMMARY This award supports continued collaboration between a
materials researcher and a data scientist kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon
event. ReaxFF is a commonly used reactive force field method, capable of
simulating bond formation and dissociation in large atomistic systems. In order
to reveal the physics behind these systems accurately by using the ReaxFF
simulations, the force field parameters must be optimized for each different
materials system, and the high-dimensional force field parameter landscape
should be explored thoroughly during optimization. However, the large number of
existing parameters limit the optimization stage of the force field development,
as the conventional optimization approaches become time-consuming. This
challenge can be resolved by the development of an efficient optimization
framework. In this project, an efficient sequential optimization framework will
be developed, including a "minimum energy" sequential search and a novel
"divide-and-conquer" strategy for efficient Gaussian process modeling. This
study will make ReaxFF force field development more practical, which will enable
fast access to physics and chemistry in a wide range of material systems to
enhance novel material design. This project can serve is an example of how
rigorous statistical/machine learning methods can be used to tackle important
problems in materials science and engineering. The project may be
transformative, as it can empower the atomistic-scale understanding of materials
systems by using novel techniques in data science and machine learning. The
developed iterative optimization procedure will be combined under Python
programming language to facilitate implementation to commercial molecular
dynamics packages. From a statistical point of view, the idea of divide-and-
conquer and design-based subsample aggregation to reduce computational
complexity of Gaussian process modeling is innovative. It can open a new path in
statistics/data science with big data settings and can lead to advances in
machine learning and optimization. The sequential optimization framework
constructed for high-dimensional problems may open new avenues for studying
problems with massive and complex input structure and energize both theoretical
and applied research in statistics and machine learning.

The award is jointly funded through the Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.