* 1842971
* EAGER: Personal Models for a Navigational Approach to Health
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Ramesh Jain, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 01/31/2020
* USD 199,512.00

Scientific and technological advances in the last century have helped humankind
move past infectious disease as the primary cause of mortality. Average lifespan
has doubled from 40 years to above 80 years in developed countries. Today,
chronic disease presents our greatest health challenge. Current healthcare
practice based on the episodic infectious disease health model is not a good
approach to treating chronic disease. Instead, healthcare needs to focus on
diet, exercise, and other lifestyle activities. Future health systems will use
rich, multi-modal data to sense health state continuously and provide guidance
in making daily lifestyle decisions. The lifestyle navigational approach is a
close-loop sense-estimate-act cycle based on sensors, computing elements, and
actuators and closely guided by the personal model of the individual. To provide
guidance, predict the future, or understand preferences of an individual, we
must build a model that is specific to an individual. The personal model
contains not only ordinary medical record data, but also information about
disease propensity and lifestyle behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop methods to easily and accurately track behaviors that have an
impact on health and chronic disease, and methods for incorporating such
information into a personalized lifestyle health model. These models will be
critical in developing a navigational approach to health in order to facilitate
precision medicine based on predictive and preventive approaches. Nutrition is
one of the major components of lifestyle, and yet there are no fully
satisfactory approaches for food logging. This proposal will specifically create
a novel approach to food logging based on using a wearable sensor to detect
heart rate changes associated with eating, which triggers an ecological
momentary assessment (EMA) for food logging. A food log compared with already
available activity logs provides enough quantitative information to understand
and analyze lifestyle quantitatively for a person. This project will develop
novel event mining techniques by extending machine learning approaches for
building lifestyle related causal models for a person that will be used in
predictive approaches as well as in guiding the person's lifestyle
decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.