* 1842958
* SBIR Phase I:  Antibiotic Dispensing Spacer for improved treatment of PJI in TKA
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Jeff Castleberry, FORCAST ORTHOPEDICS INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 10/31/2019
* USD 224,872.00

This SBIR Phase I project will help to address a critical need for patients who
have suffered an infection in a total knee replacement joint. Unfortunately,
doctors have few good options for effectively treating this type of infection to
avoid the potential for limb amputation or even death should the infection
persist and spread. Today, treatment requires surgical replacement of part or
all of the existing implant while using oral or intravenous antibiotics. Due to
the capsule around the joint (isolated from blood vessels) these methods deliver
marginal amounts of antibiotic within the knee where the bacteria reside.
Patients suffer elongated treatment, many times without the use of their knee,
waiting for the bacterial infection to slowly resolve. ForCast Orthopedics'
Antibiotic Dispensing Knee Spacer provides a refillable reservoir within the
artificial knee that can distribute antibiotic directly into the knee capsule
for effective infection treatment. Physicians can prescribe the antibiotic most
appropriate for the bacteria diagnosed. The patient returns to the doctor's
office once per week for a checkup and antibiotic refill injection until the
infection is cured. No follow up surgery is required. Duplicating the antibiotic
delivery of previous successful clinical studies (using representative but
intolerable daily injections) should result in similar highly successful patient
outcomes, reduced patient suffering and reduced healthcare
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project addresses an underserved
clinical need for improved treatment of Periprosthetic Joint Infection (PJI).
Today, doctors have few good options for treatment to avoid the potential for
limb amputation or even death should PJI persist and spread. All methods require
surgical debridement and replacement of part or all of the existing implant (to
reduce bacterial load) while using oral or intravenous antibiotics that cannot
reach the remaining bacteria within the knee capsule (blood/synovial fluid
barrier). Temporary eluting antibiotic spacers and beads are too short lived.
Patients suffer elongated treatment, many times without a load-bearing knee.
ForCast Orthopedics is developing an Antibiotic Dispensing Spacer (AD Spacer) to
replace the standard spacer in a total knee implant. The AD Spacer provides a
refillable reservoir to hold the antibiotic of choice for the bacteria
identified and a delivery system to maintain a therapeutic concentration within
the knee for the entire therapy duration, typically a minimum of 6 weeks. As a
permanent spacer, no further surgery is required after treatment. Emulating the
delivery characteristics of previously successful clinical studies (using
intolerable daily injections) should result in similar highly successful patient
outcomes, reduced morbidity and reduced total cost of
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.