* 1842412
* A low-cost float for distributed, Lagrangian observations of the biological carbon pump
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Kakani Young, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,280,841.00

This project will develop ocean observing floats using new technologies for
tracking and imaging the transport of individual particles to the deep ocean and
contribute to our understanding of the biological carbon pump (BCP). Tracking
what happens to carbon in our oceans is critical for understanding the world's
climate. If successful, the floats will collect data that could provide new
insights with respect to our understanding of the Biological Carbon Pump (BCP)
and global carbon cycling. The project will also support graduate student
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The transport of organic carbon from the
ocean's surface to its abyssal depths plays a central role in regulating
atmospheric carbon, and thus the climate. Understanding the "Biological Carbon
Pump", is thus crucial to predicting the evolution of the world's climate.
However, due to the complexity of this process and the limitations of available
observations (largely from bulk geochemical analyses of the contents of
particle-intercepting traps), predictions of oceanic carbon sequestration remain
extremely uncertain. What we need now are autonomous tools which are both
Lagrangian, essential for accurately quantifying respiration, sinking rates, and
fluxes, and widely deployable (low cost), essential for reducing spatial and
temporal aliasing, and for ensuring statistical significance. The proposed float
technology will merge recent technological developments in environmental tag
technology and low-cost imaging into a modular, low-cost platform that will
result in the next generation of observing platforms and have a large impact on
the state of our understanding of important carbon pathways. The goal is to make
possible dense distributions of Lagrangian platforms that can directly observe
the transport and transformation of individual particles that drive the
BCP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.