* 1842790
* SBIR Phase I:  6crickets Automatic Schedule Recommendation
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Helen Wang, Goodwintercrop Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 02/29/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to disrupt the 1000 hours per child per
year where American children have no school and no parents and deserve access to
the best enrichment activities. The company plans to build a much-needed
technical infrastructure for schools, enrichment providers, and parents. By
automating and simplifying the process of providers supplying, parents consuming
and schools hosting enrichment activities, the proposed system will remove
significant friction and create an efficient market. A key invention is the
company's Automatic Schedule Recommendation System which recommends a schedule
of classes for a family of one or more children and satisfies constraints such
as ages and driving distance, maximizes desirable attributes such as minimal
driving and diversity in classes across time, and leverages historical data like
classes taken in the past and social data such as classes enjoyed by friends and
classmates, to make effective recommendations. The proposed technology removes
the most significant friction during parents' purchases of enrichment classes,
namely, piecing together a class schedule from classes across different
providers. This project is the first interdisciplinary research that
strategically combines algorithms from the fields of optimizations and
recommender systems to solve the problem and achieve scalability and
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will design, implement and evaluate an Automatic Schedule
Recommendation System. Existing recommender systems are insufficient because
they largely recommend a single item to a single user; this application requires
that a sequence of items (namely, a sequence of classes that fit in a coherent
schedule) be recommended and coordinated among a group of users (i.e. children
in the same family or set of friends). Existing class scheduling algorithms are
insufficient because they find optimal schedules using known preferences; in
this problem there is a need to predict preferences. The company will design a
fully-automatic schedule recommendation system that predicts the suitability of
each session to each user using machine learning techniques and aggregates these
predictions over time to propose full schedules that are most appropriate for a
parent and satisfy multi-dimensional constraints. The resulting system will be
deployed to the company's users along with extensive evaluation of its
efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.