* 1842642
* Workshops for the Future of Mechatronic and Robotic Education
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Michael Gennert, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Edward Berger
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,957.00

Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering is a new engineering discipline that is
experiencing tremendous, dynamic growth. Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering
professionals are shaping the world by designing smart and autonomous systems
and processes that will improve human life and welfare. This requires an
interdisciplinary knowledge of mechanical, electrical, computer, software, and
systems engineering to oversee the entire design and development process. There
have been many educational efforts around Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering
in higher education such as courses, minors, and degree programs, but they have
not been well integrated or widely adopted. The educators in this nascent
community continue to re-invent content modules, courses, and curricula instead
of adopting and improving existing content. With the rapid increase in demand
for robotics and automation engineers, now is the time for Mechatronics and
Robotics Engineering to coalesce as a distinct and identifiable engineering
discipline. This project consists of a series workshops on the future of
Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering education at the bachelor's degree and
postgraduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop series serve to solidify
the emerging community of current and future educators, promote diversity and
inclusivity within the community, gather community input, and identify thought
leaders for future community activities. Participants will include a wide range
of educators teaching courses such as mechatronics, robotics, dynamics,
controls. PhD students seeking academic careers in mechatronics and robotics,
and industry professionals desiring to shape the future workforce. As a result
of these workshops, the will begin standardization of educational components
such as frameworks, curricula, course outlines, experiments, and assignments.
Furthermore, the workshops will be stepping stones towards building a diverse
and inclusive community of educators and professionals from a broad range of
colleges, universities, and industries with the ultimate goal of shaping the
future of Mechatronics and Robotics Engineering Education and increasing its
widespread adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.