* 1842037
* Scaffolding Computational Thinking Through Multilevel Systems Modeling
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Joseph Krajcik, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,272,353.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12). This
project is supported by the STEM+C program and will advance its mission by
building on the work of a previous project that developed a system modeling
tool, SageModeler, for use by middle and high school students. This project
will: (1) Extend the capabilities of the modeling tool to scaffold construction
of system dynamics models; (2) Develop curricular materials that support
students in creating, testing, revising, and sharing dynamic models of natural
systems; (3) Research the progression of student modeling practices and
computational thinking across curricular contexts; and (4) Study instructional
challenges teacher encounter when adopting a model-based approach to teaching
topics in physics, chemistry, biology, Earth science, and environmental science
at the high school level. The goal of this project is to advance understanding
of how student modeling practices and computational thinking develop over time
and across investigations of phenomena of increasing complexity. The project
will also develop a set of curricular materials that support students in
creating, testing, revising, and sharing system dynamic models in order to make
sense of complex natural phenomena. The modeling tool and all materials will be
made freely available to schools and teachers, and the software has been
translated into several languages, including Spanish. With translation options
and a tool that is designed to facilitate computational modeling without
traditional coding or the writing of mathematical equations, this project has
the potential to broaden the participation of a greater diversity of students in
STEM and computational thinking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems thinking and
computational modeling are essential practices for addressing some of the most
challenging scientific and societal problems, but systems thinking and causal
reasoning are difficult for students. The outcomes of complex system models can
be counterintuitive, and it is often difficult to know which components of a
system will have significant impacts on outcomes. To facilitate student
engagement in modeling complex natural systems, the free, web-based SageModeler
tool was developed and tested with middle and high school students. The existing
tool is limited, however, in its ability to support the development of reliable
models of complex dynamic systems. This project is guided by the hypothesis that
student computational practices and modeling of complex natural systems can be
improved through use of improved modeling software, development of appropriate
curricular scaffolds, and providing teachers with professional learning
opportunities to gain relevant pedagogical content knowledge related to system
modeling, computational thinking, and the natural phenomena to be explored. To
test this hypothesis, this research and development project will pursue answers
to three research questions: (1) How do scientific explanations of phenomena
evolve as students engage in computational thinking in the context of system
modeling? (2) In what ways can curricular materials and technological tools best
scaffold the development of students' computational thinking and system modeling
practice? And (3) What pedagogical strategies are effective for scaffolding
students in computational thinking through modeling complex systems? A variety
of data sources and data analytic approaches will be employed throughout the
course of the project to guide development of materials and track outcomes among
participating students and teachers in two geographic locations having diverse
student populations. The overall goal of the project is to research and
disseminate technological, curricular, and pedagogical scaffolds needed to
support students and teachers in developing computational thinking in the
context of system modeling and utilizing a system modeling approach for
exploring phenomena across multiple STEM disciplines. In pursuing this goal, the
project will: (1) Expand the modeling capabilities of SageModeler and the
ability to share models within an online activity delivery and reporting system;
(2) Refine and adapt existing curricular units and create new units as needed
for five major secondary school STEM disciplines; (3) Conduct research on how
students learn while engaging in systems thinking and modeling; (4) Develop
educative teacher materials and a professional learning program that includes a
professional learning community focusing on system modeling and computational
thinking; and (5) Disseminate project products and research findings
broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.