* 1842556
* SBIR Phase I:  Field Mobile Soil Nitrate Sensor for Precision Fertilizer Management
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Natalia Rogovska, N-Sense LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project stems from the need to substantially improve nitrogen
(N) use efficiency in crop production and thereby improve profitability for
farmers, while simultaneously reducing the adverse effects of agriculture on the
environment. Currently, less than half of the N fertilizer applied to
agricultural fields is used by the crops to which it is applied. The remaining N
is either leached from the soil or lost to the atmosphere as nitrous oxide -
potent greenhouse gas. This inefficient use of N fertilizer by crops is an
economic burden for farmers, cause serious water and air quality problems, and
contribute about 2.5% of total U.S. greenhouse gas emissions. Furthermore, these
N losses represent a tremendous energy inefficiency, because the production of
synthetic N fertilizer is the largest energy input in production agriculture.
The key to improving N use efficiency in crop production is applying the right
amount of N fertilizer in the right place at the right time. The proposed sensor
technology would be disruptive to existing agricultural technology and
practices, wherein N fertilizer is applied at a uniform rate across agricultural
fields, and improve profitability for farmers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to demonstrate the feasibility of a robust field-mobile
soil nitrate (NO3-) sensor utilizing mid-infrared technology to facilitate
precision N fertilizer applications. Mid-infrared spectrometers have
historically been large, expensive, and fragile laboratory instruments that
require substantial sample preparation, thus preventing their use as mobile
optical soil NO3- sensors. The scope of the Phase I research will focus on three
objectives: 1) The design and development of a robust and low-cost mid-infrared
spectrometer that uses a diamond attenuated total internal reflectance (D-ATR)
probe to measure NO3- levels; 2) The design, construction, and testing of a
chisel shank-tool bar system that houses the spectrometer and D-ATR probe; and
3) the development of control and data processing and analysis software to
manage the system. Anticipated technical results of Phase I will provide a
prototype that can measure NO3- in the upper 30 cm of soil, not just at the
surface, by enabling modulation of the depth of the shank and the probe as the
system is pulled through a field, and self-cleaning of the system as soil is
continuously moved across the optical surface of the diamond by the forward
motion of the tractor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.