* 1842393
* SBIR Phase I: Feasibility of a Wearable Blindness Prevention System
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Jonathan Cox, GLOBE BIOMEDICAL LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,206.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project comprises the
development of a wearable system capable of accurately tracking glaucoma
progression via continuous monitoring of intraocular pressure (IOP). Glaucoma is
the leading cause of irreversible blindness in the world and affects nearly 80
million people worldwide. Using a novel wearable system, optometrists,
ophthalmologists, and medical professionals across multiple disciplines can
review the IOP trends at visits, monitor high-risk patients in real-time, and
program patient-specific threshold alarms that will prevent irreversible
blindness caused by glaucoma and related conditions. Through successful product
commercialization, the novel wearable blindness prevention system (BPS) is
expected to be adopted by approximately 2 million glaucoma patients annually.
Users of the device will have continuous access to IOP data trends. Clinicians
will be alerted when at-risk patients fail to comply with prescribed daily
medicinal treatment (due to excessive IOP levels) and can continuously track the
efficacy of prescribed IOP-lowering treatments. Finally, the IOP tracking
capability of the system will allow improvements in the quality of care for
general clinicians, medical specialists, and clinical researchers and will be a
major player in the current move toward data-driven, value
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project centers on
laboratory feasibility testing of the fundamental concept behind the novel
blindness prevention system technology - image-based pressure sensing - on a
benchtop 3D-printed glaucoma simulator that is monitored using an alpha
prototype of the system. The research plan includes testing of the feasibility
of a complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) camera which fits inside a
pair of eyeglass frames, plus processor, optics, and software, as a way to
record pressure changes in eye tissue in a benchtop environment. The key
objective is to accurately - and with high repeatability - detect unhealthy eye
pressure levels in the simulator using an alpha prototype, a-BPS, that
communicates with a standard mobile device. The target research outcome for the
a-BPS is to successfully trigger a high-pressure alarm in a repeatable manner
whenever eye pressure in the simulator exceeds a clinically-relevant threshold.
It is anticipated that the Phase I research results will show successfully
operation in 90% or more of the test samples. The output from the Phase I effort
will be used as design inputs for a Phase II prototype, which will be wearable
and will allow testing on humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.