* 1842116
* Research on the Development of An Assessment to Measure Kindergarten Children's Abilities to Reason Computationally With Mathematical Problem-Solving Skills
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Victor Lee, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Lori Takeuchi
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,120,807.00

Students are coming into contact with programming toys at a young age. There are
claims that use of such toys can enhance problem solving skills, develop early
computational thinking, and provide a context for putting mathematics
understandings to work. This has yielded a number of commercial products that
purportedly help children to realize those benefits. While many of these early
childhood coding toys are fun and playful, research on their ability to truly
support early computer science learning is needed. For such work to be possible,
educators need assessments that measure integrated computational thinking for
early childhood learners that can quantify learning that takes place with coding
toys. However, such assessments do not yet exist. This is compounded by a lack
of curricular units and learning modules for early childhood classrooms that
integrate computation and mathematics and build upon what these toys are
supposed to offer. The project is funded by the STEM+C Program, which seeks to
address emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied
integration of computational thinking and computing activities within
disciplinary STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education through
high school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this STEM+C project, mathematics and
computational thinking will be integrated in early childhood education. Using
Evidence-Centered Design, the project will develop a theoretically-based,
empirically-tested assessment to measure kindergarten children's abilities to
reason computationally with mathematical problem solving skills (i.e.,
strategies and ways of thinking that aid their understanding and use of
mathematical knowledge) in teachers' classrooms. The project will also develop
modules for kindergarten instruction that encourage integrated computational
thinking with mathematical problem solving. Recognizing that these are circular
constraints, the project will involve the following four sequential steps: (1)
operationalize early CT in kindergarten mathematics classrooms by identifying CT
competencies; (2) develop curriculum involving a subset of current early
childhood toys around the competencies; (3) develop an assessment to measure
students' CT and mathematics competencies; and (4) conduct evaluation studies of
the curriculum and assessment in kindergarten classrooms. Project deliverables
include: a competency model of integrated computational thinking; an assessment
that measures the competency model; and curriculum resources for teachers around
the competency model that leverages toys and technologies intended for early
childhood settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.