* 1842973
* SBIR Phase I:  Smart Sensor for Precision Agriculture
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Morann Dagan, ATOLLA TECH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to improve the current spraying practices in
agriculture. Inefficient crop spraying causes drift which can lead to crop
damage or unwanted pesticide use in neighboring non-target crop areas. It may
contaminate nearby bodies of water or be an issue for human health. Our company
would solve this through the implementation of a closed loop sensor system which
would remotely determine the efficiency of sprayer machines and the spray
pattern of the material continuously and in real time. Farmers will benefit
through reduced costs of wasted materials resulting from over-spraying, while
feeling safe against pest and fungus infestation resulting from under-spraying.
The initial intended customers are large orchards, vineyards and tree farms.
Those farmers generally use airblast sprayers which are highly inefficient and
waste about 45% of the material. Those chemicals either hit the ground and
contaminate it or pollute the air. An owner of a large farm that implements our
proposed device will save a significant amount on chemical costs and also avoids
the consequences due to drift of chemicals onto neighboring farms, public roads,
or non-agricultural areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to introduce a new technology to the agricultural sector. This
technology has been previously built for complex and sophisticated applications
in mostly academia and government sectors. We look to provide a new
functionality while reducing the size and cost of the technology. It would be
used as a new and improved method of calibration, replacing a tedious and often
ignored current process. Furthermore, the sensor would be integrated as a closed
loop system for autonomous sprayer adjustments. A complete software solution
would accompany the hardware in order to make it approachable to the non-
scientific community. This project will prove the potential of our technology as
a competitive player in the rapidly growing ag-tech
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.