* 1842604
* EAGER: Assessing Potential Bioprivileged Molecules
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* George Kraus, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Ram Gupta
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

Novel biomass-derived chemical species hold significant promise for providing
societal needs for new and improved products such as next-generation materials,
polymers, corrosion inhibitors, lubricants, antimicrobials, food preservatives,
insecticides, etc., with enhanced performance properties. In the search for
improved products, biomass provides access to chemical species that cannot be
effectively derived from petrochemical sources. Despite the desire for novel
molecules, a significant challenge in their identification and development is
the relative dearth of understanding between chemical species and final product
performance attributes. This lack of structure-function knowledge creates a
dilemma as the precise chemical target for improved product performance cannot
be easily defined and as such no single target chemical species can be
systematically identified.

The goal of this EAGER project is to advance the systematic identification of
bioprivileged molecules, which are biology-derived chemical intermediates that
can be efficiently converted to a diversity of chemical products including both
novel molecules and drop-in replacements, by integrating a reaction network
computational framework with experimental-driven knowledge of feasible reactions
involving multifunctional molecules derived from biomass. The project will
utilize the computational framework to generate candidate bioprivileged
molecules, so the final objective is to assess whether these predicted molecules
are potential bioprivileged molecules. If successful our approach will
dramatically alter the search for useful, new biomass-derived chemicals as well
as provide chemical targets for bioenegineering efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.