* 1842386
* Data Science Program with Career Support and Connections to Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Carol Shubin, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 12/31/2022
* USD 838,157.00

The NSF's Accelerating Discovery: Educating the Future STEM Workforce supports
efforts that can position the future STEM workforce to make bold advances in the
NSF Big Ideas (https://www.nsf.gov/about/congress/115/10bigideas.jsp). This
Accelerating Discovery project will support the Harnessing the Data Revolution
Big Idea by developing a new interdisciplinary workforce training program in
Data Science. This program will include course work, research projects linked to
emerging data analysis needs in the public and private sectors, and career
development for undergraduates in mathematics. The overall goal of the new data
science program is to increase the numbers of math majors, including students
from populations that are underrepresented in STEM, who enter the data science
workforce. California State University Northridge enrolls nearly 40,000
students, 78% of whom receive financial aid. For many of these students, college
is a pathway to employment and economic security. However, many math majors feel
unsupported in career options other than K-12 education or graduate studies in
mathematics. This project will help them explore how data science can lead to
careers in industry, government, and non-profit organizations. This project has
the potential to help grow the national data science workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed data science program will target STEM
undergraduates, particularly applied mathematics and statistics majors. The
project has four goals. 1) Develop a data science course, given in flipped-
format. Class time will focus on learning technical skills needed in industry.
2) Develop a year-long data science research experience for students. 3) Develop
career workshops, seminars with data science practitioners, and links to data
scientists employed in industry or government agencies. 4) Enhance interaction
between mathematics faculty and local industry and government agencies to define
the skills needed for employment. This interaction will help create an employer
network interested in hiring the graduates and a student tracking system for
industry careers. Over the longer term, this engagement with industry will
support a development of an internship-to-career network. The student tracking
mechanism will become part of the department's review process. Research on how
this program improves student recruitment, retention, and entry into the data
science workforce will provide new knowledge about building data science
programs that link to potential employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.