* 1842577
* EAGER: ISN: Advanced Analytics, Intelligence and Processes for Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jon Kellar, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 397,969.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will contribute to the
advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare by studying how illicit
supply chain networks operate, and in particular when using the processes and
practices of legal networks. Identifying the ways in which counterfeiting and
other fraudulent parties operate will help redress this multi-billion-dollar
drain on the US economy, which results in both loss of income for the affected
legitimate parties and loss of tax income for the US government. Counterfeit
goods supply chains take advantage of legitimate distribution networks but are
discoverable because their transactional signatures are different from those of
legal transactions. This project involves comparing the analytics collected for
both physical inventory and cyber activity to determine the patterns of illicit
activities that distinguish them from those of lawful trade. These patterns
arise from sales figures, labor analytics, and differences from expected
reported trade values in time and locations. By effectively characterizing
suspicious digital transactions and better distinguishing between legitimate and
illegitimate enterprises, this research will lead to more effective
countermeasures in the digital space used by the majority of commercial
enterprises. The project team involve cross-disciplinary expertise in computer
science, operations engineering, and forensic materials science, and will
provide opportunities for graduate students in this multi-faceted effort.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide the multi-tiered cyber-physical
processes for statistical-based discovery of illicit activities and their
enabling illicit networks. The starting point is determining statistically
relevant deviations from the licit supply chains that illicit trade is dependent
on for efficiency and for simulating legitimacy. Physical and cyber forensic
processes will be investigated and compared: hybrid machine learning and
analytics of public information such as web sales and product pricing sites, and
privileged information such as projected and realized regional and seasonal
sales, allow the analytics to identify the most salient threat surface points in
the illicit supply chains. Fundamental understanding of the operations of
illicit networks - to explore, expose and exploit their vulnerabilities -
involves the collection of evidence to lead back to the source. In the physical
space, this project will investigate the use of an imaging-fueled forensic
service (IFFS) tied to fast-onramp sources of information (returns centers,
secret shopping, online activity) and capable of determining compliance with
serialization, copy prevention, and anti-tamper. These physical forensics are
used to provide "independent accounting" for the on-line analytics focused on
sales, pricing, and supply chain analytics. Based on indications of illicit
activity, the project will evaluate means to steer potentially illicit users
into revealing themselves as non-legitimate based on their ability to reproduce
the legitimate supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.