* 1842691
* RAISE-EQuIP: A high-speed, reconfigurable, fully integrated circuit platform for quantum photonic applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Hui Wu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2022
* USD 750,000.00

RAISE-EQuIP: A high-speed, reconfigurable, fully integrated circuit platform for
quantum photonic applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum photonics utilizes
the intriguing quantum characteristics of photons for information processing.
Fast manipulation and transformation of photonic quantum states at a high speed
underlie crucially the capability and capacity of quantum communication and
computing. However, to date, it remains an open challenge to do so, which
becomes a bottleneck for the speedup of photonic quantum information processing.
On the other hand, current integrated quantum photonic circuits rely seriously
on external off-chip laser sources for proper operation, which becomes a major
obstacle limiting the integration and miniaturization of quantum photonic
circuits which in turn limits the degree of functional complexity they can
offer. The proposed research aims to address these challenges. With the
synergetic research effort of our team, we propose to focus on innovative
circuit- and system-level engineering to build large-scale fully-integrated
quantum photonic circuit systems that can be flexibly reconfigured and modulated
at high speed, aiming to achieve novel quantum functionalities with
unprecedented functional complexity inaccessible to other means. &lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research covers all three thrusts of the EQuIP program. With our
proposed research, we envision an entirely transformative avenue towards
integrated quantum photonics that may ultimately revolutionize the state of the
art of communication and information processing, advancing its maturity level
towards practical implementation that would have significant impact on
industrial sectors. The proposed research offers comprehensive training in the
diverse interdisciplinary areas of quantum and integrated photonics, high-speed
RF circuitry, electronic circuit design, lasers, and signal processing, to
prepare workforces for future quantum engineering industry. It will also result
in promoting the interest and participation of K-12 students and broadening the
participations from underrepresented groups, through outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to explore and develop
high-speed, flexibly reconfigurable, fully integrated quantum photonic circuits
that offer unprecedented capability of manipulating, translating, and
transducing photonic quantum states, encoding/decoding and processing quantum
information. To this end, we have assembled a multidisciplinary team of leading
experts with strong expertise and extensive experience in quantum photonics,
nanophotonics, optoelectronic integration, high-speed RF circuitry, electronic
IC design, semiconductor lasers, hybrid optoelectronic integration, to propose a
fundamental research effort directed at the realization of scalable high-speed
hybrid quantum photonic circuit systems that perform significantly beyond the
reach of single individual components. The proposed research will integrate
elegantly the outstanding and unique properties of underlying material platforms
with innovative circuit and system design and engineering and laser-chip
integration to realize very high speed modulation, tuning, and reconfiguration
of large-scale integrated quantum photonic circuits that would enable novel
quantum photonic functionalities with unprecedented functional complexity and
capability. The preliminary results show great promise to achieve these goals.
The strong expertise and extensive experiences of our team position us uniquely
for the proposed research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.