* 1842670
* EAGER: Design and Validation of a Point-of-Care Device To Detect Biomarkers of Pain
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Massoud Motamedi, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2022
* USD 359,990.00

Currently, there are no POC (Point of Care) sensing platforms available to
individuals to monitor a patient's biological response to pain, disease
triggers, airborne irritants, toxins, or the recurrence of an infectious disease
or cancer, by direct and rapid profiling of critical biomarkers that may be
present in biofluid samples. Such biomarker-based diagnostics could have
numerous applications in precision medicine, among them precision pain
management and the reduction of opioid abuse. This project will design, build,
and validate a microfluidic point-of-care (POC) device that will separate,
identify and quantify cytokines that are markers for pain. The device will
analyze biomarkers of pain in all types of liquid
biopsies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on the detection of
biomarkers for pain in the serum of a rat model. The cytokines will be
identified at the required ultralow concentrations through binding to targeting
peptide sequences featuring fluorescent labels and subsequent separation by
means of Isoelectric Focusing (IEF). It is well established that pro- and anti-
inflammatory cytokines correlate with the perception of pain. Therefore, the
proposed POC-device will make pain "quantifiable" and enable precision pain
management. The team of investigators will combine the required expertise in
neuroscience, drug addiction and pain research (Dr. Cunningham), Biophotonics
and medical device development (Dr. Motamedi), microfluidic technology and IEF
device development (Dr. Culbertson), and biological chemistry, bioengineering,
and Biophotonics (Dr. Bossmann, PI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.