* 1842378
* Accelerating STEM Learning Through Large-Scale Data Science
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Richard Baraniuk, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 09/30/2024
* USD 5,200,000.00

With support from NSF's Accelerating Discovery program, investigators at Rice
University will design and implement the Learning in Education Research Network
(LERN) to study and harness the complex factors that propel human learning. The
central idea is that carefully designed, large-scale learning studies involving
large numbers of students and teachers, coupled with modern data science tools,
can provide insight into the factors that underpin student learning. Researchers
have long sought to determine the predictors of academic success and persistence
since such predictions could enable preemptive interventions for students at
risk for failure. However, these studies have usually examined populations of
students rather than individuals. The population focus limits prediction to
groups of students rather than to individuals. The LERN project intends to take
advantage of rapid technological advances to develop individually tailored ways
of studying learning, shifting the science of learning away from population-
based thinking and towards individual-based thinking. In this way, the project
intends to contribute to personalized learning, so individually tailored
approaches can be used to address each student's differences in learning and
achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The individual-based approach to be studied in
LERN is characterized by an emphasis on how individual differences affect
learning outcomes, and how these differences interact with learning
interventions. The project intends to develop: (1) new data science tools to
measure students' individual differences and their interactions with authentic
digital learning environments; (2) a large-scale infrastructure to
scientifically manipulate students' learning experiences; (3) a suite of
targeted experiments and studies that leverage large numbers of students; and
(4) a study fusing student individual differences and learning interaction data
with socioeconomic and demographic data. LERN will use OpenStax, a digital
learning platform, to study multiple factor interactions in learning across
large numbers of students in Houston, Texas. The project intends to develop a
set of data science tools, including adaptive assessment and digital
highlighting and annotation, that will allow examination of individual
differences and learning behaviors including locus of control and academic
mindset. These efforts are intended to shift the course of educational research
from population-based to individual-based, thus setting the stage for
personalized learning. These efforts complement the National Science
Foundation's focus on Harnessing the Data Revolution by harnessing data science
approaches to understand and improve student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.