* 1842959
* I-Corps: An Innovative Framework for High Resolution Quantitative Assessment of Flood Resiliency
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Rouzbeh Nazari, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
technical services to homeowners, local municipalities, engineering and
insurance companies to enhance community resilience and sustainability against
multi-hazard events such as hurricane that can bring strong wind, storm surge
and wide spread inundation. The proposed resilience technology contributes to a
paradigm shift in practice from engineering design code methods to performance-
based approach that considers structural resiliency concepts and quantifies
property hazard risk and value over time. The in-house developed technology
utilizes the hydrodynamic simulations to calculate the flood impacts and
combines it with the structural and socioeconomic features of built environment.
The multi-faceted tool will inform individuals, local municipalities, coastal
building designers, increasing the performance and resiliency of this building
stock and ensuring greater post-event community function, insurance companies
underwriting flood insurances and calculating premiums. Progress and information
to be gained through the I-Corps program, in interactions with hazard insurance
and risk assessment companies as well as engineering and information service
groups will enable our team to expedite the translation of the proposed
technology to the market. The developed technologies will be scalable and
broadly applicable to other hazard types and regions with potentials of
expanding to at international markets.

This I-Corps project aims to offer a comprehensive predictive tool that provides
a pin-point quantitative assessment of the damage and resiliency scenarios of
individual properties and up-scaling it to larger infrastructure cluster to
introduce a new understanding of the community wide vulnerability considering
available social and human capitals. The innovative and ground breaking aspect
of this work is that this project for the first time consolidating hydrodynamic,
structural and socioeconomic information through a massive big data campaign
followed by interactive analysis to open a new window in understanding impacts
of extreme events. Specifically, the intellectual merit of this approach resides
in its (a) Holistic approach to performance-based design of building (b)
Application of state-of-the-art data driven predictive models and advanced
computational technologies in flood damage and resiliency assessment of
buildings (c) High modularity in building design and prototyping process which
supports expansion to other hazards and building types, and (d) Potential to
create new knowledge regarding optimal multi-hazard building design. The
approach provides comprehensive support to decision makers and designers by
estimating building vulnerability and resiliency over construction property,
operation and hazards, and by balancing competing objectives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.