* 1842635
* EAGER: Self Assembled Monolayer Doping for Advanced 3D Nano &amp; Flexible Semiconductor Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Santosh Kurinec, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/28/2023
* USD 117,567.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Electrical conductivity is a property that defines the
ability to pass electric current through a material. The conductivity of
semiconductors can be charged by orders of magnitudes by introducing dopants,
trace impurities at the levels of parts per million. Doping makes possible the
integrated circuits at the heart of a wide range of devices. Through clever
innovations in engineering semiconductor conductivity, patterning, and
deposition of conductors and insulators, the semiconductor industry has steadily
made circuitry smaller, faster, and more powerful. Applications span computers,
communications, healthcare and energy, leading to the emergence of the Internet
of Things (IoT). Most current doping techniques rely on planar rigid substrates.
To reach the next frontier, there is need to devise new atomic scale chemical
means to deposit ultrathin layers of dopant molecules in precise locations in
three dimensions. Molecular monolayer doping (MLD) is a doping method with the
capability to produce ultra-shallow junctions for planar and non-planar
structures. A low-cost reaction chamber for MLD uses materials that are commonly
found in chemistry stockrooms and local home goods stores. MLD is presently at a
stage where atomic layer deposition was in the early 70s and ion implantation
was in the early 60s. Both are now high volume manufacturing techniques. The PIs
will optimize self-assembling of dopant atoms into the silicon surface with
topography at nanoscales to create futuristic computing, IoT and energy devices.
It will provide an excellent research and education bridge between chemistry and
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed work is to demonstrate the operation of low voltage, 2D material-based
phase change switches at radio-frequency (RF) frequencies. Switches are required
for reconfigurable RF front-end circuits in wireless systems with multi-band
transmit/receive capabilities. Compared to solid-state or electro-mechanical,
phase change switches promise low loss, high cut-off frequencies, high isolation
and rapid switching. Two-dimensional (2D) molybdenum telluride (MoTe2) has been
shown to demonstrate phase change properties, with theoretically projected
voltage requirements significantly lower than traditional thin film phase change
materials. Low voltage switching, coupled with flexibility and transparency make
2D phase change switches attractive candidates for next-generation, mobile
nanosystems. The proposed work will experimentally validate and characterize
large area, 2D MoTe2 RF switches. This will involve fabrication of the devices,
as well as experimental exploration of the low-voltage and frequency response
performance limits. These results will be key to the future development of phase
change devices, the establishment of predictive models and the demonstration of
reconfigurable nano-circuits. The intellectual merit of this EAGER proposal
comprises of the following: (1) exploring and establishing a fundamental
understanding of trade-offs between phase control techniques, such as heat and
voltage, applied to 2D MoTe2 and related allows in order to establish behavioral
models and achieve low-energy switching devices; (2) unlocking large-area
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of 2D phase change films, paying particular
attention to thickness control for low-energy phase transitions, as well as
increased mobility for high-frequency operation; and (3) establishing basic
design procedures for the first RF switches using 2D phase change materials,
which will be validated through fabrication and characterization. This results
of proposed work stand to have immense implications for low-power wireless
circuits and accelerate the advent of wireless sensor nodes within the Internet
of Things and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.