* 1842650
* EAGER: Type I: Liquid metal embrittlement of engineering alloys by eutectic gallium indium: Data-driven experimental design using sequential learning
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Victoria Miller, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2020
* USD 260,097.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports research and education
involving a new collaboration kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon event focused on
using the methods of data science to make progress on challenging problems in
materials science, in the mechanisms of case liquid metal embrittlement. When
certain liquid metals come into contact with specific solid metals, the solid
metals can undergo a catastrophic reduction in strength and/or ductility; this
is termed "liquid metal embrittlement." While liquid metal embrittlement has
been studied for over a century, a full understanding of the phenomenon is
lacking. There is currently no means to predict the occurrence or severity of
liquid metal embrittlement under given conditions. The PIs aim to use a method
where computers can "learn" from the data obtained from many studies to create a
model that can predict the severity of liquid metal embrittlement as a function
of the experimental conditions, including liquid composition, solid composition,
temperature, deformation rate, and microscopic structure of the solid metal
which is largely visible through powerful optical microscopes. The machine
learning model created as part of this research may enable the use of liquid
metals in engineering applications, such as in stretchable circuits, and allow
for future study of the fundamental physical mechanisms responsible for liquid
metal embrittlement. The project strongly emphasizes the education and
professional development of students of all ages. Graduate and undergraduate
researchers with a materials science background will be trained in both
conventional laboratory skills and in data science methods for engineers.
Additionally, outreach modules targeted to middle and high school students will
be developed as part of this project and distributed to the broader community
through programs including the Minorities in Engineering Program and The
Engineering Place at North Carolina State University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports
research and education involving a new collaboration kindled at the MATDAT18
Datathon event focused on using the methods of data science to make progress on
challenging problems in materials science, in the mechanisms of case liquid
metal embrittlement. To date, no predictive phenomenological or mechanistic
models of liquid metal embrittlement have been successfully developed. The
phenomenon of liquid metal embrittlement is incredibly complex, with
embrittlement behavior shown to depend on nearly every experimental variable
ever tested including temperature, strain rate, solid metal grain size, solid
composition, liquid composition, and more. Due to this complex phenomenology and
the experimental challenge of independently varying the large number of
involved, purely empirical studies of liquid metal embrittlement are
intractable. This project takes an alternative approach to establish a
predictive liquid metal embrittlement model: the Citrination platform will be
used to conduct sequential learning. In this approach, an initial model is
trained using preliminary data and used to suggest the next round of experiments
which will have the greatest likelihood of improving the predictive capability
of the model. The PI recently developed an initial model trained on data
extracted from the literature. The model was used to suggest preliminary
experiments, which were conducted and used to refine the model. However, further
iterations are required for the model to achieve predictive capability. The PIs
aim to iteratively refine the model. Once the model has sufficient predictive
capability, a second objective of this work is to test the hypothesis that
liquid metal embrittlement is not a monolithic phenomenon but is composed of
several distinct mechanisms. The last main objective of this work is to identify
"archetypal" systems for each identified potential mechanism and ideal
candidates for future mechanistic study. If the hypothesis of multiple
mechanisms is supported, this could reconcile seemingly contradictory reports of
liquid metal embrittlement behavior present in the
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.