* 1842745
* STTR Phase I:  Development of a coral reef-friendly sunscreen with broad spectrum protection
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* David Mosser, MAGIC BLUE, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR/STTR) Phase I project is to commercialize the world?s first
sunscreen that protects against UVA-induced photoaging, provides sufficient UVB
protection and to reverse UVB-induced damage, and is safe to coral reefs.
Leading sunscreens that are currently on the market have been shown to be
inadequate in protection against UVA damage (photoaging). Moreover, Oxybenzone
and octinoxate, which are found in over 80% of chemical sunscreens, have been
shown to be highly toxic to coral cells. Estimated 14,000 tons of sunscreen
settle into the world?s coral reefs every year and the oxybenzone that is
present in many of these sunscreens cause coral bleaching and accelerate the
destruction of the world?s already fragile coral reefs. The Magic Blue sunscreen
uses an alternative eco-friendly technology to protect the skin from UVA and UVB
damage, and the successful commercialization/market adoption of the Magic Blue
sunscreen will significantly benefit the global environment by protecting our
aquatic ecosystems, especially coral reefs, from further oxybenzone/octinoxate-
induced damage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR/STTR) Phase I project will develop a novel coral reef-friendly sunscreen
that can provide broad spectrum protection. Magic Blue, LLC is partnering with
the University of Maryland, College Park and collaborating with the Carnegie
Institution for Science to conduct the key feasibility experiments, including
biological analysis of UVA protection in 2D and 3D human skin tissues, chemical
assays on SPF determination, and environmental study on the effects of the new
sunscreen on soft and hard coral reefs. Once these experiments are complete,
Phase II of the project will revolve around obtaining necessary FDA approval for
commercial launch. The overall outcome from a successful STTR project will be
the commercialization of the world?s first sunscreen that will encompass the
following attributes: scientifically proven to protect against UVA-induced
photoaging, abilities to provide sufficient UVB protection and to reverse UVB-
induced damage, and safe to coral reefs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.