* 1842746
* SBIR Phase I:  Creating the Critical University-to-Workforce Connection: Providing Quantitative Evidence of Collaboration Skills
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Turner Bohlen, BEAGLE LEARNING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,690.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop new methods for training and assessing
the skill of providing and receiving constructive feedback in collaborative
environments. The United States higher education system is failing to train
collaboration skills, despite companies listing it as one of the most important
skills for new hires to have. Past research has identified specific types of
feedback that most effectively encourage peers to improve, but today's higher
education instructors have no ready means to effectively assess students'
abilities to use these peer feedback strategies. This project will develop
simple-to-use software tools to help instructors train peer feedback skills and
new methods for automatically assessing student ability to provide and receive
constructive feedback. By democratizing the training of the collaborative skills
most sought after by today's employers, this project aims to reduce
underemployment of college graduates and increase the economic output and tax
revenues of the United States by building a better trained and more productive
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an innovative peer-
assessment tool coupled with novel natural language processing methods producing
accurate measurements of student ability to give and receive constructive
feedback based on written feedback. The natural language processing methods will
combine word vectors for efficient language processing, a generalizable neural
net structure for sentence categorization outlined in existing research
literature, and manually defined features based on existing peer feedback
research. Research efforts will focus on gathering a large training dataset from
partnering higher education classrooms, and iteratively refining a deep-learning
natural language processing algorithm to achieve a target 90% accuracy.
Automating this assessment process will allow broad and continuous assessment of
student collaborative ability without requiring expensive and time-consuming
retraining of the United States instructor workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.