* 1842559
* RAISE-EQuIP: Quantum repeater for long-distance quantum communication enabled by non-Gaussian cluster states on a scalable hybrid aluminum nitride and silicon nanophotonic platform
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Daniel Kilper, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2022
* USD 750,000.00

RAISE-EQuIP: Quantum repeater for long-distance quantum communication enabled by
non-Gaussian cluster states on a scalable hybrid aluminum nitride and silicon
nanophotonic platform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Saikat Guha, Linran Fan, Dan Kilper,
University of Arizona&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principles from quantum physics will
enable far superior computational capabilities, better sensors and secure
communications that are provably unbreakable by any adversary. Most of these
advancements will be enabled by a new information resource called quantum
entanglement. One of the most important building blocks to realize a quantum-
enabled network information infrastructure that is capable of generating and
distributing entanglement at high rates over long distances is the quantum
repeater a quantum enabled processor that will sit at the node of the future
quantum internet, augmenting the current-day network router. Our project?s goal
is to research, develop and test a design for the quantum repeater, which will
be realized compactly in an integrated photonic platform that produces complex
many-photon entangled states on demand. The successful completion of this
project will enable various applications of shared entanglement, including
future-proof secure communications and multi-party secure computations,
entanglement-assisted distributed sensors for far superior imaging and remote
sensing, and will enable new science discoveries in areas such as chemistry and
high-energy physics by letting us experiment with entangled states larger than
any created so far. Even though our main thrust is to research a scalable on-
chip design of a quantum repeater, the theoretical work will help us develop a
deep understanding of building general and special-purpose quantum processors
that use photons to encode the qubit, whereas the versatile nanophotonic
platform we will design will be of value to various quantum enabled photonic
information processing with applications to distributed sensing and distributed
cloud-based quantum computing. Because of the highly-interdisciplinary nature of
quantum information science, and our project team in particular, our education
and outreach program will have a particularly broad impact in training a diverse
and strong workforce at the intersection of physics, optical sciences,
electrical and material science and engineering, computer network theory, and
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The biggest challenge in building a quantum
repeater has been the lack of good-quality quantum memories, high-rate good-
fidelity matter-photon entanglement sources, and high-efficiency quantum-state-
preserving frequency interconversion so as to make a telecom-wavelength quantum
photon be compatible with the quantum storage and processing units. Our
project?s goal is to research and develop a design of a quantum repeater that
does not need quantum memories or quantum interconversion, but uses an
integrated photonic source of locally-generated complex entangled states of many
photonic modes to replace the action of the quantum memory by providing virtual
storage of a logical quantum bit (qubit) using quantum error correction against
photon loss. Such repeaters, known as all-photonic repeaters, have been proposed
and recently researched by members of our team. But existing work on such
repeaters need millions of near-perfect single-photon sources and detectors,
along with extremely low-loss linear-optical waveguides be supplied at each
repeater node. Our key insight is to develop an alternative scheme that
leverages recently-demonstrated photonic multi-mode-squeezed entangled states of
thousands of modes as the cluster source, but built compactly on a hybrid
Aluminum Nitride - Silicon photonic platform, and use photon number detection on
a subset of those modes to cast that into a universal-quantum-capable coded
cluster state and develop a new logical qubit encoding into that "non-Gaussian"
cluster state in a so-called Schrodinger-cat-like qubit basis. The goals of this
project are: (1) establishing the theoretical design principles of a
technologically-feasible all-photonic quantum repeater based on a continuous-
variable (CV) entangled cluster source, (2) developing a compact, versatile
integrated nanophotonic platform for generating and manipulating CV cluster
states, (3) realizing direct on-demand generation of non-Gaussian universal
clusters at high rates, and (4) the first measurement of entanglement
distribution over one quantum repeater link that exceeds the fundamental direct-
transmission rate upper limit for entanglement
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.