* 1842374
* Adding Computational Thinking Components to the High-School Science Curriculum to Broaden Participation in Computational Science
* EDU,DRL
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2023
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 10/31/2023
* USD 2,691,920.00

This project is funded by STEM + C which supports research and the development
of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of
computing within STEM teaching and learning for preK-12 students in both formal
and informal settings. While computing has dramatically transformed science
research and practice, it remains a separate and distinct area of study in
almost all pre-college education contexts. The objective of this STEM+C project
is to increase students' skill in Computational Thinking - Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics (CT-STEM) practices and explore how computational
representations support significant shifts in the ways students learn and
practice science. Findings will include fine-grained characterizations of the
competencies students bring to their development of computational thinking
practices, in particular competencies for developing algorithms, data mining and
visualization, and designing/building agent-based models (models with multiple
software simulated agents that interact). These findings will enrich the field's
understanding of the nature and development of CT-STEM practices. This is an
important contribution given that investigating CT-STEM practices is still in
early stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the researchers will
integrate agent-based modeling software (NetLogo Web) with a block-based form of
the software (NetTango) and create seamless interoperation with data analysis,
systems dynamics modeling and visualization tools. One benefit of tools like
these is that they enable students who do not have experiences with text-based
programming to engage in previously inaccessible computational practices. The
research team will partner with teachers from three Chicago-area high schools to
add Computational Thinking components to existing science curricula by
integrating these additional tools and practices. The project will pursue the
following five objectives: (1) fully integrate NetLogo and NetTango, create
seamless interoperation with data analysis, visualization and systems dynamics
modeling tools, and offer the integrated software through the web-based
platform; (2) build units that cover more of the high school science curriculum
and incorporate practices for developing algorithms, data mining, visualization,
and designing/building computational models; (3) develop assessments that
evaluate students on these practices; (4) test units and assessments in
classrooms by collecting student response data through the web-based platform;
and (5) investigate students' engagement in computational thinking practices and
characterize the competencies that they bring to their learning and how their
practices develop over time. Further, the researchers' online delivery platform
will be scalable to facilitate participation from other high schools,
potentially engaging many thousands more students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.