* 1842680
* RAISE-EQuIP: A Chip-integrated Platform for Photon-Efficient Quantum Communications
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Michael Vasilyev, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2022
* USD 750,000.00

Nontechnical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum communication exploits the
fundamental laws of physics to reliably secure private information networking
even over untrusted channels. Despite rapid progresses in research and
technology demonstrations, its large-scale deployment in practical settings
still faces significant difficulties such as limited distance, low data rates,
high susceptibility to channel disturbances, and disproportional operating
overhead. This project aims to address those challenges by developing chip-
integrated devices and sub-systems for preparation and detection of photonic
signals in advantageous quantum states. They will be assembled to create
innovative systems for line-of-sight applications robust against inferior
weather conditions, ultra-efficient information encoding and decoding on single
photons, and optimized hybrid quantum communication over both free space and
optical fibers. This project will be carried out collaboratively by research
groups from Stevens Institute of Technology and University of Texas at
Arlington. Students from both institutes will be supported, motivated, and
trained to work at the intersection of device integration, quantum optics, high-
speed electro-optic circuits, and communication systems. A workforce with such
balanced trainings and knowledge bases will contribute significantly to the
industrial development of quantum technologies. At Stevens, a weekend-lab visit
will be hosted each semester open to public to showcase the merging frontiers of
quantum physics and nanophotonics. At Arlington, guided lab visits will be
organized during the Engineering Week and K-12 summer camps. Both groups will
continue to attract members from under-represented groups and help them launch
scientific and engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a highly-integrated quantum photonic
platform based on lithium niobate thin films for modular quantum transceivers,
whose unique capabilities include entanglement generation over 3.2-micron
spectral spacing, lossless photon waveform shaping on a picosecond timescale,
disruptive receiver technology based on mode-resolving photon detection, and
ultrafast optical time-division de-multiplexing for fast quantum signals. With
these offerings, this new device platform will host innovative techniques for
fast, robust, and photon-efficient quantum communications over both telecom
fibers and free space. Three quantum communication systems will be targeted in
this project. The first is an innovative mid-IR channel for weatherproof quantum
communication over free space, which not only multiplies the communication speed
and reach but may also provide a reliable, high-speed ground-space link for
quantum satellite applications through further development. The second is ultra-
photon-efficient quantum key distribution using overlapping time-frequency modes
to significantly increase the key rate while also strengthening the channel
security. Meanwhile, quantum bit locking will also be explored by unitary
scrambling and de-scrambling single photons, as an alternative approach to high-
speed quantum encryption. The third is an optimized hybrid quantum key
distribution system over free space and optical fibers that could form the basis
for the future versatile, resilient quantum networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.