* 1842769
* SBIR Phase I:  Quantum Key Distribution via Small Satellite
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Maxwell Shapiro, SKY QUANTUM INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 224,924.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a practical method for ultra-
secure global communication using quantum key distribution (QKD). QKD is an
established communications protocol which promises unbreakable encryption via
the exchange of single photons, the constituent particles of light. Owing in
large part to the lack of a practical way to connect users globally, QKD has not
yet been widely deployed. This project aims to demonstrate the viability of
high-speed, satellite-to-ground QKD using the low-cost CubeSat platform. If
successful, this design will dramatically reduce the initial costs to launch a
QKD constellation offering worldwide QKD connectivity, thereby greatly expanding
the utility of QKD and driving market growth. Early customers will be the US
Government and large businesses who are willing to pay a premium for the
ultimate in data security. Government use offers clear societal benefit, as
several agencies rely on secure global communications to ensure societal well-
being. As technology advances, the network may be used to secure the
communications of private citizens. The proposed plan will furthermore develop
enabling technologies for future space-based quantum science
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will produce designs for a high-speed QKD payload hosted on a
CubeSat. The proposed design will take a substantial step forward from the first
and only demonstration of satellite-to-ground QKD (Micius, 2017), which relied
on technology that is too massive, expensive, and low-throughput for commercial
use. Since CubeSats are heavily constrained in size, weight, and power, the
major technical challenge will be to miniaturize the payload and reduce its
power consumption while simultaneously improving data rates. To address this
challenge, the small business will investigate a novel QKD payload concept that
pushes the limits of emerging technologies in photonics and
microelectromechanical systems. In Phase I, detailed modeling and simulation of
candidate payload designs will be used to evaluate the commercial and technical
feasibility of the proposed approach, and to select a preliminary design for
initial implementation, which will commence in Phase
II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.