* 1842817
* Visual category learning by toddlers provides new principles for teaching rapid generalization
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Linda Smith, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2023
* USD 548,791.00

Learning is adaptive change in response to experience. Future experiences never
repeat exactly and the world often poses new never-before encountered problems.
Therefore, training systems that lead to effective generalization are sought
after in both human and machine learning. Extensive experience with many
training examples is known to promote generalization but this requires time and
a large set of training examples. There are cases of human learning in which
appropriate generalization requires only one or a few examples, or 'few-shot'
learning. The human infant begins learns to become a few-shot learner of visual
object categories who is able, for example, to appropriately generalize the
category 'tractor' after seeing a tractor. This research will determine the
learning experiences that teach young children to be few-shot learners of visual
object categories with the goal of determining the general principles of
training sets that lead to rapid learning and generalization. These principles
will be tested in machine learning models and in experiments with children.
General principles of how to design and structure training materials to lead to
effective learning and rapid generalization have useful applications in
education, in image recognition, and in machine learning. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Most models and theories of category learning concentrate on learning
to discriminate categories with training consisting of many examples of many
different categories. Despite remarkable advances in computer vision there is a
large class of problems that remain unsolved because they require few-shot
learning. Despite extensive research on educational practices, there is a
limited understanding of how best to structure material for generalization and
knowledge transfer. In becoming few-shot learners of visual object categories,
human infants first collect extensive experience with a few individual objects
within a few early-learned categories -- their own sippy cup, the family dog,
their own shoes and then they progress to becoming rapid few-shot learners of
other visual object categories. The core hypothesis tested in the research is
that few-shot learning emerges as a generalization of expertise about a very few
categories. The research will capture the visual experiences supporting the
development of expertise for a few categories using head cameras and head-
mounted eye trackers worn by infants. Algorithms from visual science and
computer vision will be used to analyze the statistical properties of these
visual experiences and of expertise that then generalizes to other visual
categories. Those principles will be tested in behavioral experiments with
infants and tested and formalized in modeling experiments using deep
convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The principles offer a solution to the
problem of rapid generalization from few examples that is potentially general to
any visual learning problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.