* 1842620
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering broad-spectrum disease resistance in soybean without fitness cost
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Peter Alexander, UPSTREAM BIOTECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,912.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop disease resistant soybean varieties that
will reduce the substantial losses in agricultural production caused by plant
diseases. Loss to disease can be as high as 40% globally and cost billions of
dollars annually. In soybean alone, an estimated $3 billion dollars of
production value is lost from plant diseases annually. In addition, the
destruction of crops by plant diseases threatens global food security and has a
significant negative impact on the environment due to the use of pesticides.
Application of a tunable, broad-spectrum disease resistance strategy in
agriculturally important crops will have a major societal impact by protecting
crops from devastating diseases for which alternative solutions are not
currently available, securing agricultural production, and reducing
environmental pollution from agricultural chemicals. In the future, the goal is
to apply the proposed technology to other agriculturally important crops such as
corn, rice, and tomato.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR
Phase I project is to engineer tunable, broad-spectrum disease resistant soybean
varieties. In this project, a soybean immune regulatory cassette will be
constructed through sequence homology, and then functionally validated by
demonstrating pathogen-inducible resistance against various diseases with
minimal yield penalty. The methods that will be used in this project include
bioinformatic analysis of soybean sequences to identify homologous defense genes
and corresponding regulatory elements, molecular cloning, transformation of both
Arabidopsis and Soybean plants, and testing the resulting transformant plants to
determine levels of resistance to different types of pathogens. Results from
this project will be essential for moving forward with larger field trials,
which to be accomplished in the Phase II of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.