* 1842692
* RAISE-EQuIP: Single-Chip, Wall-Plug Photon Pair Source and CMOS Quantum Systems on Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Vladimir Stojanovic, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2022
* USD 758,000.00

The amount of new data generated by humanity in the past year exceeds that
created in all of human history before. The processing demands of this data are
driving the continued need for greater computational power, in domains including
big data analytics, artificial intelligence, and augmented reality, serving
technologies including personal, medical, research, engineering, finance, and
weather prediction. As "Moore's Law" of the semiconductor industry - which has
guaranteed continued advance of computing power in the last 50 years - has
ground to a halt in the past decade, new computational paradigms are being
sought to remedy this dire situation. Quantum information technology is the new
and ultimate frontier for signal processing and computing and leverages the
unintuitive laws of our universe that hold on small scales. 50-100 qubit
processors have been developed by Intel, IBM and Google, but quantum optical
networks, needed to network them into "quantum data centers" in a way similar to
their conventional analogues, are missing. This project aims to fill that gap by
developing a new electronic-photonic chip technology and framework to allow
creation of electronic-photonic quantum systems-on-chip (epQSoCs). epQSoCs
combine light, electronic circuits, and quantum functions on a single microchip
that can provide a widely deployable technology platform for quantum networks.
The project will combine interdisciplinary expertise in photonics, electronic
systems, and quantum communications to demonstrate the first epQSoC. A single-
chip, "wall-plug" source of quantum correlated photon pairs, this epQSoC is a
fundamental building block for more complex epQSoCs and for quantum networks. By
integrating several components and novel capabilities never previously
integrated in a single chip, this source will provide new levels of photon-pair
source performance. The interdisciplinary project team will also educate a new
generation of engineers in this emerging new technology area to foster
innovation, excellence and global leadership in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A "wall plug" single-chip source of photon pairs, a
fundamental building block of most quantum photonic systems, will be
demonstrated having a high efficiency, rate and reconfigurability to produce
factorizable quantum states and allow heralding of pure single photons. No such
integrated device exists despite the fact that a rack-mounted fiber-
nonlinearity-based source of this kind for lab use has been commercialized for
almost a decade. The proposed project aims to change the quantum technology
landscape with the demonstration of a fully integrated single-chip quantum pair
source system. The chip photonic circuit will contain photonic elements for pre-
and post-source linear pump filtering, a resonant nonlinear pair generator, pump
pulse carver to allow active matching of the pump pulse length to the source's
resonant bandwidth in order to control the produced photons joint spectral
intensity (to yield a factorizable or other engineered biphoton states), and an
ultra-low loss interface to fiber. The proposed approach addresses a number of
challenges that arise in integration, on-chip filtering, and real-time control.
In addition to standalone operation, the pair source will be the first
implementation of an electronic-photonic quantum system-on-chip (epQSoC) and a
key building block for more complex integrated quantum systems. The proposed
epQSoCs will be implemented in a commercial 45nm CMOS electronic-photonic
platform (with potential for integrating single-photon detectors on chip as
well).&lt;br/&gt; The project will create the technology framework (block
libraries, tools, models and design methodologies) for low-cost, rapid
innovation and design of sophisticated epQSoCs. This framework, along with
associated educational materials and experiences will help create a new crop of
engineers that are capable of tackling the complex, multidisciplinary nature of
quantum information systems. Educational and outreach activities will provide
exposure and training to a new generation of students and future leaders in this
field, with special focus on underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.