* 1842121
* Wetlands to Desertification. Human Social-Ecological Dynamics in a Late Holocene Context
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Arlene Rosen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 194,732.00

Climate change over the past 11,000 years has had a profound impact on semi-arid
and arid rangelands worldwide, with the most severe desiccation accelerating
over the last 5,000 years. Human populations which depend on these regions for
their livelihood have had to adapt to these changes and learn to manage these
landscapes and their food resources over the course of millennia. Archaeology is
well-positioned to understand how foragers, farmers, pastoralists, and ranchers
have used these dryland resources through time in sustainable or unsustainable
ways. The Gobi Desert of southern Mongolia is a yet little-studied region of
dryland steppe, which has had at least 40,000 years of human occupation, and a
long record of dramatic environmental change. Dr. Arlene Rosen, of the
University of Texas at Austin, will lead a team of Mongolian and US
archaeologists, and environmental specialists to the Ikh Nart Nature Reserve in
the southern Mongolian Gobi in order to study the social, economic, and
environmental dynamics of human and natural systems during episodes of climate
change over the past 5,000 years. The team will include Mongolian archaeologists
and students whose heritage derives from a long cultural tradition of rangeland
maintenance and use. The project will benefit from the exchange of information
between Mongolian and US scientists about traditional herding practices,
ecological knowledge, and culture histories, combined with expertise in
reconstructing landscape and vegetation histories for the region. The aim is to
develop a model for studying dry-land ranges of other regions as well as the
Gobi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate how human inhabitants
of the Gobi Desert took an active role in altering the desert-steppe
environments either with purposeful intent or as a result of unintended
consequences of their impact on vegetation and landscapes. It is commonly
believed that ancient pastoralists accelerated desertification when they settled
in semi-arid environments. However, preliminary evidence from geomorphology and
archaeological botany suggests that the first cattle, sheep-goat pastoralist
groups to use this region might have improved the sustainability of the area by
inadvertently bringing in the seeds of northern steppe grasses along with their
herds, thus improving the sustainability of their economic way of life. By
excavating sites from these early time periods, the project will expand
knowledge of the many ways in which these herder-hunters and later specialized
herders were able to maintain their livelihood over the course of thousands of
years of increasing climatic desiccation. The excavation of the Burgasny Enger
site, in the Ikh Nart Reserve will provide elements of culture history,
lifeways, and economic orientation through the analyses of artifacts, settlement
structures and plant and animal remains. This will be paired with
geomorphological studies of landscape change and water sources in the immediate
vicinity of the site. The result will be a holistic picture and roadmap to
sustainable practices in dry-land steppe regions of the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.