* 1842078
* Workshop: Re-examining our Grand Challenges in Geodesy; November 8-9, 2018; East Lansing, MI
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Jeffrey Freymueller, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2019
* USD 48,568.00

This is a workshop to re-examine the Grand Challenges in the field of geodesy.
The workshop will convene at least40 experts in the field to revisit the state
of the field and its future directions. The previous Grand Challenges document
included sections on public benefit and workforce development that will be
revised and expanded in this workshop and new document. The public benefits from
research in geodesy are continuing to grow, and now include many applications of
real-time geodetic data that were nascent a decade ago. At the same time,
awareness of the scientific and broader contributions of geodetic research is
relatively low, both in the scientific community and beyond. With the open
availability of newer and upcoming SAR satellites global terrestrial high-
resolution geodesy is becoming a reality, allowing for yet unfathomed outreach
opportunities and tools for hazard mitigation.The broader impacts of this
workshop include support for early-career researchers to have input into the
strategic direction of their field and impacts to resources monitoring and
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will highlight the state of the art
and new opportunities in geodesy. The project will result in a revised grand
challenges document for consideration by the upcoming National Academies study,
Catalyzing Opportunities for Research in the Earth Sciences (CORES): A Decadal
Survey for NSF's Division of Earth Sciences. White papers from the broader
community will be solicited for consideration, further broadening the range of
researchers who will impact the report.The goal of the workshop is to assess
progress in geodesy over the last several years, considering both areas of
significant recent progress and areas of substantial new opportunity. For
example, the use of campaign and continuous GPS instruments for tectonic
kinematics relies on well-established methods and has produced critical
scientific contributions over the past three decades, such that these data are
essentially fully incorporated into models of tectonic motions. In contrast, the
use of repeat LiDAR and RADAR images for capturing mm-scale surface processes is
only just emerging as a useful scientific technology. Many different geodetic
approaches and methods fall between these examples, and a comprehensive
assessment of gains made and opportunities arising will help to guide scientific
investments in the coming decade. The resulting document will also serve as a
general useful reference for the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.