* 1842188
* Conference Travel Grant: Connecting Practioners and Scholars in Public Participation in STEM Research and in Community-Based Environmental Science to Enhance Informal STEM Learning
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Caren Cooper, Friends of the North Carolina State Museum of Natural Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Ellen McCallie
* 08/31/2019
* USD 74,800.00

As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in informal environments,
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks to advance new
approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes providing multiple
pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences,
advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal
environments, and developing understandings of deeper learning by participants.
This travel grant focuses on broadening participation in STEM learning and
advancing scholarship and practice related to Public Participation in STEM
Research (PPSR). In PPSR, members of the public participate voluntarily in
scientific processes, addressing real-world problems in ways that may include
formulating research questions, conducting scientific experiments, collecting
and analyzing data, interpreting results, making new discoveries, developing
technologies and applications, and solving complex problems. Currently,
participation in many PPSR projects does not often reflect the full range
diversity in the nation. The Citizen Science Association (CSA), an organization
that seeks to support the rigorous and ethical practice of citizen science--a
form of PPSR--across a broad range of issues and communities, brings together
PPSR practioners and scholars biennially. The CSA conference, to be held March
13-17, 2019, in Raleigh, North Carolina, will build networks and capacities to
support scholarship and practice across the full range of citizen science and
across diverse populations.

This travel grant supports 75 participants, 25 local and 50 national, from
groups underrepresented in STEM, who are actively engaged in community-based
environmental science and have not previously attended a CSA conference.
Community-based environmental science projects, which often occur in minority
communities, are increasingly relying on PPSR approaches, including engaging
public participants in STEM learning through technology and the development of
data literacies. Through this travel grant, the 2019 CSA conference will bring
together the expertise and experiences of practioners and scholars from citizen
science and community-based environmental science projects. The conference will
facilitate four days of interactions and mutual learning with significant time
for iterative reflection and active discussion to make the sessions personally
relevant and meaningful. This intentionally allows for identifying areas of both
commonalities and tensions across citizen science and community-based
environmental science projects, with time to work through various approaches and
issues with colleagues for greater learning. The interactions should allow for
meaningful discussion of goals, theory, methods, recruitment and retention and
other aspects of projects that make a difference in the success of projects. The
structure of the conference includes panels, presentations, poster sessions, and
discussion to increase the quality and extent of PPSR and community-based
environmental science practice.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.