* 1842012
* Hawaii Ocean Time-series -- Life Aquatic in the Volcanic Aftermath (HOT-LAVA), RAPID Response Research to the 2018 Kilauea Eruption
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2020
* USD 184,884.00

Kilauea volcano began an eruption in May 2018. This project would mount a rapid
response effort to understand how iron and phosphorus in the volcanic ash acts
as fertilizer for ocean ecosystems. The investigators propose to conduct an
oceanographic expedition to the regions east of Kapoho Bay and west (downwind)
of the summit to collect samples and conduct experiments that will lead to a
more comprehensive understanding of the marine biogeochemistry of the 2018
Kilauea eruption. This project will complement the ongoing long-term
observations at the NSF-supported Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) Station ALOHA.
The eruption of Kilauea is much more than a major geological event. It is an
issue of local and global societal interest and has attracted significant
interest and press coverage. The investigators plan to engage the public about
the interactions of land and sea, and more broadly hope to promote a greater
understanding of science. This will be achieved through interviews for public
radio and other news outlets, through blogs and web-based information about the
expedition, and by the publication and dissemination of knowledge gained through
this study.

The proposed study will include: (1) satellite-based observations of ash plume
trajectories, dispersion, and deposition, (2) analysis of collected ash samples,
and ash-seawater leaching and incubation studies to determine the effects of
simulated ash deposition on a variety of microbial rates and processes, (3)
field observations and sample collections at the lava-seawater contact zone near
Kapoho Bay and in the ash deposition region downwind of Halema'uma'u, west of
the island of Hawaii, and (4) deployment of an autonomous long-term (3-month)
experiment consisting of a Wave Glider and a Seaglider working in a coordinated
manner to record processes that occur over time as the ecosystem responds to the
wet and dry deposition of volcanic ash over larger spatial and longer temporal
scales. The region will be revisited approximately 2-3 months after the initial
survey to obtain a second set of observations and to recover the autonomous
vehicles. Incubation experiments will also be conducted at the HOT program
Station ALOHA where NSF has supported a benchmark site for assessing ocean
variability over the past three decades. Based on the long-term observations at
Station ALOHA, the investigators have established an inextricable linkage
between iron and phosphorus dynamics, and the controls on nitrogen fixation and
particle export. Studies of the response of microbial communities to the Kilauea
eruption will improve understanding of oceanic processes at Station ALOHA and
lead to better carbon cycle models for the oligotrophic North Pacific Ocean.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.