* 1842707
* SBIR Phase I:  Young Leader Project
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Nicole Lipkin, EQUILIBRIA LEADERSHIP CONSULTING LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2019
* USD 223,996.00

This SBIR Phase I project will provide children ages 7-11 years with an
interactive learning program that cultivates core leadership skills. This
project goes deeper than many traditional socio-emotional programs by fortifying
children with the behavioral skills and mindset they need to evolve as effective
leaders. The educational curriculum was developed by psychologists who
specialize in leadership development, and is based on cutting-edge child
developmental, leadership, and educational research. This project aims to
research the engagement and effectiveness of the program and its ability to
enhance ten core leadership behaviors in youth, at home, in the community, and
in academic settings. This program has the potential to make a long-term impact
on the next generation of youth, promoting resilience in the face of adverse
events, such as school violence and cyberbullying, and to positively shape the
next generation of leaders, helping them form lifelong commitments to personal
and professional development. The project has philanthropic aspirations to make
the educational curriculum available to all children and schools, regardless of
socio-economic standing, supporting the mission of NSF to promote the health,
prosperity and welfare of the nation through
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the
development of an interactive leadership program for children, that is proven to
make a positive impact on leadership behaviors and that is also fun and engaging
for youth and their adult caregivers and educators. What sets this program apart
from others is that the research will provide evidence that the program builds
the critical skills it intends on developing in children. The program is
designed to be self-led or facilitated by an adult caregiver or educator, either
using an online platform or physical materials. As children move from one
leadership competency to another, they are extrinsically and intrinsically
rewarded for their efforts. Adult caregivers and educators are encouraged to
participate and are provided mastery building exercises that help them take the
child?s leadership understanding and skill to the next level. A database has
been developed to track real-time participant feedback as curriculum elements
are developed. The testing of educational content will focus on three aspects,
which include maximizing content appropriateness, validating learning and skill
retention, and assessing variances and preferences for mode of delivery. Results
will be used to make modifications to the curriculum and product design for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.