* 1842703
* DETER Research Education and Operations Mission Sustainment
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jelena Mirkovic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2021
* USD 2,000,000.00

The project advances the sophistication, robustness and usefulness of the
DETERLab testbed, a key scientific laboratory for cybersecurity research and
education. Advances in the research, educational and operational missions of the
testbed directly benefit the hundreds of research projects, and thousands of
classroom users currently using DETERLab. All proposed activities directly
impact users, enabling them to experiment faster, more easily, with higher
fidelity and repeatability, and in more sophisticated environments. The research
and development efforts taken together expand capacity for both the research and
education communities and are necessary to meet the growing need for
cybersecurity professionals in our country today, and the growing need for
repeatability, reproducibility and reuse of testbed
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is comprised of 16 tasks across
three mission objectives to (1) advance DETERLab's research mission - these
include operationalization of new experimental capabilities, and addition of new
tools for users, to allocate and manage experiments, (2) activities that advance
DETERLab's education mission - these include creation of containerized versions
of existing exercises, creation of new shared materials from various sources
within and outside of DETERLab, and customization of lab exercises for each
student, to prevent cheating, (3) activities that advance DETERLab's operational
mission - these activities improve DETERLab's security, streamline experiment
allocation and management, and allow for fast and automated handling of many
errors. Many of the planned activities already have 1st generation prototypes,
that are improved, generalized and operationalized under the project. All the
source and binary code developed under this proposal is released publicly. All
experimental and educational materials are released via DETERLab's sharing
portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.