* 1842928
* Student Travel Support for the 2018 Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques (PACT-18) Conference
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Tushar Krishna, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Samee Khan
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,000.00

The 27th International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation
Techniques is the premier forum for presenting, discussing, and debating
innovative compiler and architectural techniques for advanced computing and
communication systems. This conference brings together researchers in fields
related to architecture, compiler, application, language and systems for
technical exchange on traditional system topics and emerging research areas. The
PACT community has enjoyed a close interaction between academic researchers and
industrial designers and aims to continue this tradition at PACT 2018. This
project funds student travel grant, and includes a goal to broaden and diversify
the student participation in the 27th International Conference on Parallel
Architecture and Compilation Techniques (PACT 2018). This year's conference,
being in its 27th year, will be held from November 1-4, 2018 in Limassol,
Cyprus.

This proposal has two primary Broader Impacts. First, the students receiving
travel support will benefit from the opportunity to engage in the technical,
professional, educational and social exchanges that PACT fosters. The conference
serves as an open forum to exchange research results and develop new ideas, as
an educational platform to expose students to new research methodologies, tools,
and infrastructures, and as a social event to network and prepare students as
future researchers. Second, the PACT conference will be indirectly strengthened.
More tutorials and workshops can be associated with the main conference, as a
result of increased number of student attendance that this travel grant will
enable. More broadly, this travel support will increase the attendance of under-
represented minorities and talented undergraduate students, attracting them to
graduate schools.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.