* 1842094
* Collaborative Research: Impacts of Microphysical, Thermodynamic, and Dynamical Processes on Nocturnal and Oceanic Convective Systems via Analyses from PECAN and HAIC/HIWC
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Greg McFarquhar, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 549,783.00

Mesoscale convective systems (MCSs) are responsible for a large portion of
summertime precipitation in the Great Plains and Midwest of the United States
and produce a large range of hazards, including strong winds, hail, flash
flooding and occasional tornadoes. Thus, accurate understanding and forecasting
of these systems is important for public safety. Processes responsible for the
growth and evolution of a particular class of MCSs, occurring at night, are
especially poorly understood. This project examines mechanisms responsible for
the evolution of such nocturnal storms using a unique set of data obtained by an
instrumented aircraft flying in clouds generated by and trailing behind
nocturnal thunderstorms during the 2015 Plains Elevated Convection at Night
(PECAN) field experiment. In particular, the project is assessing how small-
scale processes occurring in clouds generate cold air which in turn generates
features that act to force new air masses to rise, leading to the development of
new thunderstorms that subsequently generate more trailing clouds and rain. The
second component of the project examines the properties of clouds generated by
thunderstorms occurring in the Tropics. This component was motivated by a
problem faced by aviation, namely that aircraft flying at commercial flight
altitudes can encounter conditions where there is no noticeable echo on their
radar yet encounter large amounts of small ice crystals not detected by the
radar; such conditions can be problematic for aircraft engines as evidenced by
several engine events over the last 30 years. This project uses data collected
by research aircraft flying in such conditions. The research aircraft were
instrumented with probes measuring cloud properties during the 2015 and 2016
High Ice Water Content (HIWC) projects conducted off the coast of Darwin,
Australia and French Guiana. The project is examining processes that lead to the
development of large numbers of small ice crystals by identifying the
environmental conditions under which these small crystals form and grow. In both
projects, model simulations are also being used to evaluate the role of specific
processes in driving and maintaining thunderstorms (PECAN) and for generating
small ice crystals (HIWC). Further, both projects acquired next generation
polarimetric radar data coincident with the aircraft cloud observations so that
cloud properties retrieved from polarimetric radar data can be validated,
meaning that data from polarimetric radar in the future can ultimately be used
to extend the limited range duration of the field experiment measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, the PECAN data are being used
to evaluate the hypothesis that microphysical cooling processes in developing
and mature stratiform regions of MCSs force downdraft circulations that create
mesoscale gravity wave features on the stable nocturnal boundary layer (SNBL)
that in turn focus, organize and maintain future convective activity. In context
of storm kinematics and dynamics as derived from multiple Doppler radar analyses
and modeling investigations, the PECAN data are being used to (1) characterize
the microphysical and thermodynamic structure of the transition zone, notch and
rear anvil regions in formative, mature and dissipative stages of the PECAN
elevated nocturnal MCSs; (2) quantify and understand how the horizontal and
vertical distribution of latent cooling evolves across MCSs during their
lifecycles and contributes to downdrafts and gravity wave features; and (3),
determine how gravity wave features on the SNBL give rise to lifting that then
drives convection and maintains the organization and long lifetime of nocturnal
MCSs. The HIWC data are being used to (1) characterize the microphysical and
thermodynamic properties of high IWC regions and contrasting them against
properties derived from observations obtained in regions without high IWCs; (2)
determine polarimetric radar signatures of high IWC regions and investigate how
these signatures differ depending upon the relative prevalence of small ice
crystals; (3) develop representations of size distributions and mass-dimensional
relationships for high IWC regions as a volume or surface of equally realizable
solutions in the appropriate coefficient phase space; and (4) conduct
simulations to identify processes responsible for the numerous small ice
crystals found above oceanic convective cores, and compare against HIWC
observations. The broad impacts are (1) improved understanding so that
operational forecasters and nowcasters can better anticipate the evolution of
convective phenomena; (2) enhanced education and training opportunities (several
graduate students are earning advanced degrees); (3) incorporation of PECAN and
HAIC/HIWC data into courses taught and textbooks published by the PIs; (4)
advanced scientific understanding of high IWC conditions that have led to about
150 power loss and/or pitot tube failures in commercial aircraft over the last
several years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.