* 1842456
* EAGER: Finding Semantic Security Bugs with Pseudo-Oracle Testing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Gail Kaiser, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

Semantic security bugs cause serious vulnerabilities across a wide range of
software. For example, in a recent incident, attackers exploited a semantic
security bug in Apache Struts to steal sensitive personal data of up to 143
million customers from Equifax servers. In fact, such vulnerabilities are quite
common in practice. The total number of Common Vulnerabilities and Exposure
Identifiers (CVEs) assigned to different types of semantic security bugs exceeds
2,000 just this year alone. The goal of this project is to improve security and
reliability by automatically detecting such semantic vulnerabilities in critical
software. Automatically detecting these bugs is hard because unlike crash bugs
they may not show any obvious side effects. In contrast, semantic security bugs
(e.g., bypassing security checks, gaining access to sensitive information,
escalating privileges) usually result from violation of high-level
safety/security specifications which, in practice, are rarely written formally.
This project will investigate whether learning domain-specific metamorphic
relations can help in detecting semantic bugs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Software
Engineering, metamorphic relations, which correlate outputs from multiple
executions of a program with different inputs, have been shown to be effective
at finding simple functional bugs. While metamorphic relations have promise to
detect semantic security vulnerabilities, they are not able to detect semantic
security vulnerabilities in their current form, as security properties cannot be
expressed as simple input-output based properties. The approach uses pseudo-
oracle testing techniques like differential testing and metamorphic testing. The
project will use targeted path exploration techniques, with automata-learning
algorithms to discover metamorphic testing rules. The project will learn how the
semantics of metamorphic relations can be augmented to detect semantic security
bugs. The research envisions a unified framework based on pseudo-random Oracles,
which can automatically detect semantic security bugs without the need for
manually creating formal specifications to compare program behaviors of related
executions. As a first step, the objective of this EAGER project is to
empirically measure whether there is a comprehensive range of semantically
expressive pseudo-oracle relations that can detect semantic security
vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.