* 1842547
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Migration, Transformation and Sustainability
* GEO,RISE
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Edward Carr, Clark University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 02/28/2022
* USD 142,929.00

Global environmental change, environmental degradation and resource pressures
have created unprecedented situations for societies worldwide. The slow progress
on addressing these challenges has led to increasing emphasis on the need to go
beyond the study and encouragement of incremental change. Conventional knowledge
and capacity building to tackle the challenges associated with sustainability
have had limited positive impacts; consequently, there is growing need for more
fundamental knowledge on how transformations in the way societies interact both
with each other and with the natural environment. Societal transformations refer
to profound and enduring systemic changes that typically involve social,
cultural, technological, political, economic and environmental processes. A
comprehensive and concerted research initiative is needed that can boost
research on transformations to sustainability and catalyze new kinds of
solutions to environmental and social challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports U.S. researchers participating in a project competitively
selected by a 19-country initiative through the Belmont Forum- NORFACE-ISSC.
Transformations to Sustainability (T2S) is a multilateral initiative designed to
support research projects that will contribute to re-structuring the broad field
of sustainability research. Co-production of knowledge and research problem
formulation is considered to be critical to the process of societal
transformation and each project engages stakeholders or community-based
partners. The initiative seeks to develop the fundamental knowledge societies
require to help develop transformations to sustainability which are of
significant social concern throughout the world and of great relevance to both
academics and stakeholders. The T2S program aims to build capacity, overcome
fragmentation and have a lasting impact on both society and the research
landscape by cultivating durable research collaboration across multiple borders,
disciplinary boundaries, and with practitioners and societal partners. This
includes facilitating the development of new research collaborations with parts
of the world which are not often involved in large-scale international research
efforts, notably low- and middle-income countries. The funds provided in this
award will be used to support U.S. participants to cooperate in consortia that
consist of partners from at least three of the participating countries and that
bring together natural scientists, social scientists and research users (e.g.,
civil society, NGOs, and industry). Participants from other countries are funded
through their national funding organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to integrate comprehensive insights on migration into theories of
transformation to sustainability. Both domestic and international migration has
enormous transformative potential for individuals, societies and landscapes.
Transformation theories assume static populations and fail to recognize both
positive and negative impacts of the movement of people on societies and
ecosystems. The objective is to expand knowledge of transformations to
sustainability and develop a comprehensive migration-sustainability model, and
develop insights on sustainability strategies at local, national and
international scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.