* 1842528
* American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) Convening on Computer Science Education for Native Students
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Kathy DeerInWater, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 98,895.00

The American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) proposes a Convening
on Computer Science (CS) Education for Native Students. Native American students
and professionals are significantly underrepresented in CS and this is a
critical time to convene stakeholders, develop an understanding of the barriers
to CS education for Native students and Native-serving institutions, and
identify resources and relationships necessary to truly effect change that will
bring Native American students into the national CSforAll movement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AISES will recruit participants for the workshop with
outreach within its network and partner networks, and through targeted outreach
to key stakeholders. AISES will collaborate with Native education researchers
and the AISES Education Committee and Tribal Nations Advisory Council to develop
the convening's agenda. The primary objectives of the proposed convening are to:
1) use the collective knowledge of a diverse set of stakeholders to identify and
understand the challenges and current best practices of providing CS education
to Native students; 2) use this collective knowledge to develop strategies for
increasing access to and engagement in CS among Native students; and 3) provide
an overview of NSF opportunities and identify technical assistance needs to
facilitate greater participation in NSF programs among tribes, Native-serving
institutions, and Native education researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.