* 1842921
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a composite system (surfactant-particle) including non-ionic green surfactants for enhancing efficiency of green detergents through colloidal...
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Carlos Pinzon, Cleancult LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be realized first in household cleaning
applications, a market valued in more than 26 billion/year, where currently only
about 3% of the market is filled with eco-friendly alternatives. Cleancult new
scrubbing system will allow the development of more efficient and potent
cleaning products, capable of competing with traditional petroleum-based brands
while helping to reduce the water pollution effects due to laundry/cleaning
activities, reduce the appearance of skin conditions in customers due to the
continuous exposure to harmful chemicals found in traditional cleaning products,
and reduce the energetic cost related to the use of hot water in laundry
applications. Cleancult objective is to open the door to novel green clean
technologies, by first introducing our all-natural scrubbing system in our
products and potentially license the technology to other green detergents
manufacturers, and later introduce our own all-natural green surfactant
molecule, with the solid intention of increasing the green cleaners?
participation in the marker by at least 20% in the next 5
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will provide funding for the development of a micellar system(s)
composed of a biopolymer particle and a naturally derived from sustainable
sources surfactant compound. The conjugation and stabilization mechanism of
these micellar systems are the main focus on the research objectives, together
with the inclusion of different functionalization to improve oil removal, avoid
re-deposition and also enhance the antibacterial properties of the scrubbing
system. The complete characterization of the micellar system and its efficacy in
removing soil/dirt stains will be achieved through the use of spectroscopic,
rheological and hydrodynamic techniques, surface chemistry modifications, and
applying the global standards for detergency determination. The research team
will work to provide a commercially ready product at the end of this SBIR Phase
I project, and due to already in place collaborations with manufacture
facilities will avoid delays in the introduction of Cleancults' new line of
green powerful cleaners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.