* 1842375
* Building Theories of Scientific Phenomena: Comparing and Integrating Aggregate Pattern-based and Agent-based Computational Approaches
* EDU,DRL
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Uri Wilensky, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,642,139.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science education research and standards documents
emphasize the need for engaging students in the practices of scientists. Yet
still little is known about how to engage students in one of the most central
practices of science, theory building. The project will investigate how 8th
grade students can engage in scientific theory building, including computatinal
thinking, and how theory building can be integrated into their science
curriculum. There are many ways scientists approach building theory. In some
cases, they begin with data and abstract a relationship in order to more
precisely describe it in terms of a mathematical model (i.e., aggregate pattern
approach). In other cases, they posit the mechanism for a phenomenon, beginning
with assumptions about a system (e.g., its elements and their interactions) and
build a computational model that, when run, produces outcomes that can be
explored (i.e., individual mechanism approach). No educational research studies
have yet sought to characterize the commonalities and differences of the two
approaches. The project will investigate the learning opportunities of each
approach to theory building and use these results to create curricular units
that integrate the two approaches. The project will contribute to the
educational research base and disseminate project research findings for use by
science teachers, curriculum developers, and instructional
coaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research aims to understand the character of
1) the theories the students produce; 2) the processes by which they produce
their theories; and 3) the characteristics of student learning that result.
These questions are addressed through lab-based studies that introduce students
to phenomena by guiding them to either articulate the aggregate-level pattern
seen in data or develop agent-based computational models that represent the
mechanism behind the pattern. Findings will inform the design of curricular
units that will be tested through design-based research in the third year. These
findings will illuminate how the two approaches can be integrated to help
students learn about both scientific phenomena and theory-building processes.
The research will also extend insight into how the production of different
representations affords different learning pathways. Products of the study will
inform the development of curricular materials and software. The research will
be of practical value by informing general principles for designing and
conducting theory-building instruction. The software produced will extend the
widely used NetLogo and NetTango platforms to facilitate building theoretical
computational models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.