* 1842833
* SBIR Phase I:  READ! Toolkit, A Knowledge-Based Expert System to Develop Beginning Literacy Curricula in Endangered or Underserved Languages
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Catherine Callow-Heusser, BETTERMENT LABS, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop and test a computer-based expert system
that will guide development of beginning literacy curricula in any phonics-based
language. The system will produce beginning literacy curricula mobile apps for
phones and tablets and will include beginning reading, writing, vocabulary-
building, and assessment activities. The expert system will (a) minimize cost,
time and expertise required to develop early literacy curricula, (b) produce
curricula that could increase early reading fluency and bilingualism, which is
related to children's improved ability to manage their thoughts, behaviors and
emotions, (c) provide effective curricula to learn languages other than English
at home or school, (d) revitalize endangered or underserved languages while
increasing connections to culture and heritage, which will improve long-term
academic, health and economic outcomes for indigenous children or children who
speak a language other than English at home, and increase their participation in
STEM careers, and (e) contribute to research on bilingualism's impacts on
academic, social, emotional, and cultural outcomes. The system will be licensed
by underserved language communities, tribes, individuals, and organizations
interested in improving literacy, with revenue produced by the mobile app
products developed using the expert system shared between curriculum developers
and the expert system developer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase
I project will develop and test a knowledge-based expert system that integrates
early literacy research; language analysis to provide evidence-based
recommendations for developing decodable text for phonics-based early literacy
curricula; evidence-based teaching and formative assessment strategies;
curriculum development knowledge; user interface/user experience best-practices;
natural language processing for pronunciation feedback; and database and
technology skills to guide users who may not have the knowledge and skills in
developing a beginning literacy curricula in any language. The best practices
and methods based on the research will be incorporated by analyzing text to
create lists of sounds/letters and words, their frequencies, and sounds and
words that come before and after each sound/word. From these lists, the system
will generate language-specific recommendations based on the rules for optimal
sequencing of sounds and words for learning to decode in another language. While
some evidence-based guidelines needed for decoding in English, which is less
phonetically regular than many underserved languages, may not apply in a
language that is more phonetically regular, most are expected to. These rules
will guide recommendations from which users of the knowledge-based expert system
can select sequences sounds, words, and phrases to write decodable, connected
text, culturally relevant stories for beginning literacy
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.