* 1842867
* SBIR Phase I:  VTE mitigation device
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,04/30/2020
* John Welsh, OSCIFLEX LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will support the research and development of a new
medical device designed to prevent deep vein thrombosis in hospitalized
patients. Deep vein thrombosis occurs when blood clots form in the veins and is
a common complication in hospital patients that is also a leading cause of
preventable death in the United States. This project will develop a device that
modifies blood flow patterns in the legs in a new manner designed to
specifically activate genetic changes inside the vein that protect against blood
clot formation. The goal of this project is to generate a new device that it is
capable of creating the desired blood flow patterns in patients while
maintaining a high level of device comfort, reliability, and ease of use for
clinical staff and patients. In addition to preventing death and disability in
the hospitalized population of the US, this project will move a new device
towards commercial production, thereby supporting economic growth, job
formation, and tax revenue. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will
leverage novel molecular and cellular discoveries regarding the pathogenesis of
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) to create a more effective device to prevent DVT in
immobilized individuals who are at high risk for the disease. DVTs form in the
sinus behind venous valves, where blood flow is reduced during immobility,
promoting blood clot formation. This site is typically protected against clot
formation by a powerful genetic program in the endothelial cells that is unique
to the valve sinus microenvironment. Loss of this genetic expression program
results in a prothrombotic environment that supports clot formation and DVT.
Research has further revealed that the valve sinus anti-thrombotic genetic
program is activated by a specific pattern of venous blood flow at that site
that is driven by muscular activity. During prolonged periods of immobility,
common during hospitalization, loss of this flow profile extinguishes the
protective endothelial phenotype and supports DVT formation. Ultrasound analysis
reveals that current mechanical therapy devices marketed to prevent DVT do not
generate the hemodynamics at the valve that are produced by muscular activity
due to their methods of action. This project will develop a device that
generates a protective hemodynamic pattern in the valve sinus of immobile
patients by actuating blood flow that accurately reproduce muscular activity. To
accomplish this goal the device design alters the primary physical manipulation
strategy of other existing devices away from calf and thigh compression and
instead induces rapid calf expansion to replicate the effect of muscular
activity on venous blood flow. Vascular ultrasound studies demonstrate that this
actuation method successfully recapitulates the venous hemodynamics of the
active limb required to support expression of the protective genetic pathway in
the valve sinus. This SBIR Phase I project will optimize the device design to
create this actuation while also improving patient comfort, mitigating common
risks, and facilitating ease of use by clinical staff. This project will address
key risks in advancing a medical device into clinical testing and use, thereby
enabling the device to bridge to a phase of commercial manufacturing and
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.