* 1842172
* Collaborative Research: Uplift or climate change? Determining the primary driver of deep canyon incision in the eastern cordillera, southern Peru
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Nadine McQuarrie, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 271,061.00

Competition between the growth of new topography by tectonic uplift and erosion
that wears it down occurs in many mountain regions. Earth scientists recognize
that the ability of rivers to erode depends on how much water is delivered to
the mountains, and that changes between wetter or dryer climates should
influence topography. The expectation is that changes in climate and the
resulting change in erosion are reflected in the topography of a landscape. This
project focuses on the Eastern Cordillera of southern Peru, where deep canyons
carved into the Central Andean Plateau margin reflect either tectonic uplift or
an increase in erosional efficiency due to climate change. The research
incorporates newly-developed methods for diagnosing the effects of climate on
topography as part of a field-based investigation to determine the degree to
which climate-driven changes in erosional efficiency are responsible for canyon
cutting. New remote analysis methods are used to differentiate signatures of
tectonic uplift driven erosion and climate driven erosion in topography.
Improving the fidelity of these remote methods has considerable societal value
because they are an inexpensive and efficient means of hazard assessment in
areas where the presence or absence of tectonic uplift, and the resulting effect
on seismicity, are uncertain. Additionally, this project wll benefit society by:
1) essential STEM training of three US graduate students including two women, as
well as several Peruvian undergraduates; 2) international collaborations with
both Peruvian and German universities; and 3) improved STEM education
development in Peru and US at the undergraduate, graduate, and professional
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Determination of an active tectonic driver of
mountain uplift and the geometry of related structures is critical to resolving
how strongly climate and tectonics are coupled. This project tests competing
hypotheses for the proximal drivers of canyon cutting into the Eastern
Cordillera: incision driven by active rock uplift vs. incision into a previously
uplifted plateau margin triggered by climate change. Integration of observations
and analyses of the deformation history, landscape morphology, precipitation
patterns, and spatial and temporal patterns of erosion and exhumation is used to
definitively and quantitatively evaluate the relative importance of active rock
uplift and climate change in landscape evolution. Analyses focus on: 1.
estimating millennial-scale erosion rates from cosmogenic 10Be concentrations in
modern river sands, 2. assessing the role of rainfall in the relation between
topography and erosion rate, 3. analyzing cooling ages of low-temperature
thermochronometers (AHe, AFT, ZHe) provided by a complementary study, 4.
refining geologic mapping and developing balanced cross sections, and 5.
integrating all data in models to quantitatively test hypotheses. Results will
have broad implications for: 1. the general applicability and fidelity of
proposed methods for diagnosing the primary causes of canyon cutting based on
analysis of geomorphic data, 2. further development of a methodology to
quantitatively link geometry, displacement and rates on faults to exhumation
rates, erosion rate patterns and the resulting landscape morphology, 3.
quantitative, observation-based understanding of the sensitivity of erosion
rates to annual rainfall, and 4. understanding of the nature and strength of
linkages among climate, topography, erosion, and
tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.