* 1842097
* BTT EAGER:   Improving Crop Yield Prediction by Integrating Machine Learning with Process-Based Crop Models
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Patrick Schnable, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Predicting crop yield is central to addressing emerging challenges in food
security, particularly in an era of global climate change. Currently, machine
learning and crop modeling are among the most commonly used approaches for yield
prediction. This award supports fundamental research to combine the strengths of
machine learning and crop models. Machine learning algorithms will be used to
predict intermediate plant traits, which will then be fed into a crop model to
predict grain yields across different environment and field management
practices. Both conception and execution of this EAGER project depend on
collaborations across multiple disciplines, including high-throughput
phenotyping, object recognition, machine learning, optimization, computer
simulation, and crop modeling. If successful, this research is expected to
improve not only accuracy but also interpretability of yield prediction models,
which will open numerous opportunities for downstream research and discoveries.
The interdisciplinary effort will enhance the impact of science and engineering
education across disciplines, while providing a collaborative and inclusive
environment for all students to engage in cutting edge research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Underlying yield prediction is one of the grand
challenges of biology: understanding how phenotype is determined by genotype,
environment, and their interactions. Machine learning algorithms are able to
predict crop phenotype to reasonable accuracy based on genotype information, but
most models have a black box structure and their results are hard to interpret.
On the other hand, crop models offer biological insights into causes of
phenotypic variation by providing explicit explanations of the interactions
between traits and environmental conditions in different phases of the crop
growth cycle, but the collection of trait measurement data and calibration of
model coefficients are labor intensive, time consuming, and costly. The proposed
approach is a nested model. Deep learning algorithms will be trained to predict
leaf appearance rate from genotype and empirically measured trait data. Training
data will be extracted from images of plant leaves obtained via field
experiments that employ novel phenotyping technique. Next, the resulting
predicted traits and environment data will be fed into the crop model to predict
yield. If proven effective, this approach can be applied to study other plant
traits to improve crop yield prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.