* 1842272
* Collaborative Research: Using Culturally Sustaining Learning Environments to Explore Computational Learning &amp; Identity
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Christopher Wright, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 12/31/2023
* USD 769,752.00

Computing and computational thinking practices are ubiquitous in young people's
lives. From the animations programmed in their video games to algorithms used to
determine the next song selection from their playlists, today's youth are
inundated with simple and complex computational models, tools, and practices.
Nationally, computing and computational thinking practices are transforming STEM
education and youth workforce preparedness. In fact, computational thinking
practices are now recognized, alongside mathematics, as a fundamental core
scientific practice in the Next Generation Science Standards. Consequently, much
attention has been paid in recent years towards increasing opportunities for
youth to engage in STEM content through computing and computational thinking
practices. Access to these learning opportunities in computing, however, is
inequitable. Youth of color are especially vulnerable to these inequities, as
computational thinking practices are often devoid of the cultural capital and
community engagement that research has shown to be particularly effective in
attracting and engaging youth from underrepresented groups in STEM. This three-
year research and design project will examine the intersectionality between
computational thinking practices, interdisciplinary STEM learning, and
culturally expressive practices on youths' learning and identity development.
The model will test the feasibility of culturally sustaining learning
environments and the foundational principles of hip hop as a model to engage and
encourage middle school youth from predominately underrepresented groups to
learn, connect to, and consider computing in their everyday lives.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over a three-year period, an estimated 400 middle school
aged youth will participate in the project and research. The youth will meet
online and afterschool at community-based sites (i.e., makerspace, arts-based
space, community center) in Gary, Indiana; Philadelphia, PA; and Cambridge, MA.
A range of interdisciplinary STEM topics will be covered including science
principles (e.g., physics), mathematics, engineering, computer programming,
digital media, and cross-platform product planning and development through the
lens of computational thinking or making practices. The youth will work
collaboratively to develop and design their own interdisciplinary STEM-based
computing projects, using hip hop as a basis. The online platform, cyber cypher,
will be piloted by Youmedia Network Labs, a nationwide network of 28 makerspaces
and the Cambridge Agenda for Children-Middle School Network, a network of
afterschool programs in Cambridge, MA. With regards to the research, several
salient questions will be explored: (1) How do middle school youth appropriate,
resist, and/or transform ecologically situated resources and practices as they
learn computational making practices? (2) How do variations in different
culturally sustaining spaces affect the development of learning in
interdisciplinary computational making practices? (3) How do middle school youth
appropriate, resist, and/or transform ecologically situated resources as they
construct pluralistic computational making identities and within different
learning environments? and (4) Across the three sites, what are the design
principles of the culturally sustaining computational making environments that
contribute to computational making practices and STEM learning and identity
development? Data will be collected from surveys, field observations,
computational making &amp; design skills assessments, and multimodal design
narratives. The results of the research and an external evaluation will be
analyzed and disseminated via academic and practitioner targeted journals,
conferences, project participant community events, online communities, and
social media. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by STEM + C which
supports research and the development of interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary
approaches to the integration of computing within STEM teaching and learning for
preK-12 students in both formal and informal settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.