* 1842693
* EAGER: Leveraging Behavioral and Physiological Feedback in the Design of Affect-Sensitive Distance Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Lauren Wilcox, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

As the world workforce increasingly pursues technology-focused careers, we see
more technology learning environments emerge, such as online courses. There are
many advantages to online learning that make it appealing to adult learners,
such as low cost, flexibility in times and pacing, and convenience of location.
However, there are also many disadvantages that can be attributed to the lack of
face-to-face interaction. In online learning environments, instructors cannot
observe if students are motivated, engaged, lost or frustrated. This project
will investigate the feasibility of using wearable technologies and other types
of sensing to gather more context about the online learners. The research will
develop techniques for incorporating these complementary sensing technologies to
learn more about the online student's environment and their subjective
experiences during their participation in online courses. This will generate
methods to measure social context in online learning environments. The second
key aim of the project is to use insights from wearable devices and other
sensing technologies, to design new online learning environments - and the live
instruction being given to online students - to better meet learners' needs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The innovation in this project lies in multi-modal
sensing, coupled with modeling of students' cognitive and affective states. Our
primary objectives are to collect and identify correlations between wearable
sensor data and learning measures; to explore real-time interaction between
modeling and online teaching; and to inform improvement of learning systems. The
research team will study the needs of students, teachers and administrators of
online courses in computer science. This will create a large database; computer
infrastructure; methods for integrating across sensing, analytic, and modeling
modalities. The project will develop a real-world pilot, with online learners
and instructors. Studies of the pilot will confirm the feasibility and
acceptability of the infrastructure, and the ability to capture signs of
boredom, frustration, delight, and cognitive load.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.