* 1842359
* Integrating Computation into Science Teaching and Learning in Grades 6-8
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Mitchell Bruce, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,250,000.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (pre-K-12). This project will advance research and
development of new transdisciplinary approaches to computational STEM teaching
and learning that will integrate the fields of education at the middle grade
levels in earth, life, and physical sciences. This project will address the
rural education issue of access to STEM by rural schools. Moreover, both
students and teachers will be brought up to speed in computational phenomena
applied to middle school youth in one of the most rural locations in the State
of Maine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the professional
learning experiences and pedagogical content knowledge that teachers need in
order to integrate computing in their teaching of science. The research will
lead to an evidence-based model of professional development and curricular
supports for STEM+C integration at the middle level. A randomized controlled
trial will provide knowledge about the impacts of this integration on student
learning of computing and STEM. The work will include creation of three vetted
modules to integrate computing with middle-school science and a graduate course
to help prepare future will teachers for effective integration. Findings and
products from this study will be disseminated to researchers and practitioner
communities working to understand and implement integration of computing with
STEM teaching and learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.