* 1842358
* Partnering with Teachers on the Design of Inquiry for Socio-scientific Computational Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Andrew Elby, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,035,998.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program supporting this project, addresses an urgent
need for real-world, interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of
students from the early grades through high school (pre-K-12). This project
focuses on a very difficult problem that is in search of a solution. Most major
challenges that confront society today, such as generating sufficient energy,
preventing and treating diseases, maintaining supplies of clean water and food,
and addressing other critical environmental problems, are "socio-scientific."
Efforts to integrate these issues into science instruction have not fully
succeeded because they include (1) the intrinsic complexity of these issues,
rendering them difficult to reason about even for adults; (2) inadequate
involvement of teachers in initial phases and (3) the difficulty and discomfort
of facilitating classroom discussions of controversial, emotionally fraught
issues that don't have single right answers. This project will address these
issues in an integrated way using computational methods and computational
thinking. Researchers from the University of Maryland and the University of
Calgary will collaborate with teachers to design strategies for providing these
concepts to middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
the three above mentioned issues in the classroom context by introducing
computational thinking and associated tools to teachers. The teachers will be
involved as full partners in the project from the beginning. Extensive
engagement in the project activities, followed by collaborative adaptation of
those activities to middle school classrooms will help teachers gain comfort
with STEM subjects and with socio-scientific ideas and with learner-centered
pedagogy about these issues. In the context of this professional and curriculum
development plan, the research team will address research questions designed to
inform theory building. By working with teachers from multiple locations, the
team will develop insights for how to adapt the inquiries to teachers' and
students' local contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.