* 1842325
* The Second NSF International Workshop on Sustainable Smart Cities - Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Fouad Fouad, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 02/29/2020
* USD 57,795.00

This proposal will support a workshop on Sustainable Smart Cities that will
bring together decision making, research, and practitioner communities from the
U.S. and Egypt to discuss the opportunities for developing and implementing
sustainable urban development programs. The workshop will include approximately
50 carefully selected participants including 10 from the US, 5 from Europe, 30
from Egypt, and 5 from elsewhere in the Middle East and will take place in
~January 2019. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on sustainable urban
infrastructure and living is urgently needed as the pace of urbanization
continues to increase. Some estimates suggest that by 2050 70% of the world's
population will live in cities, and already approximately 80% of the US
population lives in urban areas. Cities consume a tremendous share of resources
like water and energy for which demand globally is only increasing. Urbanization
is increasing most rapidly in developing countries, making the topic of
sustainable cities particularly valuable for collaboration between US and
developing country scientists. Egypt is a particularly valuable location for
this meeting, with Cairo facing some of the greatest urban infrastructure
challenges of any city in the world and a new Egyptian capital under development
east of Cairo. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the workshop are
to:&lt;br/&gt;1) Explore how synergistic relationships between government,
researchers, and practitioners can promote sustainable urban
development;&lt;br/&gt;2) Bring together the decision making, research, and
practitioner communities from the U.S. and Egypt to identify and prioritize
sustainability programs that address regional needs;&lt;br/&gt;3) Identify
specific objectives, decision criteria, and performance metrics to help decision
makers&lt;br/&gt;prioritize and evaluate sustainability projects;&lt;br/&gt;4)
Identify mutually beneficial research and training initiatives;&lt;br/&gt;5)
Identify lessons learned that can help the U.S. to apply similar practices at
home and abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the workshop will offer a
platform for sharing experiences and best practices in:&lt;br/&gt;1) Economic
transformation of cities;&lt;br/&gt;2) Urban infrastructure;&lt;br/&gt;3)
Science, technology, and innovation for sustainable urbanization;&lt;br/&gt;4)
Health and well-being of citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching topic
and selected themes are timely. Research efforts are underway in the US and
around the world to find ways for cities to operate and grow that are efficient,
attractive and economical while also supporting the needs of residents. This
workshop will bring together experts from the US, Egypt, the rest of the Middle
East/North Africa (MENA), and Europe to share results, coordinate new
collaborative research endeavors, identify criteria for regional projects and
priorities for new programs, and identify lessons for the US and developed
countries to apply at home. These efforts are likely to be valuable in the US,
in Egypt, and around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for this project is
provided by the Office of International Science and Engineering through the US-
Egypt Joint Fund.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.