* 1842951
* EAGER:  Methodology development for 3D atomic-scale structural dynamics movies of enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Shimon Weiss, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/28/2023
* USD 334,698.00

Capturing the dynamic structure of a biological machine performing its function
remains the holy grail of biology. Conventional tools provide only structural
"snapshots" of stable states along the reaction pathway. This project aims to
develop methods that will capture a full movie of a macromolecule's structure as
it works. The research tools developed will be applicable to a wide variety of
biological systems, and will be disseminated by means of publications,
tutorials, conference presentations and the like, to accelerate their adoption.
The education component of the project will emphasize the use of single molecule
biophysics and computational tools for dynamic structure determination. It will
provide high school, undergraduate, graduate students and postdocs training in
state-of-the-art single molecule biophysics research, and offer leadership
experiences for graduate students and postdocs as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will study the structure
of the transcription bubble in a simple bacterial transcription system during
initiation as a test case for developing new technological concepts. The
existence of certain intermediates in bacterial transcription suggests common
features of the process exist across the different domains of life and reflects
a conserved regulatory mechanism; thus, the findings will have broad utility.
For the purpose of dynamic structure determination, the project will combine
experimental and theoretical tools, including multi-spot single-molecule FRET
measurements, fast single-molecule microfluidic mixing, molecular dynamics
simulations and time-resolved single-photon detection to acquire data on- and
perform molecular modeling of- the transcription bubble during
initiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.