* 1842662
* EAGER: Scanning Ultrasound Probe for Semiconductor Sub-Surface Metrology
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Gajendra Shekhawat, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2019
* USD 110,000.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;There is an acute need to image semiconductor devices
at nanometer scales below the surface. This will make it possible to identify
buried defects and perform failure analysis in two- and three-dimensional
structures such as micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS). Current nanoscale
subsurface imaging techniques require extensive sample preparation, are
exceptionally slow, and require expensive equipment. Or they are simply unable
to image opaque samples. The solution is a tool which provides non-destructive,
high throughput nanoscale imaging of buried defects at a reasonable cost. This
project will combine scanning probe microscopy with ultrasound holography to
reveal and characterize subsurface features with nanoscale resolution in three
dimensions. In this technology, a cantilever monitors acoustic waves that travel
along the surface. Perturbations to the amplitude and phase of these waves carry
information about structures beneath and near the surface. These variations are
detected as small differences in frequency and phase, resulting in beats that
are detected by the cantilever. These variations are then used to create spatial
mappings generated by subsurface and near-surface features and defects as the
cantilever scans across the surface. The ultimate aim is to integrate scanning
probe microscopy hardware with functional electronics into field-programmable
gate arrays, configurable integrated circuits. The project promises to open new
vistas in non-destructive imaging of semiconductor devices and structures. Once
developed, the technology will be made available to other institutions,
broadening the user base to include physical sciences, engineering and related
fields. The PI will integrate results from this project into undergraduate
courses and highlight how the principles of engineering and physical science
impact materials and device research. Active participation of underrepresented
groups will be promoted through classroom visits to elementary schools through
the Science Chicago program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;There is
an acute and timely need for innovative imaging modalities in semiconductor
industries. These are especially needed to identify the buried defects and
delamination and provide failure analysis in both two- and three-dimensional
structures. These include devices based on micro-electromechanical systems
(MEMS) and interconnects. This project will develop "Scanning Thickness
Resonance Acoustic Microscopy" for sub-surface inspection and failure analysis.
Current nanoscale subsurface imaging techniques are unable to probe optically
opaque samples or require extensive and time consuming sample preparation, are
exceptionally slow, and require expensive metrology equipment. The solution is a
tool which provides non-destructive, high throughput nanoscale imaging of buried
defects, and that can be widely deployed at multiple points in the research and
development cycle, at a reasonable cost. Anticipated applications will identify
buried nanostructures in semiconductor, MEMS, and low-K dielectric materials
both in 2D and 3D geometries. This innovative technology will bring
transformative research in identifying the failure analysis and buried defects
both in 2D and 3D materials stacks in complex three-dimensional devices and
structural geometries with nanometer scale resolution. In this technology, the
cantilever monitors the perturbation to the surface acoustic waves, especially
their phase, which carry information about embedded or buried sub-structures
reflected in the scattering of specimen acoustic waves due to the difference in
their respective viscoelastic properties. Variations in the amplitude and phase
of the bulk wave due to the presence of the sub-surface nanostructures/defects
as well as the variations in near surface affect the amplitude and the phase of
the difference frequency signal (beats) which is detected by cantilever. These
variations are used to create spatial mappings generated by subsurface and near-
surface features/defects. To realize these efforts requires a way to combine
scanning probe microscopy hardware, functional electronics and its integration
into field programmable gate arrays for simultaneous generation and detection of
multiple harmonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.