* 1842531
* EAGER: A Magneto-Inductive Framework for Seamless Monitoring of Joint Kinematics
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Asimina Kiourti, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 191,000.00

Today's gold-standard for monitoring joint kinematics entails the use of
reflective markers placed upon the human body and tracked by infrared cameras.
While technique is limited to laboratory environments, alternative approaches
are also restricted to contrived environments, are obtrusive and error-prone, or
obstruct natural movement. This EAGER research will overall these challenges by
developing a new class of garments that rely on embroidered E-textile coils to
monitor joint kinematics in the individual's natural environment. As a result of
this work, new and unexplored opportunities are envisioned for applications as
diverse as healthcare, sports, and manufacturing work. This research is also
anticipated to re-define the term "wearables" from bulk, rigid on-body sensors
to seamlessly functionalized fabrics. Alongside the technical work, creative
education and outreach efforts are proposed that leverage the hands-on and
inter-disciplinary appeal of E-textiles to inspire students in the field,
attract females in engineering, and educate the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER research aims to explore the feasibility
of an untested but potentially transformative magneto-inductive framework for
monitoring joint kinematics in the individual's natural environment while
overcoming shortcomings in the state-of-the-art. The proposed framework relies
on E-textile coils embroidered into garments (leggings, sleeves, etc.) to
seamlessly monitor joint flexion/rotation, reaching out to applications as
diverse as sports, rehabilitation, gaming, human-machine interaction, and more.
Technologies reported to date for monitoring joint kinematics are bounded to
contrived environments (cameras); are obtrusive and suffer from integration
drift (inertial measurement units); require line-of-sight (time-of-flight
sensors); and/or obstruct natural movement (bending/deformation sensors). By
contrast, this EAGER research leverages a compelling analogy between transformer
principles and joint flexion/rotation to realize a new class of coil-
functionalized garments that overcome the limitations above. Our research will
first explore the feasibility of monitoring joint flexion (irrespective of limb
rotation) via wrap-around coils. Concurrent monitoring of joint flexion and
rotation will then be explored via hybrid wrap-around/longitudinal coils. Real-
world considerations will finally be brought into play to enhance the
knowledgebase. Without loss of generality, focus will be on the knee joint; yet
success of this research is expected to build the confidence and tools necessary
to monitor flexion/rotation of other joints and, ultimately, full-body
motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.