* 1842175
* The Enrollment Floodgates Are Open - Best Practices in Materials Science and Engineering Undergraduate Education for Rising Enrollments, September 9-11, 2019
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Susan Sinnott, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2020
* USD 49,000.00

Non-Technical Description: The workshop will bring together leaders and students
from materials science and engineering programs at academic institutions,
materials-based companies, national laboratories and federal and accreditation
agencies. The objective of the workshop is to discuss the national trend of
rapidly rising undergraduate enrollments in materials science and engineering
programs, make projections for expected future impact on the field, establish
best practices, and summarize the findings in a report that will be broadly
disseminated. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Details: Student enrollment in
materials science and engineering (MatSE) programs has been growing dramatically
at many universities over the last decade. These increases are taking place
across BS, MS, and PhD programs with the most substantial growth taking place at
the undergraduate level. These trends are impacting all stakeholders, from
academic programs, to industries and government laboratories that hire materials
scientists and engineers, through government and other agencies that fund and
accredit MatSE programs. The objectives of this workshop are to bring together
representative stakeholders to discuss current trends, make projections for
expected future impact on the field, and establish best practices. The meeting
is structured to include presentations, contributed posters, and panels with
ample time for questions and discussion. The findings are summarized in a report
that is broadly disseminated through publication in a leading publication aimed
at the materials science community to inform and enhance the educational
activities in materials science and engineering programs around the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.