* 1842385
* Learning Mathematical Concepts and Computational Thinking through Explainable Artificial Intelligence in a Simulation-based Learning Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Ning Wang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 08/31/2022
* USD 985,438.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program supports research and development of
interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of
computing within STEM teaching and learning for preK-12 students in both formal
and informal settings. This project will advance the integration of the
education of math within the context of artificial intelligence (AI) and
computational thinking skills for high school students. AI has become ubiquitous
in our everyday lives. From virtual assistants, to self-driving cars, from
diagnosing disease, to building houses, many of today's students will go on to
work in fields that involve or are influenced by AI. Being proficient in the
language of AI is key to a workforce that will be able to continue to innovate
and to support the AI-powered technology infrastructure and eco-system. AI
builds on the foundation of mathematics. By illustrating how math concepts can
be used in powerful AI tools to solve computational problems, learning math
through AI and computation can be a motivational and educational vehicle to
illustrate the pathway from K-12 STEM education, to post-secondary STEM
education, and later to STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the AI
decision-making process today is a "black box" to non-AI experts, and even to
some AI experts. Recent advances in explainable AI, an emerging intelligent
human-computer interface that makes the decision-making of AI algorithms
transparent to users, creates an opportunity to make AI machine learning
concepts accessible to high school students. This proposed project employs
explainable AI within a simulation-based learning environment where students
follow guided human-robot team explorations to learn how to create abstractions
of a problem, utilize AI algorithms to automate the process of solution
generation, analyze the outcome, and then improve the performance of their
solution. Researchers will iteratively introduce challenge problems and
scenarios to encourage students to modify the robot's decision-making where
students diagnose, revise, test and analyze, and create new capabilities for the
robot. The proposed project partners with three high schools from Virginia and
California. The integrated learning content will be developed with high school
teachers, focusing on the connections between high school math, AI and
computational thinking skills. The proposed project aims to answer the question
of to what extent interactive explainable AI design choices and explanations
contribute to understanding of math and AI in a use-create-modify framework for
high school learners. Research studies will address (1) assessment of the use-
create-modify approach and its impact on self-efficacy for computational
thinking and use of AI, (2) assessment of understanding of math and AI, and the
different uses of explanations to promote learning, and (3) enjoyment and
engagement with the human-robot simulation, and to what extent enactment in this
human-technology interactive learning environment is able to frame high school
level learning of math and its integration with computational
thinking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.