* 1842287
* SAC Cyber Service Scholarship Program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Kim Muschalek, San Antonio College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 568,831.00

The Cyber Service Scholarship (CSS) project is funded under the National Science
Foundation's Community College Cyber Pilot Program (C3P). Its objective is to
enable 20 academically talented Computer and Information Science majors at San
Antonio College (SAC), who are veterans of the Armed Forces and/or bachelor's
degree holders, to complete the AAS in Information Assurance (IA) and Cyber
Security and enter a federal, state, local, or tribal government position
related to cybersecurity. The project is in alignment with the National Defense
Authorization Act of 2018. San Antonio is an optimal location for this pilot
effort as it is a major hub for veterans and for government-funded cybersecurity
operations that are actively looking for qualified employees. Developing and
testing a model for improving cybersecurity education at SAC provides a unique
opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the proposed interventions on
veterans and Hispanic students. SAC is designated as a National Center of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense 2-Year Education
(CAE-2Y).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CSS project will integrate research on best
practices in persistence and retention strategies for veteran and
underrepresented STEM majors and will advance the discovery and understanding
about these issues among cybersecurity educators while promoting teaching,
training and learning through faculty-student advising and mentorship. The
project aims to generate knowledge associated with improving cybersecurity
education and student outcomes at SAC, a Hispanic-Serving Institution that
educates the largest student veteran population in San Antonio, along increasing
the number of highly skilled, academically talented students who enter
government service immediately after graduation. The project outcomes can
provide potential solutions for other CAE and CAEY2-designated programs that are
preparing a significant portion of the nation's cybersecurity workforce. SAC is
also in a unique position to disseminate this knowledge via its role as a
regional support center for prospective CAE and CAEY2 programs throughout the
southwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding for this project is provided from the
Advanced Technological Education (ATE) and NSF Scholarships in STEM (S-STEM)
programs, reflecting alignment of the project with major emphases of the ATE
program on involvement of community colleges and the S-STEM program on financial
and co-curricular support for high-achieving students with demonstrated
financial need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.