* 1842496
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying temporal relationships between tectonic forcing and landscape responses in the central Andean Precordillera, Argentina
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Darryl Granger, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 224,098.00

This project will focus on understanding landscape changes, such as mountain
building and erosion, caused by the collision of tectonic plates. By using a new
method of combining two different types of analyses (thermochronology and
cosmogenic radio nuclide dating) the research team will be able to determine
patterns in how faults grow and how fast a landscape can change in a collisional
system. The two different dating techniques are complementary as they record
information about geologic changes on different but overlapping timescales, and
thus combining them will fill an important gap between shorter- and longer-term
geologic changes. This project will facilitate the professional development of a
postdoctoral fellow by providing professional training in both research and
teaching, and by establishing connections with international colleagues. The
postdoctoral fellow will receive instruction on new methods of teaching and
education and apply these approaches through participation in established
programs for K-12 outreach and by leading Earth Science seminars and field
trips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and use a novel combination
of low-temperature thermochronometry and cosmogenic radionuclide techniques to
quantify changes in recent and paleo erosion rates related to faulting and
sedimentation driven by compressional tectonics. This study will develop and
refine the combination of two geochronological methods that span different
spatiotemporal scales to understand links between rock uplift, faulting, basin
subsidence, and lag times between erosion and sediment deposition. The central
Andean Precordillera is ideal for this study as there has been active faulting
and deformation from the early Miocene to present in a region with relatively
stable and arid climate conditions during that time. This suggests that
landscape development has been driven primarily by tectonics rather than
climate. Acquiring new data to address rates of deformation and landscape
response times across several geologic structures will not only advance
knowledge about the development of the central Andean Precordillera fold-thrust
belt, but also contribute more generally to the growing body of research on
landscape responses to tectonic perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.