* 1842092
* EAGER: An Accessible Coding Curriculum for Engaging Underserved Students with Special Needs in Afterschool Programs
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Daniela Marghitu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Rogers
* 08/31/2021
* USD 331,733.00

Many schools are trying to figure out how to comply with new computing
directives, especially given there are a limited number of trained teachers that
are comfortable with this new subject area. State and federal mandates, on the
other hand, also require supporting the learning requirements of students with
special needs. The scarcity of accessible interfaces for learning computing can
lead to students with disabilities not having equal access in these new
initiatives. In addition, most schools in low socioeconomic communities are
often under-resourced, creating a further divide and challenge in bringing
computer science training directly into the classroom environment. This work
will investigate methods to positively impact underserved students with special
needs by ensuring equal access to computer science curriculum, with a focus on
1) designing an accessible coding curriculum to engage underserved students with
special needs in hands-on computing education in the afterschool space and 2)
through pilot studies evaluate the learning outcomes for two ethnically diverse
populations of middle school students with special
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.