* 1842101
* EAGER: Catalytic Reaction Coupling of Bio-oil Hydrodeoxygenation and Alkane Dehydrogenation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Zhiyong Gu, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 100,000.00

The development of economically viable techniques for manufacturing liquid
transportation fuels from bio-oils produced by pyrolysis of lignocellulosic
biomass is a grand challenge with important societal and environmental
sustainability implications. One of the obstacles is the high hydrogen
requirement for removing the undesired oxygen from the bio-oil via a chemical
reaction called catalytic hydrodeoxygenation (HDO). On the other hand, recent
developments in shale gas technologies have led to the production of vast
amounts of under-utilized light alkanes, which could serve as a source hydrogen
for bio-oil HDO. The main objective of this EAGER project is to explore the
direct coupling reaction of bio-oil HDO and light (C2-C4) alkane dehydrogenation
(DH) using a new family of bifunctional catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central hypothesis of the proposed exploratory research is that an integrated
catalyst design, consisting of a precious metal (e.g., Pt) and an oxophilic
metal (e.g., Mo) on a low acidic and weak electronegative metal oxide support
(e.g., TiO2), will enable the proposed reaction coupling scheme. Such a catalyst
concept is theoretically possible, based on thermodynamic analysis, but has not
been experimentally proven and remains untested. If successful, such a catalyst
will radically transform the existing bio-oil upgrading and olefin production
methods. Three specific research aims will be pursued to explore the feasibility
of this concept: (1) the effect of metal site size and metal-metal site distance
will be determined; (2) the influence of oxophilicity of the bio-oil HDO sites
will be revealed; (3) the impact of support composition will be characterized.
To obtain molecular-level understanding of the surface reaction pathways, the
bifunctional catalysts will be synthesized with their structures controlled at
the nanoscale. Catalyst activity will be measured based on the yields of desired
and undesired products from the flow reactor experiments. The dependence of
product distribution on (1) the size of the precious metal site, (2) the
distance between the DH and HDO sites, (3) metal-oxygen bond strength of the
oxophilic metal site, and (4) the compositions of the metal oxide support will
be determined. The proposed exploratory research may lead to fundamental
understanding of the catalytic geometric and electronic effects on the chemical
kinetics of the surface reactions. In addition to training two graduate
students, the principal investigators plan to integrate research outcomes into
undergraduate and graduate curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.