* 1842067
* Study on Effects of Flame Retardants on Chemically-Inhibited Diffusion Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Fumiaki Takahashi, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 08/31/2022
* USD 210,000.00

High-performance and low-cost brominated compounds are popular flame retardants
but are being phased out due to environmental and health concerns. It is
urgently needed to find environmentally friendly alternatives. In this project,
research will be conducted to investigate the effects of various compounds on
chemical inhibition in diffusion flames that bear resemblance to real fires.
Measurements of flame structure, with corresponding numerical simulations, will
shed light on the interactions of flames, flows, and inhibitors. This project
will provide the basic understanding of the detailed chemical inhibition
mechanisms of potential flame retardants, including both halogen-based and
halogen-free compounds. The resulting knowledge will help develop proper
screening and testing methods for characterizing flame retardants. This project
will benefit society by promoting fire safety and reducing fire
losses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to study the effects of gas-phase
chemical inhibitors on the structure of coflow diffusion flames, generated using
a cup burner. The goal is to obtain a better understanding of flame
extinguishment and retardation mechanisms. This work will be focused on the gas
phase process, thereby excluding condensed phase charring phenomena. The
research team will investigate, experimentally and computationally, the
structure of methane and propane diffusion flames with halogenated and halogen-
free (phosphorus) inhibitors added to the air or fuel. Unlike premixed flames,
the transport of inhibitors and active intermediates play an important role.
Modern combustion diagnostic tools will be used, including particle imaging
velocimetry, thin-filament pyrometry, and planar laser-induced fluorescence of
OH and CH radicals. The experimental results, including flame structures and
minimum extinguishing concentrations of inhibitors, will be compared with the
transient axisymmetric computations using full chemistry and multi-species
transport. This work will greatly advance our knowledge of the combustion and
inhibition behaviors of the selected halon replacement agents and phosphorus-
containing retardants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.