* 1842561
* Collaborative Research: Particle Energization in Turbulence and Magnetic Reconnection
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Gregory Howes, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2024
* USD 314,695.00

This three-year research project aims to provide an essential framework of
knowledge about the physical mechanisms of particle energization that will
likely be needed to make a definitive determination of the heating mechanism of
the solar corona. Furthermore, fundamental insights into the multi-scale problem
of particle energization in magnetic reconnection and plasma turbulence -- a
major goal of the research project -- will lead to an improved ability to
achieve the societal goal of predicting the impacts of extreme space weather
events, in particular the acceleration of hazardous solar energetic particles by
these mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma turbulence and magnetic
reconnection are two grand challenge problems in heliophysics, and the overlap
and interplay of these two incompletely understood mechanisms represents an
important frontier for heliophysics research. This three-year research project
targets a major unanswered question on this frontier, namely: to what extent
does magnetic reconnection play a role in the dissipation of plasma turbulence
at small scales? In order to make progress in answering this fundamental
question, during this project magnetic reconnection and plasma turbulence
simulations will be performed using both the AstroGK and Gkeyll kinetic
simulation codes. The project teams will investigate the particle energization
using a guiding-center analysis and a pressure tensor calculation, along with a
single-point field-particle correlation analysis to determine the characteristic
velocity-space signatures of specific energization mechanisms associated with
collisionless magnetic reconnection. Finally, these signatures will be sought in
the turbulent magnetosheath plasma by analyzing the electromagnetic field and
particle velocity distribution function measurements from the Magnetospheric
Multiscale (MMS) mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year project will
support the education and Ph.D. thesis research of a graduate student in space
plasma physics at the University of Iowa. Furthermore, a refined implementation
of the novel field-particle correlation technique to the analysis of particle
energization in heliospheric plasmas can be subsequently applied to understand
the fundamentals of plasma heating and particle acceleration in space and
astrophysical plasmas due to turbulence, reconnection, or collisionless shocks;
this is a major goal of the heliophysics community as outlined by the 2013 NRC
Heliophysics Decadal survey. The research results obtained during the project
will be disseminated broadly through presentations to the scientific community
at national and international meetings and publication in the peer-reviewed
literature. Elements of this research will be incorporated into public outreach
events for school audiences of all ages as well as public lectures on plasma
physics, astrophysics, and space physics. The research and EPO agenda of this
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.