* 1842111
* International Network-to-Network (N2N) Stakeholder Collaboration Workshop:  Solutions to Accelerate Research, Leverage Resources, and Maximize Synergies
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Vara Prasad, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Claire Hemingway
* 09/30/2020
* USD 99,047.00

International research collaborations are supported using a variety of
partnership models. However, what works under what circumstances and why is
poorly documented. This workshop will engage key thought leaders from across the
globe in a dynamic discussion of the critical issues related to international
partnerships and collaborations to leverage resources, maximize synergies, and
accelerate research. Workshop participants will examine existing models of
international funding partnerships and contribute to an action plan. The
workshop activities will promote partnerships, establish shared learning, and
strengthen connections to support the implementation of international network-
to-network collaborations responsive to global research to benefit society.

The aim of this workshop is to identify the overarching issues related to
international network-to-network partnerships, categorize and prioritize these
issues, and develop potential solutions to tackle these challenges.
Representatives from stakeholders in international research networks who are
knowledgeable about or have an interest in building network-to-network
partnerships will come together in a facilitated discussion. The workshop
provides a structure that supports interaction and collaboration of key
stakeholders to co-create a partnership model to support international networks
of networks. A formalized report of the workshop will (1) summarize effective
partnership models, (2) capture strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and
threats to international network-to-network collaborations, and (3) propose an
action plan. The workshop and report will increase awareness of critical issues
related to strengthening international research collaborations.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.