* 1842315
* EAGER:  Feasibility of approaches for cell-based sensing on chip
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Elisabeth Smela, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2021
* USD 99,967.00

Chemical detection using biological cells that live on the surface of an
integrated circuit chip is a promising approach to identifying odors, disease,
and pathogens. For example, the principal investigators have previously
demonstrated that a chip can be used to detect electrical signals generated by
odor-sensing cells taken from the nose when those cells are exposed to
particular odors. Despite decades of research into olfactory sensors, we are
still using animals, primarily dogs for odor detection; a cell-phone like device
for odor detection would have widespread applications throughout society. This
project aims to develop technology that overcomes the main practical challenge
for devices based on cell-based sensing: the need to supply cells to these
devices. Storage or supply of cells prior to device use has been challenging:
shipping cells to the device location so that they can be loaded into it just
prior to use is infeasible in many scenarios, as is keeping the cells alive for
long periods of time during which power may be unavailable and environmental
temperatures are varying. A dryable animal cell line that can be cultured in the
lab and methods for genetically engineering these cells has recently been
developed by others. The proposed research will lay the necessary groundwork for
using such cells on chip for cell-based sensing, so that the cells can be stored
in stasis on chip and later re-animated by the addition of water. The long term
goal of the research is to develop a bionose-on-a-chip that can be used in a
hand-held device for odor identification, replacing dogs in applications such as
security, explosives detection, and search and rescue, and opening new
possibilities for monitoring food safety and origin, controlling industrial
processes, and even diagnosing disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work
comprises three efforts to demonstrate the feasibility of using dryable cell
lines on chip. First, a gel system will be established that is compatible with
cell patterning and subsequent dessication. In the bionose application, cells
expressing distinct olfactory receptors will be patterned onto particular
sensing electrodes within a hydrogel host matrix, then dried in situ. The host
hydrogel should be compatible with culture of cells, maintain mechanical
integrity during and after drying, and support rapid exchange of ions and small
molecules. A range of gel systems that can be patterned using a bioplotter will
be studied. Second, the integrated circuit sensing chip will be packaged and
integrated with microfluidics. This will facilitate the dehydration-rehydration
process and promote testing of the system with odorants. Both conventional
micro-molding and 3-dimensional printing will be evaluated. Third, the design of
the on-chip micro-electrodes that monitor the electrical activity of the odorant
cells will be optimized through modeling and simulation to maximize detection of
the signals and to minimize anticipated crosstalk between different cell
populations on the same chip. These developments will lay the groundwork not
only for the bionose-on-a-chip application, but also other cell-based
bioelectronic sensing devices. The proposed work is challenging because
microfluidics and other organ on a chip approaches must be coupled with state of
the art circuit technologies and cutting edge biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.