* 1842342
* Collaborative Research: Introducing High-School Students to Computational Thinking in Industrial Automation
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Glen Bull, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 12/31/2022
* USD 933,640.00

As computing has become integral to the practice of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM), the STEM+Computing program seeks to address
emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied integration
of computational thinking and computing activities within STEM teaching and
learning in early childhood education through high school (preK-12).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A strong manufacturing industry is essential for the
nation's economic prosperity. Workers in manufacturing increasingly need to have
skills involving the use of computational thinking, software and advanced
technologies. The project will develop a series of Digital Invention Kits that
will enable high school students to reconstruct working models of the digital
counterparts of these inventions. For example, the Davenport Rotary Motor,
patented in 1837, will be used as scaffolding for development of a Stepper Motor
Kit that incorporates a digital micro-controller. Students will thereby learn
about the way in which the original analog electromechanical mechanisms led to
development of today's digital counterparts. The proposed Digital Invention Kits
will (1) provide an introduction to computational thinking, (2) recruit diverse
students who are not traditionally attracted to STEM fields, and (3) introduce
these students to industrial automation. The associated infrastructure developed
through these projects will increase the capacity of schools to offer a broader
range of manufacturing technologies in K-12 makerspaces. Participation in these
programs by a broader range of students will also lead to increased diversity in
advanced manufacturing programs in community colleges and beyond. The completed
Digital Invention Kits and accompanying pedagogical materials, assessment items,
and teacher support materials will be made available on the Make to Learn
website and disseminated by professional organizations. The project will also
conduct workshops and short courses introducing these materials to technology
and engineering educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate:
(1) how effective the Digital Invention Kits in improving computational
thinking, (2) how effective the Kits are in engaging and retaining female and
underrepresented students for the entire Kit sequence, and (3) how the
computational thinking strategies introduced in the program affect student
design and product development. The project will use a mixed method approach to
assess participant growth in various aspects of computational thinking, using
both quantitative and qualitative methods. To examine student thought processes
and solutions, the project will use qualitative approaches to study
computational strategies, actions, coding and products, along with rationales
and related beliefs. These will include observations of students, artifact
analyses, task-based interviews, STEM-focused interviews, and instructor
assessments (including tests and final course grades. Research outcomes will be
presented at STEM conferences and will be published in peer-reviewed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.