* 1842041
* SESYNC Networks-of-Networks Workshop
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Jonathan Kramer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Claire Hemingway
* 09/30/2020
* USD 99,727.00

International networks-of-networks have the potential to accelerate scientific
discovery by leveraging US support and participation in international research
collaborations. This initiative would grow US scientific capacity and
leadership, provide avenues for training and mechanisms for international
efforts to share technology, data and equipment. A preparatory workshop will be
held to enhance readiness for the US scientific community, across scientific
disciplines, to respond to a call for proposals to form International networks-
of-networks. To broaden the impact of international networks-of-networks, SESYNC
will hold a workshop on-site and live streamed for the community at large. This
workshop will provide the scientific community with an introduction to the
science of team science, common processes, tools and education on key challenges
and successes in international research network
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the workshop is to introduce
potential proposers of international networks-of networks to the science of team
science particularly as relevant to remote collaborative interactions. The
attendees will acquire skills useful in their existing research efforts and
applicable to responding to a new international network- of-networks call.
Discussions and presentations during the workshop will include material on
effective network communication, participant engagement, network leadership, and
management techniques that are effective at fostering and leveraging existing US
investments in critical research networks. The workshop will include topical
discussions, explore examples, and include exercises for participants to begin
to implement concepts into practice. Participants will gain an enhanced
understanding of the critical roles played by leadership styles, well-developed
organizational and communication strategies, establishment of a shared vision
and goals, data management/sharing agreements, and adaptation as network needs
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.