* 1842537
* Effect of Visualization on Undergraduate Students' Understanding of Fundamental Probability Concepts, Including Bayesian Inference
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Andrew Cohen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program:
Education and Human Resources (IUSE: EHR) Program, this project aims to serve
the national interest in high-quality undergraduate STEM education. It will do
so by developing and researching visualization resources that may promote
learning in undergraduate statistics. Helping students understand basic
probability concepts is critical to promote science literacy, as well as to
equip STEM majors with the skills and knowledge they need to succeed in graduate
school, the workplace, and beyond. This project will develop and test a learning
module on the probability concepts involved in Bayesian inference, a procedure
for updating probability in response to new data. The project will also explore
the role of visualization in learning probability concepts by comparing visual
and non-visual versions of the learning module. The instructional materials
created for the project may help educators include Bayesian inference in their
courses. This inclusion is important because Bayesian inference is an
increasingly important concept across many STEM fields, and the instructional
modules may promote STEM success for a wide range of students. More broadly, the
findings may reveal principles that can guide future efforts to create
instructional methods that make difficult mathematical concepts more accessible
to students, especially those who struggle with math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
versions of the Bayesian inference learning module will incorporate innovations
from basic research. The visual version will also use a display that links
mathematical concepts to simple spatial relationships. Students in discussion
sections of an introductory statistics class will complete either the visual or
non-visual versions of the module, and their understanding will be assessed by
the accuracy of their responses on assignments and qualitative responses in one-
on-one interviews. The primary research questions are: (1) Does the visual
representation facilitate active learning and intuitive understanding by
increasing performance on problems that challenge students to apply statistical
reasoning before getting direct instruction? (2) Does the visual representation
produce more durable learning as evidenced by performance on computational
problems completed one month after initial instruction? (3) Does the visual
representation help students convey a deep conceptual understanding of
probability concepts in interviews? and (4) Does the visual representation
reduce the performance gap for students who either struggle with mathematical
concepts or who have negative attitudes towards math? Both qualitative and
quantitative methods will be used to seek the answers to these research
questions. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.