* 1842090
* Fostering Student Computational Thinking with Self-Regulated Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Timothy Cleary, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 09/30/2023
* USD 3,459,255.00

As a result of the powerful innovation and application of computing in STEM
disciplines, the STEM+C program addresses an urgent need for real-world,
interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of students from the early
grades through high school (preK-12). This project will advance research and
development of new transdisciplinary approaches to computational STEM teaching
and learning that will integrate the fields of Computational Thinking (CT) and
Self-Regulated learning (SRL) into science activities in four content areas:
Earth Science, Biology, Chemistry, and Physics. The project will provide
professional development (PD) for high school teachers that includes instruction
on CT, SRL, and on using SPIN (Science Practices Innovation Notebook). Next,
teachers will collaboratively develop lessons that infuse CT &amp; SRL, upload
the lessons into SPIN, implement those lessons in their classrooms, and then
collaboratively analyze student work samples captured by SPIN.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout this PD process, researchers will collect
multiple forms of data by observation, surveys, SPIN documents and artifacts as
part an overall research plan. The research team will employ data analytics to
uncover patterns and develop a CT learning progression for grades 9-12. The
project proposes implementing four phases of iterative Design Research. In the
Informed Exploration phase, researchers and practitioners will work together to
find opportunities to teach CT through SRL processes during STEM investigations.
The Enactment Phase will involve short iterative tests of design conjectures to
develop and build the electronic notebook. The Local Impact phase will engage
practitioners in testing the electronic notebook in their classes while
researchers document teaching implementation and student learning of CT. In the
Broader Impact phase, the electronic notebook will be scaled up to local high
school teachers who did not participate in the project implementation. The
project will develop an empirical learning progression for grades 9-12 that will
provide more sophisticated explanations of CT with developmental step across
grades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.