* 1842299
* EAGER: Flexible III-N High-Electron-Mobility Transistors with Controlled External Bending Strains for  Wide-Bandgap Semiconductor Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2021
* Jae-Hyun Ryou, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2021
* USD 129,999.00

Group III-Nitride (III-N) semiconductors have brought significant benefits to
mankind as energy-efficient and environment-friendly light sources, as
recognized by the Nobel Prize in Physics 2014. They are also important materials
for energy-efficient electric power conversion and switching, wireless
communication, electronic warfare, and optical storage systems. This project
proposes to study the expanded functionality and further enhanced performance of
the already high-performance and high-efficiency devices using mechanical
bendability of the device structure. This project is expected to produce new-
concept devices and related new device physics for the advancement of knowledge
in the device technology. Furthermore, the outcome of this research will provide
a potentially disruptive semiconductor platform that can be integrated in other
semiconductor devices with multi-functionality and application versatility for
energy saving and harvesting. The new concept has been developed based on
theoretical studies and has yet to be proven by the demonstration of working
devices, which is one of major objectives of the proposed project. The societal
and economic impacts will be significant because electronics, photonics, and
energy systems based on semiconductors are the backbone of modern technology and
will be even more critical in the future with the adoption of electric vehicles
and smart-grid systems. As an example, 30% of electrical energy passes through
power electronics converters and 22% of total generated electricity is consumed
in lighting, which means that significant benefits are expected in energy saving
and reduction of greenhouse-gas emission. Education and outreach programs
integrated with the research program will contribute to the dissemination of
knowledge on green energy systems, semiconductor devices for sustainable
technology, and their societal and environmental
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Flexible devices based on III-N heterostructures
can be equipped with new functionalities and even further improved performance
characteristics compared to wafer-based non-flexible devices by exploiting their
unique properties of spontaneous and piezoelectric polarizations. Therefore,
they open an opportunity to new-concept devices, multi-functional mechano-
electro-photonic (MEP) devices, beyond just mechanically flexible devices, by
the active control of the polarizations with variable external strains. The
goals of the project are to prove the concept of the active polarization
engineering applied in flexible III-N structures and to lay the foundation for
the MEP devices in electronic, photonic, and energy-harvesting applications.
Various multi-functional and/or higher-performance MEP devices based on III-N
semiconductors will be developed by utilizing the interactions between
electronic and optical properties and mechanical forces in the flexible
heterostructures. The changes in fundamental characteristics of flexible high-
electron-mobility transistors with controlled bending strains will be
investigated via both modeling and experimental studies to prove the proposed
concept of active polarization engineering. Technical methods and tasks include
(1) device simulation with various curvature radii, (2) the development of high-
fidelity fabrication process for bendable devices, and (3) the development of a
physical model for the operation of MEP devices. This project is to produce
proof-of-concept actively polarization-engineered electronic devices and related
new device physics to demonstrate the potential of a new technology platform.
The MEP devices offer the potential to radically change the understanding and
applications of III-N semiconductor devices, leading to the creation of new-type
devices and systems. New device physics and modeling results including the
effect of static and dynamic external strains will provide a theoretical
background of such devices for various applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.