* 1842797
* SBIR Phase I:  PORTABLE EMAT PHASED ARRAY FOR CORROSION MAPPING
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Syed Ali, Innerspec Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 11/30/2020
* USD 224,048.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a better and safer alternative to
conventional piezoelectric ultrasonic instruments that use liquid-coupled
transducers for the inspection of pipelines, tanks, and other structures used in
power generation and liquid process industries. This new instrument does not
require the use of liquid coupling, and can work on rough, coated, or
contaminated surfaces that cannot be inspected with conventional liquid-coupled
techniques unless the part is subjected to costly and time consuming part
preparation. By not using liquids, this instrument can also be used on
components that are very hot, very cold, radioactive, or in a vacuum. A high-
resolution ultrasonic instrument that does not use couplant and has comparable
performance to a piezoelectric instrument will save inspection time, reduce
inspection costs, and permit inspections while in-service, which will result in
millions of dollars in savings for plant operators. Society as a whole will also
benefit from improvements in safety and performance of the plants, and by
reducing the amount of waste and contaminants released into the environment as
direct sub-product of the inspection, or from failures in facilities and
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project consists of the development
of a portable, high-resolution, ultrasonic phased array instrumentation,
software, and transducers based on non-contact Electro Magnetic Acoustic
Transducer (EMAT) technology to substitute or complement the tens of thousands
of conventional piezoelectric instruments in the market. For the
instrumentation, the research will revolve around the development of a high-
power and compact 16-channel pulser/receiver with a very small dead zone that
permit inspection near the surface of the part. This instrumentation will also
require custom software with signal-enhancing algorithms that compensate for the
small amplitude of EMAT signals. The 16-channel phased-array EMAT transducers
will involve multi-physics simulation of electrical and magnetic components to
develop very small and high-density coil elements that can produce enough signal
amplitude at high-frequencies while handling the pulsing rates required for
effective inspection, and the high-power generated by the custom
instrumentation. All these components will need to be enclosed in a battery-
powered package that can be used in the harsh conditions typically found in
field inspections. The expected result is a portable instrument that can compete
in performance with conventional piezoelectric instruments, especially in
applications and inspection environments where a conventional instrument is not
practical or very costly to use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.