* 1842103
* I-Corps: Ecosystem Management - Selective Insect Control
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Gold Hood, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
improvement to public health from improved containment of aerial insect-borne
diseases and decreased use of toxic pesticides. Traditional, chemical pest-
control methods are imprecise, causing damage after they have been applied. This
technology creates the option for controlled extermination, which in turn can
prevent an imbalanced predator-prey relationship and ultimately the unintended
collapse of symbiotic populations, such as bat/birds. Moreover, it does not pose
threats to human safety from chemical contamination of air or water supply, or
even residue ingested via harvested crops. This project could also combat
serious public health risks, such as Zika, by eliminating carriers in populated
areas. This benefit would also hold appeal for those in sports and leisure
applications by reducing pests at stadiums or while enjoying activities such as
hiking or fishing. Based on disruptive technology, this team hopes to provide
these benefits at a lower cost than present pest-control or healthcare
solutions, based on the precision level and expanded area of effect. This
generates economic gains and the possibility of exporting products to be
competitive in markets with reduced means while supporting American intellectual
property.

This I-Corps project is formed around a disruptive technology in the pest
control and ecosystem management space. More concisely, it is a green and
cheaper alternative to traditional chemical pest control that can capture
invasive and harmful species of flying insects without harming or otherwise
affecting non-targeted species. This technology has commercial applications in
agricultural, leisure, residential, and health management (disease control)
sectors. This work would determine the need for highly effective and thorough
collection and containment of disease carrying flying insects by agencies
responding to threats such as Zika virus. The team would also like to explore
the large footprint agricultural sector to see if this could be a viable-and
preferable- alternative to traditional pesticides. Products derived from this
project will be capable of the target and capture of specific flying insects and
utilize advanced manufacturing methods in optics and electronics, as well as
enabling enhanced sampling for those studying insect species. In summary, this
green, portable, specialized technology has superior environmental benefits and
can potential provide superior pest control at a reduced cost from traditional,
and more harmful, alternatives.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.