* 1842610
* 2019 REU Site Workshop:  Longitudinal Tracking and Assessment; April 4-6, 2019, Arlington, VA
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ian Billick, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2023
* USD 96,432.00

This award to the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory will support a workshop
for directors operating Research Experiences for Undergraduate (EU) sites. Site
directors will share best practices in implementing undergraduate research
programs and discuss issues faced by program directors of REU Site programs. The
primary focus of the workshop is student assessment of the research experience
and long-term tracking of participants. BIO-funded REU program directors will be
invited to the 3-day workshop, that starts on April 4th, 2019. It is expected
that 140-150 participants will attend the workshop, which will occur at the
Holiday Inn Rosslyn in Arlington, VA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additionally, the
grant will implement updates to the existing BIO REU website (bioreu.org),
migrating the website to a new content management system that allows for
increased capacity to manage content. The website is a primary means for REU
students and PIs to share resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The REU program is one of the primary mechanisms NSF has to
support broader participation in the sciences. The workshop will make REU
programs more effective through sharing of best practices. Additionally, the US
Congress has mandated longitudinal tracking of student participants. This
workshop will discuss ways so that the intent by Congress is appropriately
met.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit&lt;br/&gt;The REU program helps
support the research activities of 1,000+ scientists, generating hundreds of
scientific publications. Under the supervision of a scientist, undergraduates
perform their own research projects. This complements the work of their mentors,
and advances our fundamental understanding of biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.