* 1842149
* SBIR Phase I:  Smartphone-based Automated External Defibrillator
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Daniel Fleck, Altrix Medical, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2020
* USD 224,502.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR)&lt;br/&gt;Phase I project is to save lives through the
proliferation of miniaturized automated external&lt;br/&gt;defibrillators that
attach to smartphones. Sudden cardiac arrest (SCA) will kill more than
325,000&lt;br/&gt;Americans this year outside of the hospital. An SCA can cause
death if it is not treated in&lt;br/&gt;minutes. If an AED is available, it can
save a person's life; some estimates suggest a 27% increase&lt;br/&gt;in the
number of people who could be saved if AEDs are available and used when needed.
A&lt;br/&gt;miniaturized AED embedded in a smartphone case could save lives by
making AEDs more&lt;br/&gt;available and ensuring those who carry them are
reachable by emergency medical services. The&lt;br/&gt;strategy is to equip law
enforcement, firefighters, EMS personnel, and potential citizen first
responders&lt;br/&gt;with this device and use smartphone technology to ensure
they are reachable when&lt;br/&gt;in proximity to someone experiencing an SCA.
It provides an opportunity for a new paradigm in&lt;br/&gt;first response: AED
carriers that can be located during the first critical moments of an
SCA.&lt;br/&gt;Through this research, hundreds of thousands of lives can be
saved each year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will prove out the concept of a&lt;br/&gt;regulatory-
compliant miniaturized AED that integrates with a smartphone. The work
includes&lt;br/&gt;researching and designing components and electronics that
will enable creation of this critical&lt;br/&gt;medical device and accomplish
three overarching goals: (1) design and develop the
miniaturized&lt;br/&gt;components, interconnects, firmware and software
necessary to implement the hand-held AED&lt;br/&gt;Smartphone case in Phase Two
by evaluating high voltage power supply and switching&lt;br/&gt;electronics and
completing a power converter and switching design capable of generating
the&lt;br/&gt;required energy from an on-board lithium-ion battery and
supporting a bi-phasic waveform; (2)&lt;br/&gt;develop the smartphone software
and firmware necessary to implement the device itself, guide&lt;br/&gt;a user
through the emergency protocol, and send GPS information to EMS to allow them
to&lt;br/&gt;locate proximal first responders; (3) integrate the hardware and
software into a prototype that&lt;br/&gt;demonstrates a path to a form factor
function unit in Phase 2. Research and designs of&lt;br/&gt;interconnects and
encapsulation methods developed as part of this effort will offer insight
into&lt;br/&gt;the miniaturization of myriad electronics both within and outside
the medical domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.