* 1842715
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial Structure of Turbulent Flows in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Amy Frazier, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 08/31/2020
* USD 17,799.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate optimal spatial sampling of
important variables in the atmospheric boundary layer (ABL). This layer is of
considerable importance for local weather development and turbulence prediction,
yet it is one of the most difficult portions of the atmosphere to sample using
conventional measurement technologies. The doctoral student will use small
unmanned aircraft systems (sUAS), a promising technology that has emerged to
fill sampling gaps in the ABL and improve the understanding of local weather
dynamics. This research will advance knowledge by identifying appropriate
spatial sampling scales for temperature and relative humidity variables in the
ABL using the new sUAS technology. Working closely with the meteorologist-in-
charge at the National Weather Service office in Tulsa, profiles of atmospheric
variables captured with the sUAS will be shared in real-time with weather
scientists for inclusion in immediate forecast models. Results will also be
presented to national and international audiences through peer-reviewed
publications and conference presentations. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this project will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish an independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will contribute to a better understanding of small-scale turbulence in
the ABL, which is of critical importance in meteorology, by analyzing the scales
at which these variables are spatially similar (autocorrelated). Building on
theories of small scale turbulence along with established spatial analytical
methods from geography and the spatial sciences, this research will develop the
spatial sampling strategies needed for efficient and effective sampling of
scaler variables in the ABL and develop analytical methods for uncovering the
processes impacting weather development. Specifically, this research will (1)
determine the optimal sampling scales for thermodynamic variables captured with
sUAS in the ABL using variogram analysis; (2) investigate the universality of
parameters commonly used to identify the size and shape of turbulent structures
across a variety of landscape types and atmospheric conditions; (3) share real
time data and research findings with meteorologists at the NWS Tulsa office to
aid in forecasting and numerical weather prediction. Sampling will be conducted
in Oklahoma, a region of the country that frequently experiences severe local
storms including tornadoes. The Oklahoma Mesonet is a network of 120 automated
meteorological and weather stations that will be used for sensor calibration and
validation purposes. The Mesonet sites are distributed across the state in a
variety of climate zones and ecoregions. Data collection will be targeted during
times of the year when storms are likely, such as spring, to ensure diverse
meteorological conditions are captured.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.