* 1842710
* CPS: TTP Option: Synergy: Collaborative Research: An Executable Distributed Medical Best Practice Guidance (EMBG) System for End-to-End Emergency Care from Rural to Regional Center
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Shangping Ren, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 02/28/2022
* USD 176,527.00

In the United States, there is still a great disparity in medical care and most
profoundly for emergency care, where limited facilities and remote location play
a central role. Based on the Wessels Living History Farm report, the doctor to
patient ratio in the United States is 30 to 10,000 in large metropolitan areas,
only 5 to 10,000 in most rural areas; and the highest death rates are often
found in the most rural counties. For emergency patient care, time to definitive
treatment is critical. However, deciding the most effective care for an acute
patient requires knowledge and experience. Though medical best practice
guidelines exist and are in hospital handbooks, they are often lengthy and
difficult to apply clinically. The challenges are exaggerated for doctors in
rural areas and emergency medical technicians (EMT) during patient
transport.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project's solution to transform emergency
care at rural hospitals is to use innovative CPS technologies to help hospitals
to improve their adherence to medical best practice. The key to assist medical
staff with different levels of experience and skills to adhere to medical best
practice is to transform required processes described in medical texts to an
executable, adaptive, and distributed medical best practice guidance (EMBG)
system. Compared to the computerized sepsis best practice protocol, the EMBG
system faces a much bigger challenge as it has to adapt the best practice across
rural hospitals, ambulances and center hospitals with different levels of staff
expertise and equipment capabilities. Using a Global Positioning System analogy,
a GPS leads drivers with different route familiarity to their destination
through an optimal route based on the drivers' preferences, the EMBG system
leads medical personnel to follow the best medical guideline path to provide
emergency care and minimize the time to definitive treatment for acute patients.
The project makes the following contributions: 1) The codification of complex
medical knowledge is an important advancement in knowledge capture and
representation; 2) Pathophysiological model driven communication in high speed
ambulance advances life critical communication technology; and 3) Reduced
complexity software architectures designed for formal verification bridges the
gap between formal method research and system engineering.