* 1842125
* Terminal Pleistocene Occupation Isla Cedros
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Loren Davis, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2024
* USD 224,818.00

Dr. Loren Davis of Oregon State University and Dr. Matthew Des Lauriers of
California State University-Northridge, along with colleagues in Mexico, will
conduct research to study the earliest archaeological evidence of marine
environmental use along the Pacific coast of the Americas. Current
archaeological evidence indicates that humans migrated from northeastern Asia
into North America and spread throughout the rest of the Americas. As part of
this research theme, archaeologists are interested in learning about the timing
and route that humans initially took to migrate into the Americas. One main
hypothesis on this theme asserts that people used a hunting-gathering-fishing
lifeway to spread from northeastern Asia into North America and beyond by
initially traveling along the Pacific coastline around the glaciated margins of
Alaska and Canada. If this is true, archaeologists expect that early coastal
sites should contain artifacts and the remains of animals that reveal the
application of effective technologies used to extract a living from a broad
range of marine environmental resources. Finding archaeological sites that show
early North Americans peoples possessed a full mastery of marine environments
would add confirmatory evidence to support the Pacific coastal migration
hypothesis. The team will generate and share interdisciplinary knowledge about
the history of changing coastal environments on Cedros Island and how humans
lived in a changing coastal context. This international collaborative project
will generate critical knowledge about the larger issue of the initial human
settlement of the Americas and in the process will provide unique educational
opportunities for students and the public alike.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. Davis
and Des Lauriers will lead a research team to examine how early coastal peoples
used fishing and hunting technologies to exploit the full range of Pacific
marine resources from nearshore to deep-water offshore biomes. The research will
be conducted on Cedros Island, which is located in northwestern Mexico along the
Pacific coast of Baja California. This island is special because it retains many
well preserved archaeological sites clustered around ancient freshwater springs
that were undoubtedly attractive places for early peoples to repeatedly settle
and in the process create a record of their lives that accumulated over hundreds
to thousands of years. The researchers will lead a team of archaeologists,
geoarchaeologists, and environmental scientists to conduct excavations at four
sites that are known to contain artifacts and marine animal remains that date
earlier than 12,000 calendar years old. The team will also study local
geological records that date to the early period of human occupation in order to
better understand the environmental context in which coastal people
lived.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.