* 1842623
* EAGER: Measuring Real World Application Performance on Next-Generation Computing Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Rudolf Eigenmann, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Walker
* 03/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The project proposes to create a benchmark suite using real-world scientific
applications. The benchmark suite will be developed jointly with the High-
Performance Group (HPG) of the Standard Performance Evaluation Corporation
(SPEC), a non-profit organization with the goal of creating and maintaining
standardized benchmarks to evaluate performance and energy efficiency for the
newest generation of computing systems. The project will leverage SPEC
infrastructure to ensure continuous maintenance of the benchmark suite, as well
as support for result submission, review, and publication on the SPEC website.
Furthermore, the project will use the published results of the benchmark suite
to create a public ranking of High-Performance Computing (HPC) systems deployed
across the world. Partnership with SPEC will ensure that the results of the
project will be disseminated to industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The creation of a
new real-world application benchmark suite jointly with SPEC/HPG, as well as the
development of performance metrics suitable for application benchmarks, will
lead to improved HPC system design and enable the better understanding of how
next-generation computing systems must evolve. In addition to evaluating HPC
systems, the proposed application benchmark suite will also enable the
comparative performance evaluation of novel software and hardware ecosystems.
Moreover, the proposed work builds on NSF investment in domain science
application development by including these applications in the suite.
Importantly, the project will be an opportunity to bring the benchmark community
together to develop and define performance and throughput metrics for real world
scientific applications. Finally, the project will deliver a benchmark suite
that will be freely available to non-profit organizations and sustained by
SPEC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.