* 1842087
* Spatial Variation and the Origins of Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Natalie Munro, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2021
* USD 38,572.00

Dr. Natalie Munro of the University of Connecticut will provide a local scale
investigation of the transition to agriculture, while addressing contentious
debates over long-term subsistence evolution, the emergence of settled life, and
the process of plant and animal domestication. The origins to agriculture had a
profound impact on all aspects of human sociocultural life. Although research
once emphasized single origins of agricultural products, accumulating data
increasingly support multiregional models that emphasize local scale processes
in the emergence and adoption of agriculture. This project will take an
essential next step: the creation of a high-resolution, local-scale
reconstruction of the transition to agriculture and the process of plant and
animal domestication. Detailed reconstructions of local-scale forager-farmer
transition are few, but are necessary to map study how ideas, plants and animals
were innovated and transferred across much larger time scales and geographic
areas. Although the forager-farmer transition is most often viewed dichotomously
as an adoption versus an in situ scenario, Dr. Munro and colleagues will
consider information exchange and the movement of plants and animals among
localities in Southwest Asia via interaction networks. The project will provide
student training and education, foster international collaboration and engage in
public outreach. Results will be disseminated to public audiences through a
museum exhibit, articles for public audiences, and a series of lectures.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will contribute to the study of agricultural
origins by providing, a high-resolution dataset for the Upper Jordan Valley
(UJV) of Israel. The UJV provides an especially interesting test case because of
its unique ecological conditions created by a large fresh-water system, its low
elevation and the accessibility of trade routes through the larger Rift Valley.
These conditions also allow investigation of more specific socioeconomic
questions about topics such as aquatic resource exploitation and the impact of
climatic events like the Younger Dryas. Investigation will center on three
Epipaleolithic and Pre-Pottery Neolithic sites in the UJV. These include Jordan
River Dureijat and Nahal Ein Gev II which together will provide the first
complete Epipaleolithic sequence for the UJV, and the Pre-Pottery Neolithic site
of Munhatta. More specifically activities will include: (1) test excavations and
sampling at Munhatta. Micromorphological, sediment, isotope and
zooarchaeological sampling at this critical site will investigate animal
keeping, animal mobility, animal exchange and the importance of cereal grasses;
(2) the collection of a comprehensive zooarchaeological database from published
Epipaleolithic and Pre-Pottery Neolithic sites from the Upper Jordan Valley and
more broadly across Southwest Asia to enable a comparative meta-analysis of
regional plant and animal domestication pathways, and document the range of
methods and measures used to detect the process of animal and plant
domestication in adjacent regions; and (3) the collection of zooarchaeological
data from Jordan River Dureijat and Nahal Ein Gev II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.