* 1842726
* DCL: HBCU Conference Proposal: A National Symposium to Build Research Capacity at Historically Black Colleges and Universities through Collaborations with STEM Advocates and Practi
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Laura-Lee Davidson, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2020
* USD 246,847.00

The Historically Black College and University (HBCU) Research Action and
Practice (RAP) Symposium will elevate research and institutional partnernships
to advance STEM, and build collaborations with stakeholders, giving researchers
at HBCUs greater leverage to contribute to national efforts that require STEM
input. Though a small segment of our Nation's colleges, HBCUs disproportionately
graduate African American STEM degree recipients. The conference's collaboration
and dissemination strategies will catalyze HBCU researchers and stakeholders to
support achievement of the Nation's goals of filling needed STEM expertise in
the labor market and diversifying the STEM workforce. An expected outcome of the
Symposium activities is an action plan that will share what works in building a
community of practice between HBCU researchers and STEM
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the U.S. faces a shortage of experts to
fill projected STEM workforce needs, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities are prime institutions to seriously be considered as a source of
STEM expertise, especially for students and researchers that have been
traditionally under-involved in STEM. The HBCU Research Action and Practice
(RAP) Symposium seeks to highlight the capacity of HBCUs to increasingly
contribute to the scientific research enterprise. The objectives of the HBCU RAP
Symposium is to build the research capacity of HBCUs through: 1) hosting a
workshop to increase the collaborative energy between HBCU researchers,
administrators and a cross-section of stakeholders, and increase awareness of
NSF's 300 programs to HBCUs, 2) convening a research forum to elevate and
translate research led by HBCUs in a setting that strategically positions it to
advance STEM action and practice and 3) building a community of practice to
cultivate relationships so that HBCU researchers, administrators, and STEM
supporters will develop collaborations to advance STEM research at HBCUs
eventually increasing institutional research capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.