* 1842823
* SBIR Phase I:  Antibacterial Nanotopography for Orthopedic Fixation Devices
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Daniel Hickey, Tyber Medical, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project addresses the unacceptable incidence of orthopedic
device-related infections, as well as the dangerous rise of antibiotic resistant
bacteria. More than 100,000 implanted orthopedic fixation devices (pins, plates,
and screws) acquire bacterial infections each year in the US, accounting for
approximately $1.5 trillion in associated medical and surgical treatment costs.
Furthermore, the overuse and misuse of antibiotics to treat these infections has
led to a dramatic rise in antibiotic resistance, which poses a severe risk to
human health. This project aims to develop and optimize a commercially viable
process to impart orthopedic fixation devices with a unique surface nanotexture
designed to inhibit bacterial attachment and disrupt the biofilm cycle while
simultaneously stimulating robust implant integration with adjacent bone.
Importantly, this treatment acts via topography alone and does not incorporate
antimicrobial agents or pharmaceuticals. Due to the ubiquity and gravity of the
infection epidemic, this first-of-its-kind antibacterial surface technology is
expected to rapidly infiltrate the orthopedic device market and drive a dramatic
market shift towards the development of products with enhanced biological
activity. Ultimately, this project has the potential to alleviate significant
clinical and economic burdens while stimulating technological advances in a
competitive market. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work aims to create an
antibacterial surface nanotexture by utilizing a proprietary modified atomic
deposition technique. The fabrication parameters used during this deposition
process are closely linked to the resulting surface characteristics (and thus
its antimicrobial efficacy). However, the link between fabrication parameters
and antimicrobial efficacy is inadequately understood currently. Therefore, the
proposed work employs a systematic strategy to elucidate the relationships
involved and establish control over the fabrication process and resulting
surface properties. The project is separated into four stages, each designed to
explore the effect of a specific fabrication parameter on performance outcomes,
including bacterial colonization, bone cell functions, and trends in certain
surface properties that often correlate with cell-substrate interactions (e.g.
surface energy, roughness, skewness, etc.). The relationships revealed through
testing will be used to build a set of equations that describe how the
properties of the nanotextured surface vary as a function of the fabrication
parameters. This set of equations will then be used to optimize the system,
enabling consistent and controllable operation of the deposition process as
manufacturing specifications evolve. In addition to advancing the development of
a market-changing product, the proposed research will contribute to the growing
understanding of cell and bacteria responses on nanostructured surfaces in an
ongoing effort to mitigate infection associated with orthopedic
implants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.