* 1842643
* Coupled Kinetic Physics of Protons and Electrons in the Solar Wind
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Peter Yoon, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 04/30/2022
* USD 410,000.00

The problem of solar wind modeling has been of historical significance. The
related research is ongoing, and most models rely on macroscopic (fluid) models
of the solar wind. When kinetic effects, such as wave-particle interaction, are
considered, however, the approach is usually not self-consistent in that certain
types of wave turbulence is presupposed, and the wave spectra are modeled. In
contrast, the theoretical model to be developed as part of this three-year
project will be fully kinetic and self-consistent. This will significantly
advance the knowledge in the field of heliospheric physics. The model to be
developed as part of this project will predict a particular state in which the
solar wind plasma exists given a set of parameters, allowing the observed
quantities to be tested against historic spacecraft data as well the planned
measurements of the near-Sun environment that will be obtained by the Parker
Solar Probe. Although the present project is a theoretical one, rather than one
involving data analysis, the resulting prediction may help experimentalists
better interpret the past and future spacecraft data. This has the potential to
advance knowledge in a related, but different field of expertise, namely
experimental heliophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year research project
will investigate theoretically how the kinetic coupling of electrons and ions
(protons) via collisional and instability processes affect the large-scale
dynamics in the expanding solar wind. The specific problem to be investigated
relates to how the dynamically coupled solar wind electrons and protons
contribute to the near isotropization of their temperatures -- an observed
phenomena which has not yet been satisfactorily explained theoretically. The
PI's preliminary work based upon the assumption of bi-Maxwellian particle
distribution shows that collisional process may be the dominant mechanism for
the isotropization of temperatures, but the instabilities are important too for
limiting the upper/lower bounds of temperature anisotropies. This project aims
to extend the preliminary work by relaxing the assumption of bi-Maxwellian model
in both instability analysis and collisional transport calculation. The full
kinetic equations for particles and waves, as well as the dispersion relation,
will be solved by grid-based numerical scheme. The collisional transport
equation will also be solved by relaxing the assumption of bi-Maxwellian models.
Finally, the effects of inhomogeneities will be rigorously investigated by
solving the macro-microscopic kinetic equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research on the theoretical modeling of the solar wind is important from the
broader perspective of understanding and characterizing fundamental processes
that take place within the heliosphere and throughout the universe. Discovering
and understanding the basic physical processes in the immediate near-Earth
environment and in the wider universe is essential for future human explorations
of the universe, and it also has a space environmental impact, as the modern
civilization is increasingly dependent on electromagnetic conditions in outer
space. Developing an accurate model of the solar wind contributes to such a
wider goal. From the perspective of education and training, the present proposal
involves a young post-doctoral research associate, which is a major strength in
terms of Broader Impacts. It is important for the healthy scientific future of
our nation -- and the entire human society -- that a steady stream of young
scientists are educated and trained in STEM disciplines. The PI has in the past
always strived to educate and widely disseminate the scientific knowledge
acquired during his career to younger generation of scientists both from the
U.S. and worldwide. The present proposal will thus have a broader impact on the
education and training of a young scientist. The research and EPO agenda of this
project supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.