* 1842641
* RAISE-EQuIP: Quantum mux/demux: the quantum optical frequency comb as a scalable quantum encoding resource
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Joe Campbell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2023
* USD 758,000.00

RAISE-EQuIP:Quantum Mux/Demux: The Quantum Optical Frequency Comb as a Scalable
Quantum Encoding Resource&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Quantum information and quantum
computing are emerging fields that have the potential to revolutionize various
areas in science and technology. As first foreseen by Richard Feynman, quantum
computers will enable calculations at currently unattainable scales and will
bring unprecedented advances over classical computers. Examples include
calculations of large biological molecules for revolutionary drug discovery,
solving complex quantum mechanical systems, and factoring integers at a speed
exponentially faster than classical computer to defeat current standard
encryption methods. Quantum information is also fundamentally distinct from
classical information. It cannot be cloned or hacked and therefore brings new
power for cryptography, such as the method of quantum key distribution to create
secure communications channels. The realization of practical systems capable of
quantum computing and information is an extraordinary difficult task but will
have profound impacts on national security and our society. To date, two primary
challenges have been identified in making quantum technology a reality:
achieving scalability and circumventing decoherence. At this juncture, many
proof-of principle results have been experimentally demonstrated to address
either decoherence (trapped-ion, superconducting, and cold atom qubits), or the
scalability problem (field qumodes), but both requirements have not been met
simultaneously yet. This project will address both of these challenges by a
joint interdisciplinary effort between the Electrical and Computer Engineering
and the Physics Departments at University of Virginia by ways of scalable
integrated quantum photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to
marry scalable integrated photonics with quantum information and quantum
computation over continuous variables in order to encode quantum information
over the quantum optical frequency comb (QOFC). Such technology will empower
unconditional quantum protocols such as quantum communication, quantum
entanglement distillation, and quantum simulation. With NSF support, the quantum
optics group at the University of Virginia has been pioneering the
implementation of QOFC in optical parametric oscillator and has achieved record-
levels of multipartite entanglements (60 qumodes). Integrated microresonator-
based optical frequency combs, heterogeneous photonic integration and near unity
quantum efficiency photodiodes have been in the focus of research in the micro-
photonics, optoelectronic and photonics device groups at UVA for many years. The
project aims to combine these efforts and create a unique integrated device on a
chip with multimode quantum emitter, qumodes processing and detection. Such a
realization enables numerous quantum applications on a chip, including massively
scalable cluster entanglement, scalable deterministic quantum processing,
quantum secret sharing over QOFC, and quantum mode
sorting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.