* 1842220
* Computer-Assisted Video Analysis Methods for Understanding Underrepresented Student Participation and Learning in Collaborative Learning Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Marios Pattichis, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

Research that seeks to understand classroom interactions often relies on video
recordings of classrooms so that researchers can document and analyze what
teachers and students are doing in the learning environment. When studies are
large scale, this analysis is challenging in part because it is time-consuming
to review and code large quantities of video. For example, hundreds of hours of
videotaped interaction between students working in an after-school program for
advancing computational thinking and engineering learning for Latino/a students.
This project is exploring the use of computer-assisted methods for video
analysis to support manual coding by researchers. The project is adapting
procedures used for computer-aided diagnosis systems for medical systems. The
computer-assisted process creates summaries that can then be used by researchers
to identify critical events and to describe patterns of activities in the
classroom such as students talking to each other or writing during a small group
project. Creating the summaries requires analyzing video for facial recognition,
motion, color and object identification. The project will investigate what parts
of student participation and teaching can be analyzed using computer-assisted
video analysis. This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, the STEM+C program and the AISL program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. The project is funded by the STEM+Computing program, which seeks to
address emerging challenges in computational STEM areas through the applied
integration of computational thinking and computing activities within
disciplinary STEM teaching and learning in early childhood education through
high school (preK-12). As part of its overall strategy to enhance learning in
informal environments, the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program seeks
to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of, the design
and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This includes
providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in STEM
learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of STEM
learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The video analysis systems will
provide video summarizations for specific activities which will allow
researchers to use these results to quantify student participation and document
teaching practices that support student learning. This will support the analysis
of large volumes of video data that are often time-consuming to analyze. The
video analysis system will identify objects in the scene and then use measures
of distances between objects and other tracking methods to code different
activities (e.g., typing, talking, interaction between the student and a
facilitator). The two groups of research questions are as follows. (1) How can
human review of digital videos benefit from computer-assisted video analysis
methods? Which aspects of video summarization (e.g., detected activities) can
help reduce the time it takes to review the videos? Beyond audio analytics, what
types of future research in video summarization can help reduce the time that it
takes to review videos? (2) How can we quantify student participation using
computer-assisted video analysis methods? What aspects of student participation
can be accurately measures by computer-assisted video analysis methods? The
video to be used for this study is drawn from a project focused on engineering
and computational thinking learning for Latino/a students in an after-school
setting. Hundreds of hours of video are available to be reviewed and analyzed to
design and refine the system. The resulting coding will also help document
patterns of engagement in the learning environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.