* 1842023
* EAGER: Terabit DSL
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Daniel Mittleman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

EAGER: Transmitting data at a terabit per second on twisted copper wires

The transmission of data using twisted copper-wire pairs was pioneered by
Alexander Graham Bell in 1881. Today, there are well over a billion such twisted
pairs installed globally, an infrastructure which has been the basis for nearly
all telephone connections for over 100 years. In the late 1980s Digital
Subscriber Line (DSL) services were developed, in which an RF signal carrying
digital data was essentially piggy-backed on top of the same copper wires used
for analog voice signals. Through advances in data encoding and frequency
multiplexing, these systems can now typically deliver data at gigabit per second
rates. The astounding (and ongoing) commercial success of DSL arises largely
from the fact that these services do not require new wire or fiber connections
(which cost thousands of dollars per customer to install), but instead can
deliver high bit rates to customers using the existing infrastructure. However,
advances in encoding and multiplexing have nearly reached their limit, so the
only way to further increase the data rate is to increase the frequency of the
RF carrier wave, since there is more bandwidth available at higher frequencies.
The proposed research will explore the use of these existing copper twisted-
cables for transmission of signals at much higher frequencies than those that
have previously been employed in DSL systems. Similar multiplexing and encoding
schemes will be necessary, due to the unavoidable mixing of these high-frequency
signals as they propagate along these non-uniform cables. If these signal
processing approaches are still useful at high frequencies, and if the overall
signal loss is not too high, then this initial demonstration will validate the
feasibility of operating a DSL-like system with a data rate of a terabit per
second, vastly higher than anything that has been envisioned previously. This
would open up an entirely new realm for fixed (not wireless) data services.

This EAGER proposal suggests a radically new way to think about DSL transmission
systems. In all discussions to date, the fundamental physics of the
electromagnetic signal propagation is described using the language of
transmission lines. Conventionally, a transmission line guides an electrical
signal by propagation of a time-varying voltage between a pair of electrically
isolated conductors. However, when the free-space wavelength of the guided wave
approaches the relevant dimensions (e.g., the distance between the two
conductors), it is more appropriate to describe this transmission process using
the language of waveguides. Inspired by the fact that the typical free-space
distance between wires in a twisted-wire pair can be on the order of a
millimeter, this project seeks to study the use of millimeter waves or terahertz
waves as the carriers for modulated digital data on twisted-pair cables, acting
as waveguides. This proposal seeks to initiate a research collaboration between
the PI at Brown University and engineers at ASSIA, Inc. This company specializes
in the software and signal processing that enables efficient use of spectrum in
DSL systems. Their expertise, in particular in the area of vectoring
(conceptually equivalent to MIMO in wireless systems), combined with the PI's
expertise in millimeter-wave and terahertz waveguides, represents a unique team
which is ideally positioned to carry out the proposed exploratory research
program. The approach involves the experimental characterization of the
waveguide modes (all output modes for each possible input excitation) for a set
of model cable systems, starting from a simple single-twisted-pair and working
up to more complicated (and longer) waveguides. The effects of modal dispersion,
dielectric loss, and bends will be studied, and the results will be used as
inputs in channel models developed by ASSIA to predict the rate and range
performance characteristics. This work represents the first realistic
exploration of the idea of using millimeter waves for long-distance guided-wave
data transmission.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.