* 1842334
* EAGER: Discussion Tracker: Development of Human Language Technologies to Improve the Teaching of Collaborative Argumentation in High School English Classrooms
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Diane Litman, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2019
* USD 149,825.00

Collaborative argumentation - the building of evidence-based, reasoned knowledge
and solutions through dialogue - is essential to individual learning as well as
group problem-solving in STEM and other disciplines and a defining
characteristic of 21st century workplaces. However, teaching collaborative
argumentation is an advanced skill that many high school teachers struggle to
develop. This EArly Grant for Exploratory Research explores the feasibility of
improving high school teachers' understanding of collaborative argumentation and
instruction through a computer-based system called Discussion Tracker. The
prototype system draws upon recent advances in human language technologies (HLT)
to provide teachers with automatically generated data about the characteristics
and quality of their students' discussions. The system also provides
individualized guidance for teachers on how to improve the facilitation of such
discussions. The project has the potential to prepare a new generation of
teachers and students for the productive collaborative argumentation they will
need for future educational and workplace settings. Findings and products
resulting from this study also contribute to research and technological
innovations aimed at improving teacher learning and student discussions in high
school English classrooms and other content areas, grade levels, and learning
platforms. Additionally, the project's multidisciplinary training of graduate
and undergraduate students is focused on increasing diversity in cyberlearning
research and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three stages of investigation are
planned, First, a schema of the features of high-quality collaborative
argumentation in high school English language arts (ELA) discussions is created
and tested in order to identify the most critical discourse features. Second,
prototypes of the system's interface is developed that provide varied amounts
and types of data visualizations and explicit guidance for teacher learning.
Third, in order to analyze data on teacher learning, a series of experiments are
conducted to study how teachers interact with various prototypes of the system.
In order to test optimal teacher learning, teachers will be assigned to one of
two conditions: (1) Use of the system with a brief reflection guide, designed to
document teachers' observations and prompt teachers' instructional changes, (2)
Use of the system with an expert instructional coach. Teacher learning will be
studied through reflective, qualitative think aloud protocols, pre-post
questionnaires, and observations of instruction. Outcomes of the two
experimental conditions will be compared using standard statistical
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.