* 1842350
* EAGER: On-Demand Silicon Carbide Photonic Nanostructures for Quantum Optoelectronics at Telecom Wavelengths
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Spyridon Galis, SUNY Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2021
* USD 138,028.00

Single-photon emission at low-loss telecom C-band wavelength ~ 1550 nm is a
critical component for the development of future long-distance quantum
information and communication technologies using the existing fiber-optical-
based infrastructure or in free-space. Recent attempts at realizing a telecom
C-band single-photon source are limited by their unsuitable emission wavelength,
and stringent fabrication and operation temperature requirements. This EAGER
project proposes to develop critical device properties enabled by the
development of erbium-doped silicon carbide photonic crystal nanostructures
towards the realization for the first-time of room-temperature CMOS-compatible
single-photon emitters at 1550 nm. The nanowire-array-based photonic crystal
structures are grown in a self-aligned manner at predetermined positions through
an innovative chemical synthesis route. The nanostructures not only facilitate
the deterministic placement of erbium ions in the nanowires but are also pivotal
in engineering the erbium-induced 1550 nm emission. The underlying hypothesis is
that erbium integrated into photonic crystal nanostructures can experience a
redistribution of its spontaneous light emission. By properly engineering
photonic crystal nanostructures it is possible to control which optical modes
are allowed or inhibited due to the photonic bandgap effect. The proposed
scalable nanostructure platform provides high design adaptability, tunability,
and integration capabilities with silicon nanoelectronics. The attained
knowledge can be transformative as this project addresses key challenges and
unknowns about the material and quantum properties of erbium ions in
technologically-friendly silicon carbide photonic nanostructures. The
fundamental understanding of these photonic nanostructures can expedite the
incubation of pathways towards ubiquitous advances in nanophotonics, defect-
based biological imaging and sensing, quantum storage of single-photons and
long-distance quantum signal processing. Research and education are integrated
as this project focuses on promoting scientific literacy through direct
students' involvement in the proposed research. Students conducting this
research will be trained and educated in a multifaceted research
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to surpass the performance of
state-of-the-art telecom quantum emission in solid-state hosts by integrating
erbium ions into silicon carbide ultrathin photonic crystal nanostructures. The
project involves fundamental research in developing vital properties, such as
high precision placement and reduced non-radiative decay of erbium ions in
silicon-based nanostructured materials, high pumping efficiency,
photoluminescence yield, and photostability, enabled by this new class of
silicon carbide photonic nanostructures, and the understanding of their
interactions with external optical excitations. Two interlocked hypothesis-based
research thrusts will be pursued: (a) Development of novel silicon carbide
photonic crystal nanostructures through the deterministic placement of nanowires
and erbium ions, and (b) Modification of the telecom-1540 nm emission of erbium
ions by silicon carbide photonic nanostructures. The effects of erbium ion
implantation (e.g., ion dose, incident angles) on the structural modifications
(e.g., defect accumulation, ion redistribution) of nanowires will be explored to
achieve single erbium ion isolation. Simulated statistical-distributions of the
implanted ions and the structural properties of erbium-doped nanowire-based
structures will be correlated with their optical characteristics to develop
optimal ion implantation conditions to maximize the efficiency of erbium-induced
1540 nm emission. Theory and modeling will be employed to navigate experimental
efforts and to engineeringly modify the erbium quantum luminescence properties,
and light-matter interactions that are enabled by the photonic crystal
nanostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.