* 1842963
* Travel Support for RF Ionospheric Interactions Workshop; Arlington, VA; July 29 - August 1, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Robert Moore, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Meriwether
* 07/31/2019
* USD 29,911.00

This proposal requests funds to enable 14 students to attend the 25th annual
&lt;br/&gt;25th annual Radio Frequency Ionospheric Interactions (RFII) Workshop
in Arlington, VA during July 29-August 1, 2018. The RFII Workshop is a
scientific workshop focused on &lt;br/&gt;the interaction of high-power RF waves
from ground-based transmitters with the ionospheric plasma. The effects include
(but are not limited to) artificial generation of aurorae and ionospheric
irregularities. The topics covered by this workshop are of interest not only to
the Aeronomy radio science subcommunity, but also to the wider Atmospheric and
Geospace science communities. These topics are also highlighted at assembly
meetings such as the AGU and the IUGG. Student participation is a strong element
of the RFII workshop, which affords them the opportunity to network with
scientific leaders. The workshop also exposes students to work performed at
cutting edge research facilities, such as HAARP and Arecibo Observatory. These
encounters are strong motivators for future careers in upper atmospheric and
space sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.