* 1842482
* Quadrennial Review of the National Nanotechnology Initiative
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Erik Svedberg, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2020
* USD 685,000.00

This award supports the triennial review of the National Nanotechnology
Initiative (NNI) and its achievements. The review assesses the United States'
position in global nanotechnology research and development. It determines trends
and developments in nanoscience, nanoengineering and nanotechnology and
identifies critical areas of research where the United States should lead. The
study also assesses the current state of nanotechnology resulting from the NNI
activities since its authorization in 2003. It evaluates the current impact of
nanotechnology on the United States' economy, prosperity and national security,
and based on this, recommends new or revised goals, new research areas and
technical priorities, partnerships, coordination and management mechanisms, and
programs to support those goals. This triennial review of the NNI generates
feedback to the Nanoscale Science, Engineering, and Technology (NSET)
Subcommittee and the National Nanotechnology Coordination Office (NNCO) to serve
the Nanotechnology community moving forward and to guide investments in research
and development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Since its inception, the NNI has resulted
in many discoveries and inventions, which have had far-reaching technological
and societal impacts. Nanotechnology is an inter-disciplinary field. The impact
of nanotechnology arises from its potential to significantly transform numerous
fields, including information technology, aerospace, agriculture, energy,
homeland security, environment, healthcare, national defense, and transportation
systems. The project plan is to appoint a committee of experts that meets
several times. The committee is given background materials and strategic plans
by the NNCO. The committee meets with sponsors and representatives from key
federal agencies to discuss the statement of work. It gathers preliminary
information on current activities related to the NNI. Subsequent meetings
include presentations from academic and industrial representatives familiar with
nanotechnology developments in the US and abroad. A final report is issued after
a full National Academies review. The study report is disseminated to interested
technical communities and the general public through briefings, presentations, a
published manuscript and on-line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.