* 1842204
* Social Change and Continuity in a Shatter Zone
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Cameron Gokee, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2023
* USD 105,867.00

Dr. Cameron Gokee (Appalachian State University) will lead archaeological
research to study the impact of the Atlantic slave trade on village communities
in West Africa. Historical sources, which are few in number, describe how these
communities fought or fled slave raiders, but a key question remains unanswered
- how did these strategies transform political, economic, and cultural relations
among societies on the edge of the Atlantic world? Archaeology is well-placed to
answer this question by examining evidence for changing social relations within
and between village communities before, during, and after the rise of the
Atlantic slave trade in the 17-18th centuries. Most broadly, this research will
cast new light on the historical causes and consequences of a violent social
rupture shared by both Africans and the African Diaspora in the Americas. More
specifically, it will foster innovative research opportunities for university
students and public outreach collaborations with local communities, including
the installation of a museum exhibit at a UNESCO world heritage cultural center
in the region. By exploring local responses to global processes over the long-
term, this research can also inform forward-looking approaches to US political
and economic engagement in rural Africa and other regions on the periphery of
the modern world system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Gokee and his research team
will examine how the Atlantic slave trade impacted social life in a West African
"hatter zone" - a region where people fought, fled, and/or joined the predatory
political economies of neighboring states. Focusing on the Bandafassi region of
eastern Senegal, this project will identify the social rules of of inclusion and
exclusion that defined who could be enslaved by whom, and under what conditions,
over the past several centuries. Researchers will identify these patterns
through landscape survey and detailed mapping of past village sites, including
riverside locales associated with merchants and militias and highland
settlements associated with the people avoiding them. Analyses of the artifacts
from these sites, including a microscopic study of pottery, will document how
economic processes of production and exchange also shaped the social relations
within and between different village communities. The specialized collection and
luminescence dating of pottery samples will then reveal how the village
societies of Bandafassi did or did not change over time, particularly in
response to the Atlantic slave trade in the 17-18th centuries. These methods
will generate new data for better modelling how global forces impact local
communities in shatter zones past and present, while also providing novel
opportunities for public outreach and student education and research in the US
and Senegal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.