* 1842605
* EAGER: Development of Surface Chemistry and Plasmonic Interferometers for Early-Onset Detection of Alzheimer Disease
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Domenico Pacifici, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This project will develop novel surface chemistry and optical biosensing
platforms to a biomarker of brain tissue damage that has been associated with
early onset of Alzheimer's disease. New signal transduction mechanisms will be
explored to design a new class of optical biosensors that are less susceptible
to device misalignment and external noise sources. The new class of biosensors
will be used to detect a biomarker which is associated with various
neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease. Successful
integration of the proposed transduction sensing mechanisms can lead to more
reliable, accurate, point-of-care biosensing platforms that have the potential
to enable faster drug screening and discovery, and detection of clinically
relevant biomarkers for early onset screening of disease (such as Alzheimer's).
The involved researchers will benefit from training opportunities in state-of-
the-art biosensing technologies. Research and education will be integrated by
bringing the proposed research into the classroom via curricular development,
and conversely bringing the classroom experience into the laboratory by
involving high-school, undergraduate, graduate students and members of
underrepresented groups in the proposed research, exposing them to the concept
of learning by teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project
will explore novel surface-functionalization methods and transduction mechanisms
based on active plasmonic interferometry and surface plasmon polariton (SPP)
mediated fluorescence modulation of embedded light emitters to develop high-
throughput, multiplexed sensing platforms with more accurate and reliable
optical response, without sacrificing sensitivity. The long-term aim of this
project is to realize highly integrated plasmonic interferometers for
multiplexed, reliable, portable biosensors with high sensitivity. To achieve
this task, the short-term goal of the proposed research is to develop and deploy
specific surface chemistry on top of plasmonic interferometers to detect
Triggering Receptor Expressed On Myeloid Cells 2 (TREM2), a biomarker of brain
tissue damage that has recently been associated with early onset of Alzheimer's
disease. Moreover, novel transduction mechanisms based on SPP-mediated
fluorescence modulation in active plasmonic interferometers coated with embedded
light emitters and electrically-pumped plasmon sources will be explored to lift
the critical requirements for an external, highly collimated and coherent light
source, which will, in turn, increase the reliability and accuracy of plasmon-
based optical biosensors. The specific aims of this exploratory, year-long
research are the following: (i) develop surface chemistry targeted to
functionalize the arms of plasmonic interferometers for specific detection of
TREM2; (ii) study the optical response of active plasmonic interferometers
coated with thin layers of efficient light emitters; (iii) embed electrically-
pumped plasmon sources based on emitting layers, such as silicon nanocrystals or
erbium-doped silicon nanocrystals embedded in silicon dioxide, as well as
metal/insulator/metal tunnel junctions for direct excitation of SPPs; (iv)
assess the sensitivity of the proposed transduction mechanisms for TREM2
detection. Demonstration of an integrated sensing platform based on plasmonic
interferometry can positively impact diverse fields, spanning from environmental
sensing, to point-of-care diagnostics, and accelerate drug discovery, for
Alzheimer's disease, for example. The students and researchers involved in this
project will gain a broad set of experimental and simulation skills, ranging
from nano-fabrication, optical design and characterization, device integration,
and numerical simulations. The PI will mentor all students involved in the
project. Undergraduate students (including women and underrepresented
minorities) and K-12 public school students will benefit, respectively, from
research experience on sub-sections of the proposed research and pedagogical
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.