* 1842740
* SBIR Phase I:  Single Beam Ion Sources for Advanced Materials Processing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Braden Bills, Scion Plasma LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a single beam ion source
that enables the manufacturing of high-quality thin film materials and related
products. Thin films have a significant impact on quality of life as they are
used widely in semiconductor devices, displays, solar panels, tribological
coatings, cell phones, optical filters, and micro-electro-mechanical systems.
The annual market of these industry segments exceeds $600 billion and has been
steadily increasing. Common methods to produce thin films include physical and
chemical vapor depositions, which today have tradeoffs between film quality and
manufacturability. A high deposition rate results in loosely packed atoms and
subsequently unstable materials properties. Producing high-quality dense films
today requires slow deposition at elevated temperatures leading to high
manufacturing cost and other limitations, such as inability to use flexible
substrates. Ion sources are plasma generation devices that enable ion beams to
interact with materials at the atomic level and efficiently produce dense films.
The single beam ion sources bring in multiple benefits for thin film
fabrication, including superior stability, improved adhesion, low electrical
resistivity, high optical transmittance, and smooth surfaces.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will validate the
technical and commercial feasibilities of the single beam ion sources
particularly suitable for fabricating high-quality thin films and devices. In
ion beam assisted thin-film deposition, ions simultaneously interact with the
atoms as they are deposited from another source. The ions transfer kinetic
energies to the surface atoms so that they can move around to form densely
packed films. The single beam ion sources proposed in this project can produce a
highly focused beam of ions with tunable energy for optimal processing of the
growing films. These unique features are enabled by an innovative design of the
electromagnetic fields, which efficiently generate plasmas and extract the ions
in a narrow beam. Unlike the conventional racetrack type ion sources, the single
beam ion sources can accurately control the ion incident angle, which has strong
effects on the surface morphology of the deposited film.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.