* 1842117
* RAPID: Workshop on Providing Timely and Accurate Scientific Information to Legislators: November 2018, Tokyo, Japan
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Chris Tyler, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Cassidy Sugimoto
* 06/30/2019
* USD 96,543.00

The quantity and complexity of scientific and technological information provided
to policymakers has been on the rise for decades. Yet, little is known about how
to provide timely and actionable science advice to legislatures. This project
gathers data at an international gathering of government officials and
researchers to inform the development of an emerging research area "legislative
science advice" that has the potential to dramatically improve policy advisory
systems. This research takes a collaborative approach, in dialogue with
researchers and government officials, to ensure that the framework can
facilitate productive communication among stakeholders. The bidirectional
communication and information gap between policymakers and researchers is a
chief policy concern across the globe. By engaging with an international
community, this research can examine best practices with immediate application
for improving legislative science advice. Furthermore, the introduction of
students into this project will contribute to the development of expertise in
this growing area of research and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A pre-workshop
survey of researchers and government officials will be used to identify
promising theoretical areas, opportunities for multidisciplinary partnerships,
and the research questions of most relevance to policymakers and interest to
researchers. The approach starts with the proposition that there are likely
differences among researchers and practitioners in conceptualizing the
relationship between science and policymaking, and therefore also likely varying
research priorities, with corresponding theoretical models and units of
analysis. It is hypothesized that influential factors include not just the
discipline (academic/practitioner) of the study participants, but
characteristics of the governments with which they identify or study (economic
development, political system, and democratization). Quantitative techniques
that identify both areas of consensus and disagreement between workshop
attendees, will be used to explore nuances that might otherwise escape notice in
other forms of expert consultation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.