* 1842970
* CAREER:  Dissecting the cellular pathways and signaling networks orchestrating plant defense responses and their interplay with bacterial virulence factors
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Clemencia Rojas, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 902,703.00

Plant diseases caused by microorganisms have a significant impact on
agricultural productivity and, consequently affect the availability of food and
fiber for an ever-growing human population. To fight potential pathogens, plants
have evolved a complex defense system that detects the presence of potential
pathogens and activates multiple responses to restrict pathogen proliferation
and prevent tissue damage. Some of these responses include the fortification of
the cell wall and the release of molecules with antimicrobial properties. In
spite of these and other defense responses diseases still occur because
pathogens have also evolved multiple strategies to avoid the plant defense
system. The objective of this project is to understand how plants fortify the
cell wall and release antimicrobials, and how pathogens interfere with these
processes. This knowledge will shed light into new approaches to control plant
diseases and reduce their economic and societal impact. The research activities
from this project will be used to engage undergraduate students from under-
represented minorities, and will provide multi-disciplinary training for
postdoctoral fellows and graduate students, who will also be mentors in the
outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plant endomembrane system is
essential for pathogen recognition, and for the deployment of defense responses
such as the remodeling of the cell wall and the delivery of proteins with
antimicrobial properties to the extracellular milieu (apoplast). Both of these
responses require protein secretion, a process that has been investigated but
remains poorly understood, especially in plants, as it involves multiple and
highly dynamic subcellular compartments, trafficking pathways and protein
networks. Because endomembrane-mediated processes are essential in plant-
pathogen interactions, these processes are also targets of pathogen's virulence
factors, but the strategies that pathogens use have not been well characterized.
The main objective of this project is to gain a deeper understanding into
secretory pathways and signaling networks regulating plant defense responses and
how these processes are targeted by virulence factors from bacterial pathogens.
This project will use multi-disciplinary approaches involving live-cell imaging
and proteomics technologies in combination with biological, genetic and
biochemical assays to identify subcellular compartments, trafficking pathways
and protein networks operating in cell wall remodeling and delivery of
antimicrobial proteins to the apoplast. The project will also provide a
framework to compare how bacterial pathogens with contrasting lifestyles trigger
distinct sets of molecular and cellular responses, and how synergistic
interactions between virulence factors from adapted bacterial pathogens subvert
plant immune responses. This project is jointly funded by the Plant Biotic
Interactions Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.