* 1842678
* CANSec: The Central Area Networking and Security Workshop
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Bo Luo, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

As the world becomes more connected every day, the topic of information security
becomes more important. While researchers and students from universities across
the nation are conducting important research and outreach that results in
advances in information security, the impact of these efforts could be widened
at a forum to share research findings, best practices, foster collaboration, and
provide a forum for students to interact with other scientists and practitioners
in the field. The proposed project from the University of Kansas requests funds
to provide travel support for students attending the Central Area Networking and
Security Workshop (CANSec). The CANSec Workshop is an annual regional workshop
that aims to bring together researchers and practitioners in security and
networking related fields across the Great Plains region. Since its inception,
eleven workshops have been successfully held. The workshop will offer a variety
of sessions including keynote talks, research presentations, posters,
industrial/academic panels, and cyber defense competitions. It provides students
a chance to present their ideas and research to other students, faculty, and
professionals in a constructive environment, and to learn and practice cyber
defense skills in a real-world scenario.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
the Central Area Networking and Security Workshop (CANSec) is to provide a
regular forum for researchers and students across several Midwestern states
(Kansas, Missouri, Colorado, Iowa, Arkansas, Oklahoma, Nebraska, Texas, and
Indiana) to present research and educational activities, and to promote
interactions and collaborations. This grant would provide travel support for
students attending CANSec, so they can interact with peers and faculty from
across the region. The CANSec organizing team strives to keep low costs for the
attendees to accommodate more student participants and a broader audience. The
CANSec workshop also promotes the development and collaboration in information
security research and education in the Great Plains region with several EPSCoR
states including Kansas, Oklahoma, Arkansas and
Nebraska.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.