* 1842697
* SBIR Phase I:  Synthetic biology platform for production of stabilized high-value proteins
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Daniel Mandell, GRO BIOSCIENCES INC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop technology using engineered
bacteria to improve protein stability in two large markets: therapeutic proteins
and industrial enzymes. Proteins used as therapeutics frequently have
insufficient half-lives in human blood plasma, so that patients with chronic
disease need to receive frequent dosings, often by painful injections. These
burdensome dosing schedules result in high rates of patient noncompliance, with
attendant poor responses and negative health outcomes. Therapeutic proteins with
improved half-lives in blood plasma would permit relaxed dosing schedules,
lowering costs of administration and improving outcomes by reducing
noncompliance. This proposed technology focuses on improving the plasma half-
life of a therapeutic for a chronic disease primarily affecting children that
currently comprises a $4B global market. Similarly, industrial enzymes are
frequently deployed in harsh environments that impair enzyme stability and
activity. Endowing enzymes with improved resistance to destabilizing chemicals
would enable their deployment in high-value environments that are currently
prohibitive. The proposed technology will be used to stabilize an enzyme for
application in a $730M segment of the personalized medicine market. If
successful, this work would provide a platform for developing next-generation
enzymes deployable in currently prohibitive environments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I project is to
utilize a synthetic biology platform to create proteins with new amino acid
building blocks that dramatically improve half-life and stability. Many proteins
used as therapeutics or used as industrial enzymes are stabilized by disulfide
bonds. These bonds break in the presence of chemicals called reducing agents
that are found both in human blood plasma (destabilizing to therapeutics) and in
solvents and buffers (destabilizing to industrial enzymes). Using a strain of
engineered E. coli that can incorporate amino acids beyond the 20 standard amino
acids into proteins, the goal is to replace disulfide-forming cysteine amino
acids with selenocysteine amino acids that form bonds called diselenides.
Diselenide-stabilized proteins maintain stability and activity in environments
with reducing agents incompatible with disulfide-stabilized proteins. This
project will produce a diselenide-stabilized protein therapeutic for a major
disease class. Improvements to disulfide-stabilized therapeutics will be
demonstrated by ELISA assays showing improved binding activity, and by cell-
based assays showing improved therapeutic activity, after prolonged exposure to
blood plasma. This project also will produce a diselenide-stabilized industrial
enzyme to catalyze a critical reaction for personalized medicine. Performance
improvements over disulfide-stabilized enzymes will be demonstrated by in vitro
stability and activity assays in reducing conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.