* 1842021
* RAPID Proposal:   Constraining kinematics of the Whillans/Mercer Ice Stream Confluence
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Peter Koons, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 07/31/2020
* USD 48,438.00

The Siple Coast in West Antarctica has undergone significant glacier changes
over the last millenium. Several ice streams--rapidly moving streams of ice
bordered by slow-moving ice--exist in this region that feeds into the Ross Ice
Shelf. A long-term slowdown of Whillans Ice Stream appears to be occurring, and
this is affecting the zone between the Whillans and Mercer Ice Streams. However,
the consistency of this slowdown and resulting changes to the shear margin
between the two ice streams are unknown. The goal of this project is to quantify
the observed changes over the past decade and understand the dynamic processes
that cause them. A collateral benefit of and driver for this as a RAPID project
is to test a method for assessing where crevassing will develop in this zone of
steep velocity gradients. Such a method may benefit not only near-term field-
project planning in the 2018-19 field season, but also planning for future
fieldwork and traverses.

The team will use remote sensing feature-tracking techniques to determine
transient velocity patterns and shifts in the shear-zone location over the last
10-plus years. This velocity time series will be incorporated into a large-scale
ice-sheet model to estimate ice-sheet susceptibility to changing boundary
conditions over the next century based on likely regional ice-flux scenarios.
This approach is an extension of recent work conducted by the team that shows
promise for predicting areas of changing high strain rates indicative of an
active glacier shear margin. The ultimate objectives are to characterize the
flow field of merging ice streams over time and investigate lateral boundary
migration. This will provide a better understanding of shear-margin control on
ice-shelf and up-glacier stability.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.