* 1842306
* Development of Drifting Buoys to Measure Dynamic Ocean Topography and Precipitable Water Vapor
* GEO,OPP
* 10/15/2018,09/30/2023
* James Morison, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 09/30/2023
* USD 1,128,815.00

This project proposes to build drifting buoys making precise measurements of sea
surface height (SSH) and Precipitable Water Vapor (PWV) content. Sea surface
height is one of the ten Global Ocean Observing Systems (GOOS) Essential Ocean
Variables. It is important as the measure of long-term sea level rise and on
shorter time scales, tides and storm surges. The difference between sea surface
height and the height of the geoid is dynamic ocean topography (DOT), which
constitutes the surface pressure gradient that drives geostrophic surface
velocity, a second GOOS Essential Ocean Variable. DOT observations are combined
with density profiles, such as measured by oceanographic buoys (e.g., Argo
floats in temperate oceans and Ice Tethered Profilers in ice-covered seas) to
infer velocity shear, which makes it possible to measure absolute water velocity
versus depth, a third GOOS Essential Ocean Variable. In ice-covered seas, except
during high winds, the sea ice drift (Vice) largely follows the geostrophic
surface velocity (Vgeo). The difference between Vice and Vgeo plays an
increasingly critical role in stabilizing the doming of the Beaufort Sea Gyre in
the Arctic Ocean. Furthermore, cross-shelf gradients in DOT drive secondary
circulations (e.g., upwelling and downwelling) responsible for shelf-basin
exchanges, which are critical to maintaining the Arctic Ocean cold halocline.
Observations of Precipitable Water Vapor (PWV) content are needed to understand
changes in atmospheric conditions globally and in the Arctic in particular.
Observations of tropospheric precipitable water vapor content are needed to
understand changes in atmospheric conditions, the global water cycle, and water
vapor as the dominant greenhouse gas. This is particularly true over the Arctic
Ocean where such observations by other means are largely non-existent. Condensed
water vapor (in clouds) reflects incoming solar radiation and traps long-wave
radiation near the surface, making soundings of moisture content critical to
understanding the role of clouds in the surface heat budget, the water cycle,
atmospheric dynamics, and their effect on sea ice, operational weather
forecasts, and radio propagation. PWV content in clouds reflects incoming solar
radiation and traps long-wave radiation near the surface, making soundings of
moisture content critical to understanding the role of clouds in the surface
heat budget, the water cycle, atmospheric dynamics, and their effect on sea ice.
These effects are critical in operational forecasts of weather and radio
propagation. In spite of the importance of DOT and PWV content, wholly
autonomous in situ measurements of these variables have not been made. Satellite
altimeters greatly expand the areal coverage of DOT observations, but in situ
DOT and PWV content observations are critical to provide ground truth for the
satellites and fill high-frequency temporal gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Applied Physics Lab (APL) will build six DOT Buoys combining the Iridium data
telemetry, power systems, and ice-capable buoy hull of a proven APL drifting
buoy with a dual-frequency GPS receiver similar to what is used in a proven
moored internally recording GPS buoy built by partners at the Pacific Marine
Environmental Laboratory (PMEL). Past data from the PMEL buoy will be used to
design the optimum sampling strategy for the DOT Buoy. Partners at the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) will perform the Precise Point Positioning (PPP)
processing. APL and JPL will evaluate the DOT Buoy performance and facilitate
application of the buoys to planned ONR (SODA, SIZRS), NASA (ICESat-2, SWOT),
and NOAA (IABP) programs in 2019-2021. The DOT Buoys will use precision dual-
frequency GPS and PPP processing of GPS data to determine DOT to 1-cm accuracy
and PWV to 1-mm accuracy. PPP and the dual frequency capability of the receiver
address the key sources of GPS errors. PPP processing relies on a worldwide
array of stationary GPS receivers to determine the errors in GPS satellite
orbits and clocks. Corrections for these errors will be applied to raw code and
phase information from the DOT Buoy GPS receptions to derive positions good to
1-cm accuracy. However, this requires that full code and phase information must
be telemetered from the drifting buoy for post processing with 1-week latency.
The basic hardware and PPP scheme are well proven. The challenge is to design an
Iridium telemetry system and sampling strategy that measure DOT and Precipitable
Water Vapor content at appropriate spatial and temporal scales and buffers the
data for transmission through an Iridium data link. The proposed buoys will be
suitable for surface or air deployment in sea ice or open water. The buoys will
immediately enhance research in the Arctic Ocean by a number of federal agencies
(ONR, NASA, NOAA, NSF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.