* 1842020
* EAGER: ISN: Detecting and Disrupting Illicit Supply Networks via Traffic Distribution Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jonathan Caulkins, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2022
* USD 359,908.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will enhance national
health, prosperity, and security by contributing to our understanding of and
ability to disrupt the online infrastructure that supports illicit supply
networks. Malicious advertising is responsible for exposing a large fraction of
online users to malicious content, including content from illicit supply
networks, such as those trafficking in fake luxury goods and counterfeit
pharmaceuticals. These abusive services not only exfiltrate private information
and cause economic harm, but can also, in the case of unlicensed pharmaceutical
products, damage public health. This project focuses on developing methods to
detect and disrupt these illicit supply chains by targeting the traffic
distribution systems that enable them, i.e., the online hosts that are
responsible for redirecting users from gateway pages to the final abusive
service. Mapping these networks and ultimately taking down their hosts will
increase the cost of illicit commerce, yielding positive economic and public
health impact. The award will provide support to engage graduate students in
research with high societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to
understand, measure, model, and disrupt traffic distribution systems as well as
characterize the effects of this disruption on the pricing of illicit goods and
services. By devising multiple high-toxicity URL streams and automatically
crawling these URLs on a daily basis from multiple geographical locations and
multiple browsing agents, this project will enable the collection of a large
number of traffic distribution systems as well as the abusive services that
utilize them. The project includes the development of techniques for converting
the collected network traces into directed graphs, the attribution and merging
of nodes belonging to the same actors, and the use of these graphs for modeling
the effects of takedowns in the presence of operational constraints. This
research will discover and document how these illicit operations function,
improve the automated detection of their abusive services, and provide data to
other researchers on the operations of traffic distribution systems and their
vulnerability to disruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.