* 1842655
* RAISE-EQuIP: Chip-Scale Quantum Memories for Practical Quantum Communication Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Rashid Zia, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2022
* USD 750,000.00

RAISE-EQuIP: Chip-Scale Quantum Memories for Practical Quantum Communication
Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is conceived in the context of the
NSF's call for Research Advanced by Interdisciplinary Science and Engineering
(RAISE), and specifically a Dear Colleague Letter for Engineering Quantum
Integrated Platforms for Quantum Communication (EQuIP). It addresses a grand
challenge of 21st-century science: leveraging modern capabilities in materials
science, nanofabrication, signal processing, and integrated systems-on-a-chip to
harness the computational power and sensitivity of quantum-coherent systems for
practical applications. Motivated by the clear potential of spin-based quantum
devices, this RAISE-EQuIP project adopts an engineering approach to address a
series of technological roadblocks that currently limit their performance and
scalability. The interdisciplinary approach harnesses state-of-the-art classical
and quantum signal processing, electronic circuit design in silicon-based
integrated platforms, machine learning optimization, and nanophotonic design,
with the aim to transform spin-based quantum registers from a laboratory-scale
experiments into compact, integrated systems that are available to power new
applications and scientific investigations. With superior performance offered
under real-world constraints, these devices can be deployed in testbed quantum
communication networks and will enable future investigations of fundamental
quantum physics. The collaborative project will engage many undergraduate and
graduate students from diverse backgrounds; its research goals are coupled with
a broad educational mission to educate students and the public about the
emerging field of quantum science and technology. Through the realization of
compact, robust, low-cost quantum devices, this project will support the design
and deployment of hands-on activities for K-12 students and the public about
spins, photons, and quantum communication, for use at venues that target large,
diverse populations in Philadelphia, PA and Providence,
RI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Clusters of nuclear spins coupled to an optically
addressable electron-spin qubit such as the nitrogen-vacancy (NV) center in
diamond are leading platforms for quantum communication. The cluster constitutes
a register of qubits that can be individually addressed, entangled, stored for
times exceeding 1s, and utilized for quantum error correction. However, state-
of-the-art experiments are currently performed on laboratory-scale setups
consisting of customized optical cryostats, vibration-sensitive free-space
optics, and racks of microwave electronics. Performance is further impeded by
sub-optimal photon collection efficiency and labor-intensive calibration
requirements for quantum control sequences. This RAISE-EQuIP project will tackle
these challenges on multiple levels, drawing on complementary expertise of the
collaborating researchers in diamond NV quantum control and device engineering
(Bassett), high-speed analog circuit design and signal processing (Aflatouni),
and computational physics and nanophotonics (Zia). We will design and build
compact, fiber-coupled diamond devices featuring nanofabricated optical
metalenses and impedance-matched microwave antennas to transmit optical and
spin-resonance signals, respectively, and integrate these devices with custom-
fabricated silicon CMOS chips that process the necessary analog and digital
signals for spin resonance, photon counting, and real-time adaptive feedback
control. Computational machine learning methods will enable efficient mapping
and control of the unknown coupled-spin Hamiltonian. The resulting quantum-
register devices will exhibit performance superior to state-of-the-art
laboratory systems, but with a fraction of the size, cost, and energy
requirements. Components of the modular, hybrid-integrated system are
generalizable to other quantum architectures based on spins, ions, photons, and
superconducting qubits, so these devices can serve as a framework for future
generations of portable quantum technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.