* 1843892
* EAGER: Human Arm Impedance Modulation During Overground Physical Interactions
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2021
* Devin Burns, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 12/31/2021
* USD 299,928.00

A robot that physically interacts with humans in a human-like way may lead to
impactful applications in healthcare and rehabilitation. However, little is
known about how physical interactions can communicate goals and intent between
partners. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project
supports development of a mobile interactive robot that will support fundamental
research into how humans may modulate arm impedance to communicate intent during
partnered ambulation. By studying how a person walks alongside the interactive
robot while holding its "hand", this research will add to our understanding of
how humans communicate and sense cues pertaining to movement direction and
speed. The new knowledge will lead to the development of safe, effective and
interactive robots that can be deployed wherever a guiding hand is needed, such
as in hospitals, nursing homes, in sports training, or on factory lines. As
such, the results of this research will benefit the US healthcare, economy, and
society. The project will involve an educational component that provides
engineering and research methods training to graduate and undergraduate
students, as well as STEM outreach to high-school and middle-school students.
Additional efforts will be made to attract and retain underrepresented
individuals into careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research develops a novel robot intended to communicate intent with a human
partner through physical forces. Methods include device development, development
of robotic control algorithms, and the interrogation of object impedance of
stationary and moving objects. The implemented system will be validated through
human subjects experimentation involving human arm impedance estimation during
over-ground human/robot partnered walking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.