* 1843662
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy Efficient Supercritical Water Oxidation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Sophie Mancuso, BEYOND THE DOME INC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 10/31/2020
* USD 223,882.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to help wastewater treatment plants become compliant
with emerging environmental regulations, while saving energy and without adding
cost. It has potential to reduce the amount of biosolids that need to be shipped
off-site and landfilled by up to 85% as well as completely destroy odors and
pathogens. As a result, the project may also enhance social justice throughout
the country. Currently, low-income and disadvantaged communities inherit waste
from other communities, sometimes very far away from where the waste originated.
They inherit the stench, the vectors (rats, flies, birds) and toxins. For
example, 7% of the biosolids produced by New York City end up in Alabama, via
trains and trucks. People living near the landfills and along transportation
routes no longer use their porch because of the stench. By improving the
economics of a technology that destroys organics much better than state-of-the-
art technologies, wastewater treatment plants will become cleaner, less
malodorous and use less energy. Other markets could open as well including clean
power and chemical manufacturing. Finally, the project may lead to increased
hiring of employees over the next three years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to create an affordable and reliable process to cleanly
and completely destroy organic waste, extract more resources and energy from
sludge and biosolids at wastewater treatment plants while considerably reducing
the amount of biosolids that need to be shipped off-site for disposal. This
objective will be achieved by improving a process that uses water contained
within the waste to create a hyper oxidative environment. Similar processes use
costly and hazardous pure oxygen, are extremely energy intensive, and are
plagued with high maintenance cost. By making innovations in energy recovery,
the use of air as an oxidant instead of oxygen is possible without the large
cost associated with having to heat and compress an entire air stream- oxygen
plus inert nitrogen. Once optimal technical conditions for energy recovery are
identified, the project will enter the design and fabrication phases. The
resulting new energy recovery module will be added to an existing system. The
prototype will be tested for continuous operation. New insights into energy
recovery will be gained, which will benefit the scientific community as a
whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.