* 1843994
* SBIR Phase I:  MobIQ: A SIM-Based Solution To Software-Defined IoT Network Services
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Yuanjie Li, MobIQ Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from advancing the application
territory of Internet-of-Things (IoT) and 4G/5G/Beyond-5G ecosystems. If
successful, the obtained results would directly benefit a large portion of the
current 8.4 billion wirelessly "connected things" with an estimated $273 billion
market. It will facilitate "always-on, anytime, anywhere" network services and
further help enable many emerging IoT applications (e.g., safe driving, remote
healthcare, smart city, wearables). The technology is expected to create new
business opportunities for IoT vendors, service providers, and mobile virtual
network operators. If successful, it will facilitate evolution from an operator-
centric network ecosystem to a user/application-centric
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project will develop a software-based solution to enabling dependable, software-
defined network services for IoT applications. The objective for Phase I is to
provide "always-on, anytime, anywhere" network service for billions of IoT
devices and applications. Different from the current infrastructure-based
solutions (using software-defined networking or network slicing), the proposed
technology offers an in-device, SIM-based software solution without
infrastructure upgrades or added device hardware. It enables in-SIM visibility
to "black-box" mobile network operations, performs in-device optimizations using
readily available mechanisms, and offers further value-added cloud services for
network-wide optimization and management via crowdsourcing. The technology is
readily deployable on today's IoT devices (both low-end and high-end) and
provides "must-have" features for two customer segments (validated through NSF
I-Corps interviews) - IoT mobile virtual network operators, and IoT application
vendors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.