* 1843917
* SBIR Phase I:  Advanced Direct-To-Patient Data Aggregation Platform For Clinical Trial Recruitment.
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Gerald Lee, SANGUINE BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,981.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable researchers to recruit participants
for clinical trials more quickly and reliably. A major problem in medical
research is that a majority of clinical trials are delayed or canceled because
of insufficient recruitment of eligible participants. By developing an
independent (third-party) data aggregation platform for detailed electronic
patient data through this project, researchers will be able to efficiently reach
a large pool of potential participants for trials, and increase the likelihood
of trial success. The resulting platform will create a much more efficient
recruitment system, as the data is shared among the broader research community
rather than managed by any individual research organization. With subscriptions
and fees per enrolled patient, the platform will be able sustain itself while at
the same time lowering recruitment costs for researchers. More broadly, the
greater ability to design and execute successful clinical trials will be a huge
benefit to the medical community and accelerate the pace of research and new
product development.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to improve
the speed, accuracy, and reliability of clinical trial design and recruitment.
Research organizations like pharmaceutical companies and hospitals typically
maintain isolated databases with limited, static patient data. This project
focuses on building a third-party data platform that elegantly stores and
organizes electronic patient data. The design of the platform enables
ontological queries, allowing researchers to consult data when designing trials
and quickly ?testing? specific inclusion/exclusion criteria to determine
feasibility. When proceeding to execute the trial, the platform will rank
individuals by likelihood to enroll, and facilitate contact with potential
patients that have previously provide consent to be contacted. Initial
objectives of the project include the development of a methodology to abstract
patient data from medical records, and programming of the database structure.
Later the work will focus on quality assurance software, and algorithms to
translate free-text trial requirements into filters compatible with said
database. The expected outcome is a platform storing accurate data of 200
patients, with filtering and ranking algorithms that match patients to trials
with nearly the same accuracy of an experienced recruitment team.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.