* 1843074
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-Chromatographic Method for the Purification of Monoclonal Antibodies
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Kelli Luginbuhl, Isolere Bio, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kaitlin Bratlie
* 02/28/2021
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to improve manufacturing technology for the
purification of monoclonal antibodies, which are important therapeutics as well
as valuable tools in research and diagnostics. Approximately four new antibody
drugs are approved every year, and while they can have tremendous clinical
outcomes and are sometimes heralded as "magic bullets," they often come with a
significant price tag. This puts a strain on patients and insurance companies,
limiting the accessibility of antibody-based drugs. Furthermore, antibodies are
critical research tools that enhance the understanding of biology. The
technology developed in this research project will provide a completely novel
method for the purification of antibodies from cell culture that will lower
cost, increase manufacturing throughput, and accelerate the time to market for
new therapeutics. Commercially, this technology will disrupt the current gold
standard - Protein A resin - making antibody purification simpler, faster, and
cheaper at all scales: research, clinical, and industrial.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I project is to
develop technology for improved purification of monoclonal antibodies. Although
upstream production of antibodies in cell culture has improved dramatically,
downstream purification has not kept pace, resulting in a production bottleneck
and a major market opportunity. The objectives of this SBIR Phase I project are
to demonstrate technical and commercial feasibility of a new technology that
combines affinity with liquid-liquid phase separation to separate antibodies
from cell culture contaminants. It involves an antibody-binding domain fused to
a biopolymer with stimulus responsive phase behavior. When this fusion protein
is added to cell culture harvest, it binds the antibody and, after triggering
the phase separation with salt, pulls the antibody out of solution. The purified
antibody can then be eluted from the fusion by lowering the pH. This project
aims to 1) optimize regeneration conditions so that the fusion can be reused, 2)
evaluate long-term stability, and 3) validate the technology at scale and
conduct a head-to-head comparison to the industry gold standard, Protein A
resin. The goal is to identify storage conditions that provide a long shelf life
for a product that can be reused 10-100 times without compromising antibody
yield or purity. The focus of the project is to demonstrate promising
capabilities of the technology for use in industrially manufactured monoclonal
antibodies, replacing conventional chromatography steps with a simpler and more
cost-effective method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.