* 1843017
* SBIR Phase I:  Versatile Low-Noise Traveling-Wave Parametric Amplifier for Quantum Information Processing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Christopher Koh, MILLIMETER WAVE SYSTEMS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 03/31/2020
* USD 224,986.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from the development of a traveling-
wave parametric amplifier (TWPA) prototype suitable to be marketed to the
Quantum Information Processing community. Quantum computers require extremely
sensitive amplifiers operating near absolute zero to amplify weak signals. There
are two critical features of this amplifier that will benefit the community
directly: 1) the ability to have more qubits per amplifier - essential for large
scale quantum computers, and 2) the ability to use a commercial manufacturing
process. As quantum hardware continues to scale, so does the number of qubits,
making multichannel amplifiers essential. European and Asian investment in
quantum technology is growing at an alarming rate. The US is at risk of losing
the leading position in this technical space. The commercialization of TWPA
technology is an example of technologies required for the US to remain
competitive in quantum technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will introduce a TWPA product
prototype for the Quantum Information Processing market by addressing some of
the interfacing, packaging and manufacturing limitations of experimental
devices. Critical to the ability to distribute these amplifiers to the market is
a means of manufacturing such devices at scale. A key advantage of the proposed
technology is its ease of fabrication and the fact that it can be fabricated
using an industry standard process, which will be demonstrated during the Phase
I project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.