* 1843430
* SBIR Phase I:  Carbon Fiber Encapsulated Polymer Powder for Additive Manufacturing Advancements
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Andrew Maxey, Vartega Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project pertains to the novel production of short-fiber
reinforced thermoplastic material applicable to a range of processes, with the
added benefit of utilizing high quality, low cost recycled or recovered fibers.
The beachhead application is in a powder-based additive manufacturing system
capable of mid-scale manufacturing that can bridge between prototype-stage and
capital-intensive injection molded economy-of-scale manufacturing. Such systems
can be located in regional production hubs to accelerate new or highly-
customizable products to market. The inclusion of the proposed additives in
these systems will expand the range of end-product material properties
available, and thereby expand the potential client pool for the same platform.
Anticipated flow properties of the material will position it as an accessible
additive option for other 3D printing technologies as well as the much larger-
market of injection molding processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project adapts a processing technology that
is yet untapped for this application, to produce a composite thermoplastic
additive for polymeric powder feedstock 3D printing. This additive is expected
to increase stiffness, strength, and thermal stability of the end product, while
reducing weight and providing superior handling characteristics during
production relative to existing alternatives. The project is focused on
identifying process conditions required to produce a nominally conforming
product, followed by testing that characterizes the material and handling
properties. Results of these tests will be compared against acceptance standards
published by the beachhead additive manufacturing system supplier in preparation
for inclusion into 3D printed test components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.