* 1843309
* The Cognitive Basis of Linguistic Illusions
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,11/30/2022
* Daniel Parker, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 11/30/2022
* USD 235,752.00

Our ability to use and understand language in everyday conversation is a feat
that seems to be accomplished both rapidly and effortlessly. Just as the
impression that our visual interpretation of the world around us is robust and
complete, our impression of language is similarly rich. Behind the perceived
ease of language understanding is a complex set of neuro-cognitive mechanisms
that must work in tandem to give us a rich linguistic experience. However, these
systems are not always foolproof and can be misled, arriving at unintended
interpretations or the perception of ill-formed sentences as if they were well-
formed. These errors trigger what are known as "linguistic illusions", and just
as visual illusions have transformed our understanding of how our visual system
interprets the world around us, the systematic study of linguistic illusions can
transform our understanding of how we interpret language. Importantly, by
studying the conditions under which we do and do not fall for linguistic
illusions, we can improve language technologies, provide better language
learning instruction, and aid in assessments of cognitive impairments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to better understand the scope
and cause of linguistic illusions. Current language processing models assume
that illusions are the product of two distinct cognitive systems: one system for
fast, efficient communication (the 'parser'), and another, slower system that
classifies grammaticality (the 'grammar'). A competing account claims that
illusions reflect a single grammar system embedded in a noisy cognitive
architecture that creates the opportunity for errors. The current project
addresses this debate by extending research to a broader set of linguistic
phenomena using behavioral and computational methods to better understand the
exact conditions that trigger illusions. This project will inform our
understanding of (i) the cognitive architecture of language, (ii) the mental
mechanisms for encoding, accessing, and manipulating sentence structures, and
(iii) the role of the grammar in sentence processing. The project will have a
direct impact on the broader scientific community, the undergraduate researchers
funded through project, and the general public. Specifically, the project will
expand the pool of participants that are typically included in psycholinguistic
studies to non-college students, leading to a more comprehensive study of
linguistic abilities across populations, and will bridge research and education
by providing meaningful research experiences to undergraduate researchers,
including under-represented minorities, through undergraduate training boot
camps, research assistantships, and outreach activities at K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.