* 1843411
* SBIR Phase I:  Affordable point-of-use water disinfection through mass-produced nano-silver embedded paper filters
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,08/31/2019
* Theresa Dankovich, FOLIA Materials Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The proposed broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) project is the reduction of waterborne disease from
drinking water in low-income populations. 2.1 billion people drink fecally-
contaminated water, 50% of hospitalization in developing countries are due to
waterborne diseases, and contaminated drinking water causes &gt;500,000
diarrheal deaths each year. Low-income populations not only pay for water, but
pay anywhere from 30% to 10 times more in absolute terms than the wealthy. This
proposed technical innovation will provide: a consumer packaged goods water
filter, i.e. a product priced as a consumable and sold through food/beverage
retail grocery stores. This is a different business model than water filters
which are sold as durable good appliances through specialty stores. If
successful a new consumer water filter category reaching a fraction of 2.1 B
people has potential to represent a $1B+ category. This proposed project would
bring the innovation closer to commercialization by creating a more robust
performing antimicrobial filter paper through challenge water stress
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to
develop a nano-silver antimicrobial filter paper through mass-production
methods, e.g. paper machines, that is formulated to be biocidal in a wide
variety of water sources. Technical hurdles include the reliability of
technology scaling, developing frameworks for quality and stress testing,
broader antimicrobial efficacy, and longer use life. The project goals include
engineering a paper formulation with increased silver uptake, more uniform
nanoparticle synthesis, synergistic antimicrobial chemicals, and reliable filter
paper pore size and flow rate. The project plan to address these technical
challenges include rigorous stress testing with specific challenge chemicals and
high microbial loads, development of new formulations based on adding
synergistic antimicrobial chemicals, absorbent chemicals to increase silver
uptake, and process variations in the operation of the paper machine (speed,
temperature, pressing, etc). These experiments will require new formulations to
be evaluated following the same quality and stress tests with each iteration at
the bench scale and pilot scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.