* 1843054
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermal Intensification for Continuous Thermoplastic Composite Forming
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Christopher Oberste, WEAV3D Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2020
* USD 224,718.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project relates to the historic challenges associated
with composite manufacturing, including long cycle times, poor recyclability,
labor-intensive manufacturing, and energy-intensive curing processes.
Thermoplastic composites have the potential to reduce cycle time, reduce labor
requirements, and improve recyclability; however, traditional thermoplastic
processes are energy intensive. This Phase 1 SBIR is seeking new, more efficient
process heating methods that can be integrated into a continuous composite
manufacturing process to improve production speed and reduce operating costs,
enabling the growth of composite materials in weight sensitive industries that
require high-volume, low-cost structural components, including automotive,
unmanned aircraft, wind turbines, and cargo
transportation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will determine the technical feasibility of ultrasonic
heating and induction heating as an alternative to infrared heating in a
continuous composite forming process. Process heating constitutes a significant
portion of the direct energy consumed by in manufacturing. This is particularly
true in the production of fiber-reinforced thermoplastic composites, where the
polymer matrix must be melted as part of the consolidation process. As part of
this Phase 1 project, heater modules for induction heating, ultrasonic heating,
and infrared heating will be developed and integrated into a bench-scale,
continuous composite forming prototype. Composite material will be produced
using each heating method and energy consumption will be monitored during the
forming process. The composite material produced during testing will be weighed
and embodied energy will be calculated by dividing the total energy consumed by
the mass of the material. The objective of this work is to identify a heating
method that can reduce embodied energy by at least 40%, relative to the infrared
heating system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.