* 1843436
* SBIR Phase I:  Durable Superhydrophobic Smart Coating with Active Corrosion Protection
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Xuejun Zhang, SynMatter, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2020
* USD 249,993.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to create a cost-effective, high-performance
anticorrosive coating for protecting metal structures, particularly in marine
environments. High value assets that are essential parts of the US energy
infrastructure, such as offshore oil and gas platforms, marine ships and wind
turbines, are exposed to one of the most corrosive environments with direct
exposure to salt water via immersion and seawater spray. Corrosion of these
metal structures is estimated to cost the world economy around $2.3 trillion in
maintenance and replacement capital every year. This project's superhydrophobic
coating has the potential to significantly reduce both cost and waste by
improving structural safety, reducing maintenance frequency and lengthening the
operating lifetime of such vital assets. It will also reduce the environmental
impact of corrosion protection systems by using less harmful materials, negating
coating repainting needs and extending metal lifetime.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to make a
durable, superhydrophobic, high-performance anticorrosive coating through
creation of dual-function coating additives. Coatings and corrosion inhibitors
are generally the first line of defense in this fight against corrosion. Highly-
water repellent superhydrophobic coatings are leading contenders for delivering
a step change in corrosion protection performance. However, current solutions
suffer from two notable issues: high cost and low durability in highly corrosive
marine environments. Existing superhydrophobic coatings require complex and
expensive equipment and materials. In addition, these coatings are easily
damaged during use, resulting in the loss of their water repellency and
corrosion protection ability. The key innovation of this project is a novel
dual-function additive that can impart coatings with both superhydrophobicity
(passive corrosion protection) and on-demand corrosion inhibitors release
(active corrosion protection). This additive based approach results in a durable
coating that retains its protective abilities even through significant use and
abrasion and enables adaptation to many other coating applications, even ones
outside of corrosion.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.