* 1843818
* SBIR Phase I:  The Comake Graph
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Andres Gutierrez, Comake, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to drive economic growth and innovation
by increasing a knowledge worker's ease of access to the digital information
that is relevant to his/her work. Businesses today are enormously dependent on
the archives of files, communication, and other information contained within the
systems and services they rely on (networked drives, cloud storage, messaging
tools, email, etc.). As these archives grow, they are increasingly hard to
standardize and organize so that individuals know where to look for and how to
find the information they need to do their jobs. The result is that individual
employees waste enormous amounts of time trying to locate files and information
fragmented across complex directories and many communication channels.
Centralizing access to files and communication within an easily searchable and
flexible workspace can unlock several hours of lost productivity and duplicate
efforts per knowledge worker per week. Furthermore, presenting all of the
relevant context around each file and message, including other file-versions,
related files, discussions, activity events, etc., can help knowledge workers
today with better version control, an understanding of how projects/ideas
unfold, transferring of best practices, and preventing institutional knowledge-
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project seeks to further develop a novel method for users to contextually and
unobtrusively access all relevant files and information associated with their
work. This project focuses on developing software that can automatically map the
relationships between digital workflow components (email messages, chat
messages, tasks, contacts, files, etc.), and store them in discrete private
databases controlled by the users. This project's key technical challenges
include: improving the proprietary algorithms that automatically interconnect
user information (while the information remains hosted on third party
systems/services); improving the scalability of data ingress, processing,
indexing, and syncing; and establishing a system capable of hosting and
processing a multitude of discrete and disconnected databases of user
information. The anticipated outcome of this project is a new type of software
platform that can be hosted in private instances and that improves the
productivity of its users by: consolidating user information stored on third-
party systems/services; making it all easily searchable and manageable; and
augmenting every file with additional history and context from all other
connected third party systems/services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.