* 1843347
* SBIR Phase I:  High-Energy X-ray Gratings for Nondestructive Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Michael Vincent, REFINED IMAGING, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of advanced X-ray imaging,
high-energy X-ray grating-based interferometry, systems for nondestructive
evaluation of additive manufacturing components. The image quality of the high-
energy, X-ray grating-based interferometry imaging system will be advantageous
for detecting critical size flaws &lt;br/&gt;on flight critical aerospace
components, such as turbine components, and medical devices such as customized
hip cups. Interferometry radiography is capable of detection of sub-micron to
micron voids at a rate faster than conventional industrial X-ray CT scanning.
Imaging speed and quality is important; some flight critical components face a
reject rate of 10% based on the current X-ray CT scans. The goal of better image
quality is feedback into the additive manufacturing print parameters so as to
increase part yield and reliability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the first to commercialize
high-energy, X-ray grating interferometry in the US. The interferometry concepts
for this proposal are novel and have been partly derived from the NSF-supported
gravity wave detection facility, the Laser Interferometry Gravitational-wave
Observatory (LIGO), which led to a hardware/software patent for high-energy
X-ray grating optics and software. The microfabricated gold and/or nickel
structures on silicon or graphite wafers have exceedingly high aspect ratios,
requiring the use of support structures for physical stability of the
microfabricated features. The support structures introduce image noise and
diminished interferometry performance. The LIGO-derived procedure accommodates
the support structures, restoring image quality and instrument performance. The
support structures are especially important for optics used with high-energy
X-rays, such as systems designed for inspection of additive manufacturing metal
components&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.