* 1843479
* STTR Phase I:  Innovative Platform for Low Volume Blood Coagulation Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Daishen Luo, Levisonics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project addresses the problem of assessing blood clotting and
associated bleeding and thrombosis risks in neonatal and pediatric patients.
Existing coagulation analyzers put these patients at further risk because they
cannot operate with low volumes of blood, and because they are less reliable
owing to the requirement for test sample contact. This project will develop
Acoustic Tweezing Thomboelastometry (ATT) for these patients. Using only a
single acoustically-levitated drop of blood, this non-contact technology
platform enables safe and reliable assessment of blood clotting in small
children and provides an opportunity for development of newborn screening tests
for coagulation abnormalities. This technology is the outcome of NSF funding
which has supported the training of several PhD students in biomedical and
mechanical engineering. ATT can reduce side effects for neonatal and pediatric
patients by using 1/100th the sample volume required by technologies developed
for adult healthcare and improve diagnostic response time for critical care
providers by up to 350%. This technology could decrease the cost of blood
coagulation analysis by over 30%, thus allowing for patients in the United
States to save $2.0 billion annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project develops an innovative technology for non-contact blood coagulation
analysis that integrates photo-optical and viscoelastic measurements in a single
drop of blood (&lt;6uL in volume). The essence of the ATT technology is to
levitate a small sample in a host fluid (e.g., air) by the acoustic radiation
force and measure its physical properties under deformation during levitation.
ATT addresses the issue of high variability and poor standardization of existing
coagulation analyzers caused by blood sample contact with artificial surfaces.
Due to its noncontact feature and low sample volume requirement, ATT can rapidly
(&lt;10 minutes) and reliably assess bleeding/thrombotic risks and is sensitive
to temporal changes in shear viscosity and elasticity during blood clotting and
fibrinolysis. In addition, ATT can measure platelet function and assess the
functional levels of fibrinogen and other coagulation factors. The goal of this
project is to develop a user-friendly minimal marketable product for the market
of pediatric coagulation analyzers. This goal will be achieved by meeting the
following three objectives: 1) build the user-friendly prototype; 2) develop
integrated software for device control, data acquisition, and data analysis; and
3) calibrate the prototype and standardize it for coagulation
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.