* 1843944
* STTR Phase I:  Integrated Solution for Low Cost Distributed Wind Energy Generation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy, Accelerate Wind, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to enable broad
market adoption of rooftop and other methods for local wind energy generation
through reduction in costs. This is achieved through development of technology
designed to lower the cost of wind turbine drive trains and associated power
electronics, high cost items which are often left without innovation in new wind
turbine designs. Prohibitively high costs are currently the biggest barrier to
widespread adoption of distributed wind turbines, and power electronics can be
as much as 50% of these costs. Significant cost reduction has the potential to
increase worldwide distributed wind power adoption. The innovative power train
technology developed in this project is specifically designed to couple with a
proprietary technology for wind capture at rooftop edges. When combined with
this technology, costs estimates are competitive with rooftop solar energy,
enabling wind energy to become a common addition to rooftop solar installations.
Successful deployment of this technology will contribute to society by
decreasing the carbon footprint of energy production, increasing energy
resiliency, and creating new jobs associated with manufacturing and deployment.
Significant manufacturing efforts are likely to remain in the US, creating local
job opportunities and economic growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project proposes to use a
novel drive train architecture to reduce small wind turbine power train costs.
In this architecture, costs are lowered by temporarily storing the energy coming
out of the wind turbine rotor in a flywheel before passing it on to the
generator. This allows for the power train to include a generator and inverter
that are sized for average rather than peak power outputs, enables removal of
diversion load, and allows for the use of a faster spinning, and therefore lower
cost generator. The Phase I project seeks to prove the feasibility of developing
a low-cost flywheel which meets the needs of the overall drive train (including
efficiency and reliability), a powertrain control system which maintains high
efficiency, and a powertrain system configuration which maintains the reduced
cost projections required for market traction. Research efforts include
development of a bench-scale drive train to test the controls of the flywheel,
powertrain simulation to test alternative generator and converter topologies,
and benchmarking of generator candidates to determine efficiency and power
density.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.