* 1843624
* SBIR Phase I:  Anti-Fouling and Anti-Scaling Slippery Surface Coating for Cleaning and Sanitation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Birgitt Boschitsch, spotLESS Materials Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of an easy-to-apply
anti-fouling, liquid- and sludge-repellent coating aimed to reduce the water
footprint, required cleaning frequency, and need for aggressive cleaning
chemicals to maintain bathroom fixtures. Advanced ecofriendly technologies that
enhance cleaning efficiency are highly sought after in janitorial services for
large institutions and homeowners alike. Specifically, the household cleaners
market size was valued at $5.79 billion in 2016 in United States, of which ~20%
is toilet bowl cleaners that aim to remove bacteria and hard-water stains. From
a societal perspective, we estimate that about 6.1 billion gallons of water is
flushed down the toilet nationally each day - that is 2.2 trillion gal of water
each year in the United States alone. Incorporation of this coating into
bathroom fixtures, can significantly reduce the water footprint of bathroom
fixtures. Viable low-flow or no-flow toilets may also help help address the open
defecation problem affecting over 1 billion people globally.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop and
investigate a new class of viscoelastic-repellent surface coatings with anti-
bacterial and anti-scaling functions for cleaning and sanitation industries.
Surface coatings that can resist bacteria and mineral fouling while maintaining
both liquid and viscoelastic solid repellency are rare. The proposed project
will investigate and quantify the coating design parameters required to
significantly prevent the attachment of bacteria and mineral deposits, while
remaining durable against mechanical abrasions under realistic operating
conditions. This SBIR Phase I project will demonstrate that a sprayable surface
coating not only can repel both liquids and viscoelastic solids, but can also
resist fouling from bacteria and hard water stains without the use of aggressive
chemical cleaners or excessive amounts of water. The best coating parameters
identified in Phase I project will be considered for pilot tests in Phase II.
The development of such a robust, non-fouling coating will offer significant
reduction in the use of cleaning chemicals, flush water, and cleaning time,
which has the potential to reduce costs associated with sanitation facilities
maintenance.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.