* 1843958
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3: Programmable control of metabolism in synthetic cells using intrinsically disordered proteins
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Matthew Lakin, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2021
* USD 299,986.00

Almost all proteins have a specific three-dimensional structure that maintains
its specific activity in the cell. One class of proteins do not. They are
referred to as intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs). Their role in the cell
appears to be to spontaneously associate with other proteins and activate them
collectively. This is an important function to include in the design of a
synthetic cell. This project will explore how IDPs interact with other proteins
and with DNA and RNA. Of particular interest is how those interactions affect
the regulation of gene expression and cell metabolism. Dysfunctional
interactions are linked to neurodegenerative disorders, such as ALS (Lou
Gehrig's disease). The results of this project may lead to enhanced treatments
and improved outcomes for patients suffering from these diseases. The project
will also support training and education of undergraduate and graduate students.
Members of underrepresented groups will take part via science involvement
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop interactions between
IDPs and nucleic acids as a control mechanism for gene expression. The approach
will be extended to the regulation of protein synthesis. To accomplish that,
IDPs will be modified to bind and sequester mRNA in membrane-free organelles.
The IDP-RNA complexes will be designed to be responsive to environmental cues,
including protein concentration, temperature and protease activity. They must
also bind the target RNA tightly, and release captured RNA for expression on
demand. Testing of these concepts will take place in a cell-free protein
synthesis system. Transcriptional networks will be augmented with genes that
express engineered nucleic acid-binding proteins. Pathways will be created to
regulate expression of a simple reporter protein and to build circuits to
regulate CRISPR interference systems. Thus, this project will establish a global
control mechanism for synthetic cells to adapt their functioning to available
environmental resources and cues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.