* 1843727
* EAGER: Building a Network of Quantum Diamond Microscope (QDM) Facilities and Researchers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Roger Fu, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2020
* USD 265,566.00

This EAGER Award is to explore the scientific benefits that come from a network
of Quantum Diamond Microscope users. It will lay the foundations of a community
of users for a new transformative instrument for understanding of rock
magnetism. The quantum diamond microscope (QDM) offers sub-micrometer spatial
resolution in the imaging of magnetic fields, enabling the precise
identification and analysis of ferromagnetic carriers in natural rock samples.
The project will consist of the construction of two QDM setups to be distributed
to user facilities, making the QDM available for a wide range of users. This
team will also host two training workshops for the QDM recipient laboratories
and a 3-day community workshop where researchers with interest in magnetic field
imaging and its applications will gather to exchange ideas and define future
directions in the study of rock magnetism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will greatly increase the availability of a transformative instrument that can
be applied to understanding of, among many other subjects, the history of the
Earth's dynamo, the motion of tectonic plates through time, and the history of
precipitation in the Western US since the last glacial maximum. The scientific
research enabled by the QDM will improve understanding of paleoclimate and
pollution, both of which may be studied using high resolution magnetic field
imaging methods. The work will involve the training of a post-doctoral associate
as well as students at the graduate and undergraduate level in the use of a new
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.