* 1843332
* SBIR Phase I:  Universal Proteome Sample Preparation Kit Development
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Amber Lucas, IMPACT PROTEOMICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 02/29/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a protein sample preparation kit
that eliminates variability and provides researchers with the information they
need to find important protein drug targets and biomarkers. The high throughput
protein analysis methods of proteomics are having a significant impact on the
biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries, from the development of new
protein-based drugs to quality control monitoring and biomarker discovery to
clinical diagnostics. All proteomics applications require robust, repeatable and
automatable sample preparation methods. Currently, however, these methods are
not standardized. The lack of the standardization often leads to experimental
failure and unreliable results, which may require many rounds of experimental
repeats, costing time and money. Standardized protein sample preparation kits
will provide significant workflow savings, improve time to market, and
accelerate biomarker discovery and drug development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I project is to develop a universal
peptide isolation kit to serve the diverse needs of the proteomics community.
Currently, methods for sample preparation typically have more than a dozen
steps, are prone to peptide loss and bias, and require more than a day to
complete. Through the NSF I-Corps program, it was discovered that more than 70%
of researchers in academia and industry are unhappy with current protein sample
preparation methods. To address this need, a sample preparation kit that
increases the speed and efficiency of peptide sample preparation was developed.
The approach differs from current methods in three fundamental ways. First, all
manipulations will be done in solution in a single tube with half the number of
steps compared to existing protocols. Second, a fast, universal, and reversible
chemical tag is employed rather than relying on physical separation, preventing
sample loss or bias. Third, a stabilized derivative of trypsin will allow for
complete digestion of protein samples followed by efficient removal of intact
and fragmented trypsin, preventing contamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.