* 1843341
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative software and database tools for targeted genomics
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Jill Pecon-Slattery, CORNERSTONE GENOMICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of a unique cloud computing platform
with a novel database and bioinformatic software package to address the strong
demand for transformative foundational resources crucial to interpret the
biological function of DNA variation sequestered within and between genomes. The
goal is to target a broad scope of laboratories investigating human genomics and
disease, comparative and evolutionary genomics, systems biology, animal health
and veterinary sciences, and wildlife biodiversity and conservation. The product
will offer opportunities to advance cross-disciplinary research to keep pace
with the accelerating rate of DNA sequence variant discoveries driving the
extraordinary growth of the genomics industry. This vision is founded on the
continued rapid growth projections (in billions of dollars) for the genomics
market and the concomitant increase in the need for integrative tools and
services. The technology will allow customers to save time and research costs,
experience substantial increases in efficiency and accuracy, and explore, in
precise detail, complex gene networks and pathways.

The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I project is to resolve a critical
impasse in genomic workflow where inconsistent or unreliable identification of
DNA variant function prevents actionable discoveries. Using the customized suite
of bioinformatic tools provided by this technology development, the customer
will be able to interrogate the database for any gene or gene system of
interest, determine the normal range of DNA changes tolerated by the gene within
functional space, and screen their own data against this baseline to identify
variants causative in altered biological function and phenotypic traits. The
research objectives include: Compiling proprietary and novel DNA sequences from
thousands of genes, establishing and confirming the precise arrangement of these
gene sequences guided by shared common ancestry to create the database
framework, establishing a plan for product software and content to guide the
user through proper use of the database and interpret variant function, and
developing strategies to ensure product security and cloud-computing service
data visualization and display to protect the processing of user data when
passed within the software.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.