* 1843991
* SBIR Phase I:  A Microservices Approach To Low-Latency Process Interaction Through Distributed Ledgers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Jonathan Heinecke, BLOCKY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,989.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR)&lt;br/&gt;project is to make unique properties of Distributed
Ledger Technology (DLT) widely available to&lt;br/&gt;developers. In doing so,
the company will empower developers to create novel distributed services
with&lt;br/&gt;trustworthy and consistent shared state operations that will lead
to more transparent business&lt;br/&gt;and governance practices. In the Phase I
tools will lead to new innovative meat&lt;br/&gt;distribution businesses in
Bozeman, MT. In the long term, we aim to build the fundamental
tools&lt;br/&gt;for the growing ranks of blockchain developers, who need
powerful and easy-to-integrate tools&lt;br/&gt;that access and manipulate DLT
state. Ultimately, our suite of services will provide a
unified&lt;br/&gt;interface to multiple DLT implementations and facilitate the
trustworthy exchange of shared&lt;br/&gt;state among different applications to
create a wide and consistent view of world state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project proposes to create an ecosystem of tools to operate on
shared&lt;br/&gt;application state stored on DLTs and to roll out these tools as
they mature. The ultimate goal is&lt;br/&gt;to provide a unified API much like
that of leading cloud service providers, which consists of&lt;br/&gt;several
incrementally introduced services.&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the services planned
to provide are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Blocky Valve - A JavaScript API that simplifies DLT
read and write access.&lt;br/&gt;2. Blocky Pipes - A DLT data delivery
microservice based on message queues connected&lt;br/&gt;to Blocky
Valve.&lt;br/&gt;3. Blocky Loading Ramp - A continuous integration and
continuous delivery (CI/CD) service&lt;br/&gt;of smart contracts.&lt;br/&gt;4.
Blocky Cement - An oracle service for exchanging data across DLTs
using&lt;br/&gt;consensus-based provenance. Cement will also enable interaction
between smart&lt;br/&gt;contracts across different DLTs.&lt;br/&gt;5. Blocky
Crates - A database-like query interface to data stored on DLTs. Crates will
also&lt;br/&gt;enable smart contracts to interact with up-to-date shared
application state stored on&lt;br/&gt;DLTs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.