* 1843365
* SBIR Phase I:  A Biocide/Biocide-Resistant System for Microbial Contamination Control in Biomanufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Ouwei Wang, POW GENETIC SOLUTIONS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop technology that will enable robust,
contamination-free, continuous biomanufacturing. While biomanufacturing may be
one of the most technologically complex and profitable industries, the
underlying production process, batch fermentation, has not changed in decades.
In theory, continuous fermentation would decrease operational cost and increase
production capacity. However, owing to the high risk of contamination,
continuous fermentation is considered unreliable and is rarely used. The
proposed technology solves this issue and enables contamination-free, continuous
fermentation. Successful implementation of continuous fermentation facilitates
automated production and paves the way for future technological development in
continuous product purification and recovery. The reduced operational cost is
essential for the economic viability of bio-based commodity chemicals such as
bioplastics, as their market demand depends primarily on their price
competitiveness with petroleum-derived counterparts. The proposed technology
also eliminates the use of antibiotics in fermentation, which in turn alleviates
antibiotic misuse and promotes a positive environmental and health impact.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I project is to
explore the feasibility of using a biocide/biocide-resistant system to prevent
and treat microbial contamination during continuous biomanufacturing. Microbial
contamination in biomanufacturing processes is a major concern, as it results in
loss of productivity, time, and money. In addition, it restricts the production
mode to slow batch fermentation, and prohibits the implementation of continuous
fermentation. The proposed technology solves the contamination problem, as a
biocide will inhibit the invading microbial and viral contaminants and a
biocide-resistant enzyme will protect the processing hosts. The proposed Phase I
research will address the technical challenges by using classical molecular
biology and synthetic biology techniques. The first objective is to demonstrate
that the proposed technology will provide biocide resistance to bioplastics-
producing organisms while inhibiting the outgrowth of contaminants. The second
objective is to show that the proposed technology can be used to prevent and
treat contamination in continuous fermenters. The final objective is to fine-
tune the biocide/biocide-resistant system to demonstrate the technology will not
adversely affect the production yield and product quality in continuous
fermenters. If successful, future Phase II development will be conducted in
pilot and industrial-scale reactors to further optimize the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.