* 1843626
* SBIR Phase I:  A chemical assay kit for the high-throughput screening of chiral amine enantiomeric excess
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Justin Dragna, ENANTIOSENSE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to commercialize new sensor technologies that
enable the rapid measurement of the handedness of molecular mixtures. Like
screws and keys, many molecules possess a certain handedness that can be
important when interacting with living systems. This issue is vital to
pharmaceutical research, where one handed form of a drug may result in benefits
while the opposite form may cause harmful side effects. Consequently, measuring
the handedness of molecular mixtures is of paramount importance in modern
pharmaceutical research. However, conventional approaches to making these
measurements are often too slow for modern pharmaceutical discovery and
development research where high-throughput experiments on hundreds or even
thousands of samples per day are performed. This project aims to remove this
bottleneck by leveraging a recently introduced new instrument and
commercializing reagent kits that have been shown in academic laboratories to
achieve a much faster and simpler method for measuring the handedness of
molecular mixtures. Making this improved technology widely available to the
greater research and development community has the potential to streamline drug
development efforts at reduced cost and minimized waste production, which is
expected to increase profit margins and create new jobs in research, development
and manufacturing, resulting in substantial benefit to the health and economy of
the United States.

The innovation of this project comprises a series of optical sensors, developed
during a decade of fundamental research in the participating laboratories, which
will allow rapid eescreening of a variety of asymmetric reactions. The focus of
this unprecedented enterprise is to validate selected sensors against
pharmaceutically relevant compounds, determine the error of the optical assays
by comparison with traditional techniques such as chiral HPLC, to evaluate the
robustness in the presence of potential interferants, and to apply a sensor in
the analysis of an asymmetric reaction using multi-well plate technology. The
development of a user-friendly kit will include the testing of different methods
for the creation of pre-dispensed dried sensors that can be reconstituted
without leaving behind residues that might increase the error margin beyond a
few percent which is generally acceptable for high-throughput screening
applications. The final outcome will be a convenient mix-and-measure protocol
that enables rapid analysis of hundreds of small-scale asymmetric reaction
mixtures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.