* 1843306
* SBIR Phase I:  SafeLi: Graphene monoxide anodes for extreme batteries
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Carol Hirschmugl, CONOVATE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project arises from bringing new materials to market for making
improved rechargeable lithium ion batteries needed by the high-tech economy,
medicine, and the military (batteries are the second largest military
consumable). In today's world, everything, including medical devices (e.g.,
wireless implants and sensors), has an app; using apps requires batteries. This
project will produce "Safer Energy for the Wireless World"; the resulting
improved batteries will incorporate novel, lighter, and safer (no overheating)
anode materials that will charge faster and store more energy than current
versions. The new anode materials are estimated upon success to yield sales of
$1B during the first 10 years from selling the materials to battery
manufacturers to incorporate, initially, as composites in lithium ion battery
anodes, and, later, as the entire active anode. Broader societal impacts include
greater safety because the batteries do not overheat; lighter, more portable
devices with longer battery life and faster recharging time; reduced need for
backup batteries; and diverse STEM workforce development though applied research
and entrepreneurship training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to develop safer, more powerful ways to charge electronic devices by
translating fundamental research from university to industry. The opportunity
arises from an NSF-supported discovery of the first solid form of carbon
monoxide known, a two-dimensional crystal structure: graphene monoxide (GmO).
GmO and its first proposed application for anodes in lithium ion batteries are
patented. Knowledge gaps to be addressed include identifying tailored materials
for optimizing batteries for electronics, using theoretical and experimental
approaches to identify the maximum energy storage capacity for lithium
batteries, and determining the energy and power densities and safety properties
under normal and extreme operating conditions. The technology must be
demonstrated in 200-mAh pouch batteries, the first milestone needed for battery
manufacturers to consider adopting the innovation through licensing or sales.
The second milestone is to scale up materials to produce large quantities. The
overall goal is to commercialize the GmO material into an active anode or
additive material for extreme batteries. In sum, the project will yield
prototype batteries made from the new materials, optimize properties for
specific partner applications, simulate interactions between GmO and Li, and
identify pathways for scaleup of materials production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.