* 1843035
* SBIR Phase I:  3D Printing of Thermally Stable Composites for Injection Molding Tooling
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Joshua Martin, 3DFortify Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will enable Fortify to provide U.S.
manufacturers with a disruptive manufacturing technology to create low-volume
tooling parts with order of magnitude reductions in lead times and part price.
U.S. manufacturers rely on prototype and low-volume production parts that are
currently produced using aluminum soft tooling that need to be precision
machined. Prices for these small run parts can reach USD $10,000 or more per
tool, depending on complexity, with lead times extending weeks or months. This
results in high unit costs when parts are produced in low volumes. Industry data
suggests the market for outsourced prototype and low volume injection molded
parts with physical dimensions serviceable by Fortify technology may be as large
as USD $2.7 Billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will enable Fortify to create a thermal competitive
advantage to enable customer discovery in the field of low-volume injection
molding tooling. Despite the noise in the field of 3D printing, disrupting the
injection molding tooling industry has remained elusive due to the lasting need
for high strength, thermal stability, fatigue resistance, and smooth mold finish
in 3D printed molds. Fortify is uniquely positioned to address these technical
challenges by leveraging novel materials, patented manufacturing hardware, and
proprietary manufacturing software. Fortify prints ceramic-filled, high-
temperature resins that are locally textured by magnetic fields in customized
magnetic printers to produce optimum ceramic microstructures designed by
Fortify's INFORM software to maximize the thermomechanical performance of the
printed parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.