* 1843116
* SBIR Phase I:  Controlling plant pathogens with novel seed treatments based on nematode-produced ascarosides
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Murli Manohar, Ascribe Bioscience Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2020
* USD 224,923.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop a novel seed treatment technology
for plants, based on small naturally occurring molecules proven to activate
natural defenses against a wide range of agriculturally important pathogens. The
proposed innovation as a plant protectant is active at very low concentrations
(nM range), can be readily synthesized in large quantities, and is biodegradable
and non-toxic. To feed a projected world population of over 9 billion people in
2050, innovation will be required at all stages of crop production and
distribution. Annual application of more than 600 different chemical pesticides
(500 million Kg) costs $10 billion, and yet 37% of all crops are still destroyed
by pests (insects 13%, pathogens 12%, weeds 12%). By providing an alternative,
effective method for managing transmissible diseases in major crops, dependence
on existing agrochemicals such as copper, synthetic fungicides and antibiotics
will be reduced, as will the rate of resistance development. The goal is to
improve the economic and environmental sustainability of agriculture by reducing
the use of potentially harmful pesticides, and significantly enhance food
security worldwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR
project is to develop a novel control for plant pathogens by leveraging a class
of small, naturally occurring molecules that elicit specific immune responses in
plants. These small molecules are recognized by plants at extremely low
concentrations, and their perception has been demonstrated to result in defense
responses and enhanced resistance to viral, bacterial, oomycete, and fungal
pathogens, in Arabidopsis, tomato, potato, barley, and wheat. In order to bring
the innovation to market in the form of a commercial seed treatment, the
following must be demonstrated: a seed-coating formulation capable of long-term
stability and efficacy, without adverse effect on seed germination or natural
microbe/insect populations. The focus of the proposed Phase I project will be to
optimize synthesis of the compound of interest and develop a stable,
commercially viable formulation that is effective across a breadth of crops.
Following initial validation, product testing will advance to in vivo efficacy
testing in greenhouse and field trials. The seed treatment product developed
will establish the technical and economic feasibility of using small-molecule
signals to activate plant immune responses, and demonstrate their utility to
improve economic and environmental sustainability of
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.