* 1843390
* SBIR Phase I:  High-pressure Density-driven Separation Technology for Carbon Capture
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Syed Barizuddin, Liquid Carbonic L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2020
* USD 224,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the potential to deploy a powerful tool for carbon
capture. CO2-capture is the foundation of greenhouse gas mitigation. The high
cost of current processes for CO2-capture have prevented their widespread
deployment. High-pressure, Density-driven Separator (HDS) technology efficiently
and continuously captures CO2 from gas streams, including both flue gas and fuel
gas. An HDS module produces nearly Pure High-pressure CO2 (PH-CO2). HDS
technology has transformational operating expense enabled by innovative
strategies for compression, expansion, energy recovery, and subsequent use of
the dense and light fractions. An HDS module has no moving parts, membranes,
pressure swings or temperature swings. Therefore, HDS technology has the
potential for very low capital expense. These low costs allow access to
financial markets. Other revenue sources are also facilitated by low capture
cost. For instance, PH-CO2 is food grade, valued in excess of $100/ton. PH-CO2
is suitable for enhanced oil recovery. HDS technology separates CO2 from fuel
gas, producing a valuable high-pressure vapor, in addition to PH-CO2. HDS
technology dramatically reduces the CO2-capture cost and provides a purity that
enables a profitable B2B model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project
proposes to develop HDS technology. Quantitative metrics will be refined and
employed to develop detailed capital expense and operating cost models. Two
technical hurdles must be overcome to reduce these costs. These hurdles are also
opportunities for innovation. The first opportunity is to achieve sufficient
volumetric efficiency in the pressure vessel for commercial deployment. The
equilibrium state inside the HDS module is perfect separation. Increasing the
rate of approach to that equilibrium state reduces the size and cost of the HDS
module. This will be accomplished by exploiting the synergy between fluid state,
surface state, fluid motion, and gravity. This synergy coalesces CO2, allowing
its rapid separation from the remaining components of flue gas and fuel gas. The
second opportunity is to achieve sufficient overall process efficiency for
commercial deployment. The power required for compression determines operating
expense. Our strategy involves operating the near-isothermal cold compression
train and near-isothermal hot expansion train as a heat engine (an approximation
of the Ericsson cycle). In this manner, innovative gerotor compressors and
expanders work together with heat exchangers using waste heat to reduce or
eliminate operating costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.