* 1843112
* SBIR Phase I:  Grid-scale electricity storage from waste heat
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Levon Atoyan, Active Energy Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,901.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to significantly lower the cost and expand the number
of addressable markets for ice thermal energy storage. Cost effectively storing
energy is imperative to a sustainable future. Storage can provide reliable
access to power from intermittent renewable sources, increase the resiliency of
the grid to weather events or terrorist attacks, and increase the utilization
efficiency of existing assets, deferring costly upgrades. Today, ice thermal
storage systems help building owners shift cooling loads from costly peak hours
to when electricity is less expensive. Unfortunately the upfront cost of these
systems, driven by the large cost of the cooling coil used to generate ice,
prevents adoption from many users and has unduly restricted the number of
addressable markets for ice thermal storage. Elimination of ice buildup on the
cooling coil would reduce the size of the coil, and more importantly
significantly lower the cost of these systems. Low-cost ice thermal energy
storage could greatly improve the economics for long-duration energy storage
technologies such as pumped thermal energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project proposes to translate the discovery of surfaces with zero
ice adhesion into a cooling coil that can be integrated into a functioning ice
thermal energy storage system. In order to repel ice, these surfaces require
complete submersion in an immiscible oil phase, making coil geometry and overall
system development challenging. At the beginning of this project, various plate
and tube based cooling coil geometries will be systematically prototyped and
refined, measuring the freezing and melting heat transfer efficiencies.
Different formulations of the surface coating will be tested as well. The most
promising candidate geometries will be charged and discharged over multiple
cycles as part of an ice thermal energy storage system. The results from cycling
will be compared to conventional ice-on-coil technology using metrics such as
energy density and heat transfer efficiency. An ice shedding cooling coil, at
less than a third of the size of an ice-on-coil system, is expected to deliver
improved cooling performance. Demonstration of an ice shedding cooling coil in a
functioning ice thermal energy storage system will prove the technology?s
readiness to scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.