* 1843965
* STTR Phase I:  Powerless, Flexible Sensor Subfloor Mats from Natural Materials
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Xudong Wang, EWPanel LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2021
* USD 203,603.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project involves a low-cost, convenient, anonymous floor
occupancy analysis. This will be achieved by developing a powerless, flexible
subfloor sensor mat that can integrate with regular flooring products. If
implemented in buildings, the sensor mat will help raise space utilization,
improve occupant productivity and satisfaction, and inform dynamic layout
planning for organizational agility. This sensor mat will address the needs from
different parties in the small building ecosystem, including flooring
manufacturers, building system integrators, work space system providers,
architects and interior designers, and cooperations and businesses in commercial
buildings. Additionally, this thin film with high electrical output, if
successfully achieved in this project, will find great commercialization
potential in other applications, such as self-powered, wireless adhesive
wearable electronics, and implantable medical devices. This proposal also has an
environmental impact in that it reduces carbon footprint, promotes use of green
natural materials and generation of renewable energy.

The proposed project has the intellectual merits of addressing two key questions
that could determine the technical and commercial feasibility of the occupancy
sensor mat. First, how to create a sufficiently thin and flexible sensor mat
that has no impact on flooring installment and walking performance. Second, how
to raise the electrical output and energy generated from the sensor mat to the
level that is high enough to meet the requirements of signal resolution and
wireless transmission? Specific research tasks and methods include: natural
cellulosic materials chemical functionalization for electric property
engineering towards high power output; sensor mat design to effectively convert
footsteps to electricity within a confined mat thickness; integration of
wireless transmission units tailored for the sensor mat towards a self-powered
sensor with wireless connectivity. The final goal is to develop a powerless
sensor from which the electrical output and the energy generation will be
sufficient to sustain itself and to provide discernible data.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.