* 1843216
* STTR Phase I:  Enhancing IoT's Connected Device Capabilities using High-Performance Low-Power RRAM-based FPGAs
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Florian Solzbacher, ReRouting, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Technology Transfer
Research (STTR) Phase I project lays in its ability to enable reconfigurable
hardware acceleration in the Internet-of-Things (IoT). Users under constrained
power at the edge will be able to choose a new solution that can bring
acceleration, and enable datacenter like capabilities, and benefit from the
IoT's long-sought promise. Using Resistive Random-Access Memory (RRAM) to
develop a next-generation Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA), increasing
performance while reducing energy consumption at the sensor node level, is
possible. As already experienced in our data driven world, it is critical that
we improve our computing capabilities at the edge in order to gain in
responsiveness and increase our energy efficiency. With evermore data and
performance requirements to deliver on the consumer demands, innovative uses of
emerging memories are showing great promise and providing capabilities that will
help fulfill the IoT's potential. If fulfilled, this technology has the
potential to enable a whole set of data driven applications at the edge, such as
low-energy image recognition and learning in drones to operate longer and more
effectively or long-lasting medical implants with leading data aggregation and
reactiveness.

This Small Technology Transfer Research (STTR) Phase I project will aim to
commercialize a patented technology to realize a ultra-low-power Field
Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) based on Resistive Random-Access Memory (RRAM).
To handle the data explosion in Internet of Things (IoT) network, the industry
is moving towards increasing intelligent analysis capability for single IoT
devices. Tight power budget has become a critical road block: high-end
solutions, such as multicore CPUs, GPUs, can provide enough computing capability
but fail to meet the power budget, while low-power commercial products, such as
micro-controllers and low-power FPGAs, can satisfy power constraints but hardly
follow the increasing complexity in data analysis algorithms. This project aims
to develop a ultra-low-power FPGA that can offer high-performance data analysis
capability under IoT-level power limits. This project will prototype a FPGA chip
built around an innovative RRAM-based routing multiplexer design. We will also
release an associated software tool suite to support the implementation of
customer's applications on the technology. Compared to existing commercial
solutions, the proposed FPGA product is expected to demonstrate similar
computing capability as high-end FPGA solutions while satisfying an IoT power
budget (<1W).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.