* 1843330
* STTR Phase I:  Tuned Miniaturized Point-Field Detectors as Contactless Current Sensor for Post-silicon Power Electronics
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Homer Mantooth, Telli Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to introduce a fully
integrated current sensor with an order of magnitude performance improvement
over state-of-the-art technologies. The developed technology will enable more
reliable, efficient and compact power electronics systems. Power electronics is
an integral part of today's power delivery systems such as renewable energy
systems, electric vehicles, data centers and most consumer electronics. In these
applications, electric current information is often an essential parameter that
needs to be known and measured for control, diagnostic and prognostic purposes.
With advances in power electronic circuits with specific attention to high
frequency power converters, there is a need to investigate alternative
approaches and techniques to measure the current. These approaches should result
in availability of current sensors that have fast-response, are accurate, loss-
less, and preferably non-intrusive. The impact of such a sensor is to enable
systems and circuits that will be miniaturized and be made more efficient by
using wide bandgap semiconductors and high switching frequencies. Additionally,
the availability of current measurement information will lead to greater
reliability and prognostic capability. Applications include but are not limited
to power converters in electric vehicles and data centers.

This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I project seeks to demonstrate the
feasibility of a novel contactless, hybrid current sensor offering an order of
magnitude better performance than the state-of-the-art in capturing currents up
to and beyond 30 MHz for use in emerging high-frequency power converter
applications utilizing wide bandgap semiconductors. The proposed sensor combines
complementary magnetoresisor and Rogowski coil technology along with magnetic
concentrators into a single chip. By combining these previously underexplored
technologies in discrete current sensing would result in a non-invasive,
lossless current sensor for MHz converters, where today none exists. Phase I
objectives will address technical challenges in developing a chip-scale
integrated sensor, including miniaturized Rogowski coil design and magnetic
concentrator shape and material evaluation for signal amplification and
electromagnetic interference rejection. Design of the analog signal conditioning
circuits required for the integrated circuits are also part of this phase.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.