* 1843921
* SBIR Phase I:  Multivariate Shrinkage Sensor For Injection Molding
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,09/30/2020
* Rahul Panchal, LEONINE TECHNOLOGIES INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 09/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is that it addresses the
injection molding industry which generates over $100 billion in revenue in the
US alone. The proposed multivariate shrinkage sensor promises a leap forward
from the current use of in-mold pressure/temperature sensors for indirect
estimation of molded part dimensions and quality. Direct measurement of the
shrinkage along with pressure and temperature in situ from the proposed sensor
will enable improved process and quality control methods for injection molding
which will eliminate the burden of frequent post-molding inspections and allow
fully automated manufacturing. As a result, over 30 % of manufacturing cost and
time will be saved while achieving 100% quality assurance even for the parts
with tighter specifications. The proposed sensor will help heavily regulated
industries such as medical devices and automobile manufacturing in achieving
significant time reduction for process set-up and stabilization, and improvement
in parts quality while meeting stringent regulatory requirements. Each
percentage point improvement in productivity due to cycle time reductions, yield
improvements, and related automation corresponds to cost savings of more than $1
billion per year in the United States alone while reducing the energy
consumption and environmental waste related to molding, discarding, and
recycling of defective plastic parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research Phase I project provides a creative and original concept: a
multivariate design for measuring shrinkage along with pressure and temperatures
via a conventionally packaged device. Furthermore, knowledge and understanding
are expected to be advanced in the development and validation of improved on-
line models for estimating molded part shrinkage in real-time. Previous research
did not have access to in-mold shrinkage data and so propagated faulty initial
conditions throughout the shrinkage analysis. Due to the lack of direct
observability and controllability of the molded part dimensions, most molders
rely on the use of cavity pressure traces or part weight measurements as
estimators of the part dimensions. However, there still is no technology or
research available to monitor and predict the shrinkage on-line during
production to improve, to optimize and to control parts quality and processing
parameters without using expensive instrumentation. The outcome of this Phase I
project will fill this gap and develop a fully functional multivariate shrinkage
sensor which will enable measurement of molded product dimensions in situ prior
to ejection from the mold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.