* 1843794
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable Electrochemical Production Of Carbon Nanotubes From Carbon Dioxide
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Anna Douglas, SkyNano LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 12/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will address a critical bottleneck to widespread
advanced material use in commercial markets. Carbon nanotubes are advanced
supermaterials that have been at the forefront of technological innovation since
their discovery in the early 1990s, but limited commercial success has ensued
due to their high cost of production. Current use of carbon nanotube materials
is limited to a few industries capable of absorbing the high cost of research-
scale quantities of carbon nanotubes (defense applications, aerospace
manufacturers, and research institutions). Achieving scalable, lower-cost carbon
nanotube manufacturing processes will enable widespread applications such as:
advanced batteries with lower cost, weight, and improved longevity, tires with
longer lifetimes and increased fuel efficiency, and coatings enabling enhanced
functionality such as in the case of de-icing for aircrafts, spacecraft
vehicles, and drones. The societal impact of this advancement includes better
performing and more energy efficient devices for consumers without added cost.
The commercial impact of this technology will enable the significant effort
carried out in many market sectors to evaluate and understand the benefit of
carbon nanotubes to products, to be economically realized.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a
novel electrochemical liquid-phase growth method for carbon nanotube production,
which significantly lowers the cost of production for carbon nanotubes and
enables widespread commercial use of the materials. The largest bottleneck to
carbon nanotube utilization today is the high production cost that arises due to
numerous factors including low efficiency of chemical processes, high overhead
cost for scaling, and formation of toxic by-products that require additional
costs. These limitations have led to high prices for the materials that prohibit
their use in cost-sensitive markets, which rely on low-cost additives such as
carbon black. The research objectives of this SBIR project will demonstrate
feasibility of using a scalable catalyst preparation and deposition technique
for the production of carbon nanotubes through low-cost, environmentally-
beneficial electrochemical routes. To achieve this, we will utilize ambient
processing for catalyst preparation and a scalable electrochemical reaction
chamber that harnesses the precision of electrochemistry, sources the carbon
feedstock directly from air, and operates at extremely high energy efficiencies
(>90%). The anticipated technical results include a rapid and scalable growth
technique with minimized added cost from catalyst deposition without
compromising carbon nanotube quality.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.