* 1843748
* NSF-JST -RCN-India Workshop on Power System Resiliency and Distributed Energy Management. To Be Held in Mumbai, India January 14-15, 2019
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Vijay Vittal, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,536.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;The proposal supports an international workshop between
researchers from the U.S. Japan, Norway, and India on the fundamental scientific
issues related to power system resiliency and the integration of distributed
energy resources like photovoltaic solar resources, wind energy resources and a
variety of storage devices. Unlike conventional fossil fuel, hydroelectric or
nuclear fuel based electricity generation, distributed energy resources are
inherently uncertain and could significantly affect power system resiliency.
This workshop between researchers from four countries that have experienced
significant penetration of renewable resources will examine the critical issues
affecting power system resiliency due to the increased penetration of renewable
resources and identify key areas of collaborative research to arrive at
innovative solutions to enhance power system resiliency and reliability. The
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bombay, India, will host the two-day
workshop. The invitees to this workshop will be identified and invited by the
workshop organizing committee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The increasing integration
of spatially distributed renewable resources and storage devices and the
modernization of computing and communication systems have contributed to
increasing the complexity of interactions between constituent cyber and physical
layers of the power system. Nevertheless, the systematic utilization of large
data sets to inform distributed decision making-notable opportunities
attributable to the generational changes highlighted previously-can improve
resiliency, economy, operational efficiency, power quality, and availability.
The proposed workshop, will be organized in India in January 2019, will outline
the foundational science for power system resiliency and distributed energy
management systems. A unique feature of the meeting is that it will bring
together researchers from the US, Japan, India, and Norway; in this regard, it
is anticipated that technical discussions will result in solutions that have
global impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.