* 1843534
* SBIR Phase I:  NANOSTRUCTURED 3D CATALYTIC COATINGS FOR HIGH-EFFICIENCY POLLUTION CONTROL AND AIR PURIFICATION
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Elijah Shirman, METALMARK INNOVATIONS, PBC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,990.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to address the global challenge of pollution
abatement and air purification which have a profound impact on the environment,
health, and economy. Hundreds of billions of dollars are spent each year on
emission control activities, yet air pollution costs the global economy over
five trillion of dollars annually in welfare costs and is attributed to one in
every eight deaths. The design and performance of current industrial catalytic
air purification technologies is insufficient to treat the growing number of
airborne pollutants. Finding sustainable, cost-effective solutions to this
problem, and is becoming increasingly important in view of tightening
regulations. The technology we propose has a high commercialization potential
due to the fact that it is cost-effective, shows excellent long-term performance
and potential for scalable fabrication within an existing manufacturing
framework within the United States. Further, the founders of the company are
inventors of the technology and have exclusive licensing of the core IP.
Significantly, our demonstration of operating temperature reductions has been
well-received by industry as evidenced by findings from our customer discovery
effort through programs such as NSF I-Corps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses outstanding
challenges in catalytic converters, notably technical challenges associated with
cold start, durability, and high cost, which can be attributed to the use of
substantial amounts of platinum group metals, and reliance on the limited
reserves of these metals. Through highly controlled composition and nano-,
micro-, and macro- structuration, we have previously demonstrated dramatically
reduced precious metal content in a catalytic decomposition of known pollutants.
The research objectives of this SBIR project are to develop a scalable
deposition method of these advanced catalytic materials onto industrially
relevant substrates, to promote and accelerate their integration into commercial
products to tackle the growing problem of air pollution and greenhouse gas
emissions. The technical work will involve the synthesis of these materials and
modifications to the synthetic schemes in a way that will be compatible with
such large-scale deposition processes, as well as longevity, robustness, and
catalytic testing. It will require building equipment for the deposition.
Overcoming the technological challenges that are the subject of this SBIR
Project will facilitate translation of the nanostructured materials to a broad
range of catalytic applications related to pollution abatement and air
purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.