* 1843518
* SBIR Phase I:  Incorporation of a new adjuvant system to produce a thermally stable, orally administered Diphteria-Tetanus-Pertussis vaccine
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Garry Morefield, VAXFORM, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will test the feasibility of incorporating a novel
vaccine technology to diphtheria, tetanus, and acellular pertussis (DTaP)
vaccine to produce a thermostable and orally administered formulation. Vaccines
are one of the best investments in global public health and are estimated to
save 2-3 million lives per year and protect more than 100 million lives from
illness and disability. This project proposes to use a novel vaccine technology
platform that targets immune cells in the intestine, enducing a broad immune
response, and retains stability at room temperature. This technology has the
potential to minimize dependence on the cold-chain and trained medical
professionals to administer the vaccine, which are barriers to full vaccine
coverage. Additionally, it has potential to increase uptake of vaccine booster
doses for adults, with convenience of self-administration and reduced anxiety
with no needles. Finally, successful formulation of an oral DTaP vaccine would
open the doors to other antigens to be delivered orally. This technology can
significantly improve national health, which is one of the missions of NSF.
Additionally, switching vaccines to thermostable, oral delivery form is very
cost-effective and will alleviate the burden and cost of cold-chain and
professional to administer the vaccines.

This SBIR Phase I project will test the application of a novel delivery
technology to the DTaP vaccine. The highly innovative delivery platform consists
of a novel adjuvant, a C-type lectin (CTL) receptor ligand with aluminum
hydroxide that targets mucosal immune cells for a strong synergistic boosting of
broad immune response, and microencapsulation of the vaccine to resist the
strong acidic environment of the stomach. This technology can be incorporated
into existing or new vaccines enhancing stability and allowing oral delivery.
The first goal of this project includes incorporation of CTL receptor ligand to
the DTaP vaccine and applying enteric microencapsulation to the particles to
protect the vaccine from low pH. Extensive testing and experiments will be
conducted to obtain the optimal formulation of the final oral vaccine. The
second goal will be to test and compare the potency of the newly formulated
vaccine with a commercially available DTaP vaccine in mice. The final goal will
be to test and compare the stability of both vaccines at high temperatures.
Successful completion of all objectives will provide a great base for commercial
feasibility of the technology. This technology has the potential to be
incorporated on any vaccine that can benefit from a thermostable and orally
delivery platform.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.