* 1843314
* SBIR Phase I:  AbGrab Laparoscopic Lifting Device
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Jared Greer, Lapovations, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project supports development of an innovative device for use
in laparoscopy (minimally invasive surgery of the abdomen). Laparoscopic
injuries most often occur during primary port entry, before visualization into
the abdominal cavity is possible. Injuries are primarily to the bowel or
vasculature and are very serious, with mortality rates up to 5% for bowel
injuries and up to 15% for vascular injuries. To minimize this risk, surgeons
lift the abdominal wall away from the vital organs that could be inadvertently
punctured during primary port entry. Two lifting techniques are commonly
utilized, but one is unreliable and the other invasive. The product in
development utilizes suction instead of mechanical force to grasp the abdominal
wall and is more reliable and less invasive than the current techniques.
Projected benefits include better surgical outcomes, increased surgeon and
patient satisfaction, and decreased patient post-op pain. Successful development
of this product is forecasted to create 40 new jobs by 2023 with an annual
payroll exceeding $2.5M. As a direct result of this Phase I grant, this
innovative product can reach the U.S. market in 2019 and become the gold
standard for abdominal wall lifting devices in the next five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical innovation in this proposed project is
a novel abdominal lifting device for use in laparoscopic surgery that is more
reliable and less invasive than current lifting techniques. The novelty of the
innovation is affirmed with one issued patent and an additional pending patent
application. The device takes advantage of existing suction available in every
operating room. This suction allows for the non-invasive attachment of the
lifting device to the abdominal wall. Current lifting techniques include
manually grasping the abdominal wall and using perforating towel clips. Manual
grasp does not always provide a secure grip and perforating towel clips
invasively perforate abdominal wall tissue to provide a handle by which to lift
and elevate. The technical goals of this project focus on creating a minimum
viable product produced with biocompatible materials using standard good
manufacturing practices for FDA Class I medical devices. Production quality
samples will be produced with five different materials to determine which
performs best in terms of strength, reliability, and flexibility. These samples
will also be used to determine if any further design changes are needed prior to
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.