* 1843943
* SBIR Phase I:  Modified Finned Tube Heat Exchangers for Economically Purifying Produced Water
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Gary Katz, Katz Water Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,994.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project involves improving oil and gas sustainability. To
achieve that goal, we are proposing purifying produced water at the wellsite
using waste natural gas to reduce disposal costs, carbon footprint and human
induced seismicity from disposal wells. This process is enabled by patented
equipment that fundamentally changes thermal distillation by performing the
entire process inside a heat exchanger to reduce equipment and energy costs. In
Texas, using the amount of gas that is flared annually, the proposed X-VAPTM
system can theoretically purify a significant percentage of U.S. produced water
problem of 33 billion barrels in 2020. The brine discharge from the purification
process will be concentrated into specific densities to be recycled as a
drilling fluid. This new circular economy will provide environmental benefits by
reducing the need for large diesel water trucks to move the source water,
dispose the produced water and deliver heavy brine for drilling. Society will
benefit with a new renewable source of fresh water and reduce the need for oil
and gas producers to compete with farmers and ranchers for increasingly scarce
fresh water resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes
to prove the X-VAPTM thermal distillation system can fundamentally improve
thermal distillation by reducing equipment costs and energy requirements. Before
this patented invention, the entire thermal distillation including the
distillation and separation from contaminates has never been performed inside a
heat exchanger. The unique design provides a removable spring water tray and
distillation column to address maintenance issues including scaling in the
field. Our team of industry-experienced engineers will further test, improve and
validate the existing thermal distillation prototype by performing prototype lab
experiments and coordinated simulations to calibrate and improve equipment
designs (Phase I). These novel simulations will need to be calibrated against
coordinated prototype laboratory tests to achieve a 90% agreement between
simulations and laboratory tests. This testing data and correlated simulations
will be utilized to scale the prototype design to efficiently handle large
volumes of produced water typically encountered at oil and gas well sites. The
proposed research and simulation testing will validate the patented system and
create a proposed program for customer field testing prior to commercialization
(Phase II).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.