* 1843049
* SBIR Phase I:  Robust autonomy for robotics-based data collection in surface water environments
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Jeffrey Laut, Manifold Robotics Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project lies in the increase in efficiency and reduction
in cost of gathering information in surface water environments using unmanned
surface vehicles (USVs). USVs have the potential to increase accessibility to
bodies of water, enhance coverage, and make data collection safer by removing
humans from the task. However, to fully realize the potential of USVs for
gathering information, a level of autonomy with minimal need for human
supervision and intervention is required. The development of this technology
will open the door to the pervasive use of USVs for environmental data
collection, and ultimately benefit society through: i) more information upon
which to base decisions about resource management and environmental policy; ii)
higher frequency of data collection activities through reduced cost; and iii)
increased safety by keeping human personnel out of harsh
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will lay the foundation for a transformative approach to
environmental data collection in surface waters. The intellectual merit of this
project lies in addressing technical challenges that will enable unmanned
surface vehicles (USVs) to effectively navigate autonomously in complex surface
waters that may contain a range of diverse obstacles, which would otherwise be
inaccessible or at best require a high degree of human supervision. This will be
achieved by advancing the state-of-the-art in computer vision and machine
learning toward intelligent obstacle characterization. The proposed framework
interprets images or video of obstacles to extract salient features, such as
flexibility or rigidity, through the innovative use of machine learning,
dimensionality reduction, and tools borrowed from the analysis of collective
behavior. This extra layer of information provided through the proposed
framework represents a significant advancement in computer vision, which offers
direct benefits to environmental monitoring and data collection by empowering
USVs with new unmanned capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.