* 1843789
* SBIR Phase I:  Thermal Drawing of Hybrid Organic-InorganicMulti-Material Dielectric Filters
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Esmaeil Banaei, Everix, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 10/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide high-performance light filtering
at a level that potentially affects all people in the world. Inexpensive high-
performance light filters allow for early detection of cancer and infection by
bringing the highest-precision technologies such as fluorescence microscopy and
sensing to portable, consumer diagnostic devices. They also make sensors in
self-driving cars and other intelligent devices of the future to detect objects
in the surroundings more accurately by eliminating the undesired light noise
from the ambient and focusing on the target frequencies of light only. Batteries
of future mobile devices may also last up to 20% longer due to more efficient
light energy management in display units that become possible with low-cost,
large-scale optical filters.?Finally,?the anticipated lower manufacturing cost
at high volume will allow for more high-tech manufacturing jobs to remain in the
US.

The proposed project will establish the technical feasibility of using a novel
multi-material, micro- and nano-layered film production process in order to
produce visible and near-infrared thin-film optical filters. The time and cost
requirements of conventional, deposition-based production techniques of such
filters are a significant barrier to market growth and commercial acceptance of
their broad range of uses. In order to address this market gap, this project
will investigate the elements necessary for consistent production of filters
made of hybrid organic/inorganic materials using the novel process of thermal
drawing. This investigation will cover methods of integration and handling of
hybrid organic-inorganic materials in the thermal drawing process as well as
understanding and controlling fluidic instabilities at interfaces to obtain
filter uniformity and integrity. The results of the proposed research will
determine whether the novel thermal drawing process, in conjunction with
developed materials and handling techniques, can reliably generate high-
performance visible and near infrared filters at scale.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.