* 1843551
* STTR Phase I: Sustained Delivery of Peptides with Inverse Flash Nanoprecipitation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Robert Pagels, Optimeos Life Sciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project aims to pioneer a novel approach for the sustained
delivery of peptide therapeutics using nano-composite microparticles. Peptide
therapeutics tend to suffer from rapid enzymatic degradation and clearance, with
half-lives on the order of minutes, and require frequent injections. The goal of
a sustained release formulation is to reduce the frequency of injections by
slowly releasing the therapeutic over a period of weeks to months. This will
result in improved patient compliance and quality of life. Patient non-
compliance is an economic burden that is estimated to cost the healthcare system
over $100 billion/year. The lack of commercial success of existing sustained
release technologies is due to low loading efficiencies, lack of controlled
release at higher loading, and complex manufacturing. These limitations can be
overcome with the newly-developed inverse Flash NanoPrecipitation (iFNP) process
to produce nano-composite microparticles. This project aims to develop and test
a once-monthly injectable formulation of a peptide therapeutic for type 2
diabetes that is currently injected daily. This research will aid in the
understanding of the fundamental materials science and engineering principles
that control therapeutic release from nano-composite microparticles. The rules
for controlling release will apply broadly to other peptides, and this research
will help to more rapidly develop future long-acting formulations.

Current methods to produce peptide-loaded microparticles suffer from low drug
loadings and poor encapsulation efficiencies, two of the most important factors
for commercial viability. In contrast to existing methods, the iFNP technology
allows for the assembly of nanoparticles with peptide loadings greater than
50wt% and encapsulation efficiencies greater than 90% in a fully scalable
process. The nanoparticles are then assembled into microparticles to create the
final sustained release formulation. Each drug-containing pore inside the
microparticle is surrounded by a dense hydrophobic polymer layer which allows
for therapeutic loadings 10x higher than competing technologies. The iFNP
process has been demonstrated on a number of proof-of-concept molecules. In this
project, iFNP will be used to produce a formulation of a peptide for diabetes
therapy with a month-long release profile. The first goal of this project is to
develop an understanding of the physical parameters that control the peptide
stability and release. Supporting this goal, the peptide will be formulated with
polymers of varying glass transition temperatures and degradation rates, and the
release profiles will be measured in vitro. The efficacy of the optimal in vitro
formulation will then be tested in a rat model. These studies are an important
step in developing a commercial product that can positively impact patient care.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.