* 1843025
* EAGER: Type II: Deep Learning and Combinatorial Algorithms for Inorganic Crystal Structure Prediction
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Sanguthevar Rajasekaran, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2022
* USD 299,999.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports research and education
involving a new collaboration kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon event focused on
developing artificial intelligence methods to discover new materials or identify
specific materials with desired properties for an application. Methods involving
computation, materials data, and the tools of data science offer the potential
to find or design a material with desired properties much faster and at lower
cost than traditional methods used by materials scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the research team will develop novel
machine learning techniques to mine knowledge from various publicly available
databases on materials and their properties. The knowledge thus gained can be
utilized for material selection and design. The team will focus first on using
the methods of data science and materials data from a large community repository
obtained from using computers and theory to calculate the energy needed to form
a material from its constitutive elements. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the
techniques developed in this project will be coded as software for different
computers. Software will be released as open source codes to the materials
science and data science communities via a number of mechanisms including the
GitHub. This project will also provide educational opportunities to graduate and
undergraduate students and a first-hand research experience in data analysis for
materials science. Results of this project will be incorporated in appropriate
undergraduate and graduate courses. Strong efforts will be made to include
minorities and women. Results of this project will be disseminated widely via
publications in journals and international
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award
supports research and education involving a new collaboration kindled at the
MATDAT18 Datathon event focused on developing deep learning predictors for
formation energies and other materials properties. Large databases of computed
material properties, such as The Materials Project and AFLOWLIB developed under
Materials Genome Initiative, host properties of tens of thousands of materials.
They are primarily employed to screen materials for various target applications
such as photocatalysis and battery materials. Such databases can also be
utilized to develop deep learning-based predictors of materials properties.
These predictions are expected to be more accurate than predictions made using
traditional machine learning (ML) techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Even cutting
edge conventional ML methods such as Gradient Boosting or Random Forest of Trees
have limited capacity, or the ability to learn, when compared to multi-layer
deep artificial neural networks employed in deep learning to mine vast data. In
this project the research team aims to develop a deep learning predictor for
formation energy of crystals. The investigators also propose to develop other
relevant combinatorial algorithms for solving this problem. Formation energy,
which is the energy difference between the crystal and the constituent elements
in their atomic form, is one of the most reliable properties available from
these databases. The focus of this project is on fast and highly accurate
prediction of formation energies and stability of materials by utilizing the
superior capacity of deep learning systems and other algorithms to learn from
big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will deliver a publicly accessible
cyber infrastructure implementing a deep learning system capable of predicting
formation energies for inorganic materials with an accuracy that is vastly
superior to that of the predictors built with traditional ML models, and new
forms of chemical representations of materials that can be reused to predict
other properties of materials. One of the challenges in the employment of deep
learning techniques is in the large training times taken by these algorithms.
The research team plans to address this challenge with a variety of algorithmic
innovations including novel parallel training algorithms. The investigators plan
to employ a number of parallel architectures including CPU clusters and
GPUs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.