* 1843833
* SBIR Phase I:  Exploration of Plasma Activated Water Systems in the Dairy Industry
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Cable Durham, Ozonovation Corp
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2021
* USD 224,828.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project centers on the possibility opened by plasma-activated
water in dairy sanitation. Plasma activated water has several advantages: it is
reusable and reduces the need to buy, store, and dispose of chemicals, it will
not face antimicrobial resistance, unlike chemicals, and could be a faster
disinfectant. In addition to replacing chemical disinfectants, plasma activated
water could prove to be fast enough to allow for disinfecting the milking unit
in-between individual cows, which should reduce the spread of mastitis within a
herd, reducing the farmer's costs in terms of medicine, increased labor, and
culling. By using plasma activated water as part of a milking system, cleaning
could be automated as well as target spores in farm environments. The resulting
reduction in costs, infection rate, manual labor &amp; strain, and increase in
milk quality, could revolutionize the dairy industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase 1 project proposes to research a method whereby plasma activated
water replaces chemical disinfectants used in dairy milking machines. The dairy
industry is facing two major problems relating to milking machines: first, a
manual labor shortage, and secondly an ever-present threat of mastitis, an
infection estimated to cost the industry $1B annually. These two problems come
to a head at the milking machine, as current methods require cows to be manually
cleaned before milking. The goal of this project is to explore whether plasma
activated water could be an effective replacement for teat dips, aiming to
design a self-cleaning milking attachment for existing machines, and clean the
cows with PAW prior to milking. In Phase I, the focus will be on building a
basic prototype to check sanitation capabilities, and compatibility with a farm
environment. Future research would include a longer-term study of animals and
track infection rates before and after.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.