* 1843519
* SBIR Phase I:  Evaluating ADFMR magnetometers for portable, non-invasive functional bioimaging
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Dominic Labanowski, SONERA MAGNETICS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,996.00

This SBIR Phase I project examines the feasibility of using magnetic sensors
based on Acoustically Driven Ferromagnetic Resonance (ADFMR) for neurological
imaging. Information about brain activity is critical to the diagnosis and
treatment of a variety of disorders including epilepsy, traumatic brain injury,
and Alzheimer's disease. The most powerful non-invasive technique for measuring
brain activity, magnetoencephalography (MEG), uses magnetometers that require
liquid helium cooling and magnetic shielding to operate. Due to these
requirements, current MEG systems are large and expensive, limiting their
adoption and accessibility. ADFMR sensors could allow for the measurement of
biomagnetic fields without the need for cryogenics and magnetic shielding,
dramatically reducing the size, cost, and power consumption of such systems. The
portability of this improved technology would allow for functional neuroimaging
outside of the carefully controlled imaging suites where it is possible today.
This could allow for diagnosis of previously unreachable patients (ie. in the
ICU, operating room, or ambulance) as well as the development of new uses for
this technology (ie. long-term monitoring, scanning during movement). This
improved, portable MEG could also enable the first practical, portable brain-
computer interface ? applicable across a wide variety of applications in both
defense and consumer sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
investigates the ability for ADFMR sensors to measure extremely small magnetic
fields, such as those generated by the human brain. The ADFMR phenomenon has
been shown to be a much more power and size efficient alternative to traditional
methods of exciting ferromagnetic resonance, allowing for its use as a sensing
mechanism for chip-scale magnetometers. In the proposed program, a number of
methods to improve the performance of current ADFMR devices will be
investigated. First, a compact model will be developed to allow for fast
modeling of ADFMR devices and their associated detection circuitry. Using the
results of this model, devices will be fabricated in order to experimentally
validate various mechanisms for the reduction of 1/f noise in the detector
circuitry and for the optimization of the ADFMR absorption profile for maximum
sensitivity to applied magnetic fields. These sensor elements will initially be
tested using standard benchtop characterization equipment. Following a benchtop
demonstration, challenges in miniaturizing the full sensor system will be
addressed by developing fully integrated magnetometer
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.