* 1843244
* SBIR Phase I:  Single-molecule field-effect transistor arrays for multiplexed genomic identification of infectious diseases
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Steven Warren, QUICKSILVER BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research Project (SBIR) project is the development of a platform for pathogen
identification and other genomic applications that achieves rapid, sensitive,
multiplexed single-molecule detection. The genomic diagnostics market is poised
to grow to $40 billion by 2021. The goal of this platform will be to offer
multiplexed detection of more than 1,000 pathogens, allowing accurate point-of-
care diagnosis of infectious diseases. Other genomic applications that also are
possible include assessment of the microbiome or monitoring opportunistic
infections in pulmonary diseases. In addition, the platform has the potential
for use in genomic sequencing, a market that is expected to reach $9 billion by
2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I project
is to develop a highly multiplexed, bioelectronic, label-free assay platform
capable of real-time, label-free detection of thousands of nucleic acid targets
without amplification. This will be accomplished through the use of nanoscale
single-molecule field-effect transistors (smFETs) on a complementary metal-oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) integrated-circuit platform, which fully leverages the
economies of scale of modern semiconductor manufacturing. The initial target
application for this technology is multiplexed pathogen identification at the
point-of-need. This project will bring the technology to wafer-scale
manufacturing, which will both improve device quality and lower the per device
cost of manufacture, and demonstrate proof-of-concept for genomic detection
(without amplification) on clinical samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.