* 1843807
* SBIR Phase I:  PeTeS: Personalized Text Simplification For English Language Learners
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Yevgen Borodin, Charmtech Labs LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to develop a novel text simplification
technology that will personalize text to the reading level of students. There is
a demand for such tools in inclusive and integrated K- 12 classrooms to cater to
the needs of students with varying reading levels. This is especially pertinent
to English language learners (Els), international students, and Special
Education students with learning disabilities such as dyslexia, ADHD, and other
cognitive impairments that impede their reading abilities. Existing tools offer
one-size-fits-all solutions offering no control over the simplification process.
The proposed Personalized Text Simplifier (PeTeS) will adapt texts to the
reading levels of individual students, thereby filling a much-needed gap in the
marketplace. With over 60% of U.S. K-12 students reading below grade level, the
broader impact of the proposed technology will be in improving the literacy of a
diverse population. The expected outcomes of using PeTeS will be improved
vocabulary acquisition and improved reading and comprehension of texts by ELs
and international students. Using PeTeS for reading may lead to better grades
and higher graduation rates. PeTeS will also save teachers time on not having to
explain texts or translate for students. PeTeS, will complement the instructor
and provide additional support to ELs and international students, especially, in
content areas, where these students have very little
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed PeTeS is envisioned to be an adaptive
reading assistant for personalizing instruction. The key innovation of PeTeS is
in the application of natural language processing algorithms to perform
automatic text simplification to dynamically meet specific reading levels -
simplification being defined as an adaptation of any given text in a way that
maximizes the likelihood that the student will understand its content. The key
idea here is to replace a word that is presumed to be not known by the student
with a word that is presumed to be known, i.e., the replacement criteria is the
student?s knowledge and not the word complexity. Towards that, the proposed
PeTeS technology will maintain a student knowledge model representing the
reading level of the student. PeTeS will rely on the model not only to simplify
the text to the student's level and improve comprehension, but also to challenge
the student to learn unfamiliar words while reading whatever they need to
read.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.