* 1843743
* STTR Phase I:  DDevelopment of a Transparent, Near-Ultraviolet Photovoltaic Power Source for Wireless Operation of Smart Windows and Internet-of-Things Devices
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Yueh-Lin (Lynn) Loo, Andluca Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is a transparent photovoltaic technology that
converts near-ultraviolet (NUV) light into point-of-use power for dynamic
'smart' windows. Energy use in buildings represents roughly 40% of total U.S.
energy demand. It is projected that over half the buildings that will be in use
in 2050 are already built. Retrofitting existing buildings with smart windows
that regulate/monitor sunlight transmission could reduce building energy
consumption by 10 - 40% and represents a $64B total addressable market, but is
presently prohibitively complex and labor intensive. Transparent, NUV solar
cells will simplify smart glass/film adoption by obviating the need for external
wiring, thereby catalyzing deployment of smart window technologies in existing
buildings to increase energy efficiency and enhance occupant health and
productivity. Similarly, IoT smart devices/sensors promise to make the built
environment more efficient by giving users more control over appliances,
information, and energy use. Transparent NUV solar cells can provide point-of-
use power to in-window IoT devices/sensors without altering aesthetics. For the
photovoltaic community, the operation physics and performance of the NUV
photovoltaic technology developed through this program will be of broader
interest, as NUV wavelengths are inefficiently harvested by conventional
photovoltaics.

The proposed project will explore a photovoltaic technology that selectively
absorbs near-ultraviolet (NUV) light - energy that is otherwise wasted - and
efficiently converts it into high-voltage power. Solar cells harvesting NUV
photons could satisfy the unmet need of powering smart windows monolithically
without competing for visible or near-infrared photons that the windows seek to
regulate or imposing design constraints on window aesthetics. First-generation
NUV solar cells exhibit power scalability with area, and single-junction
photovoltages exceeding 1.6 V (record for thin-film PV). This Phase I project
aims to (1) translate NUV solar technology from rigid glass to a flexible
substrate, and (2) demonstrate use of low-cost transparent electrode
alternatives. These breakthroughs will allow for facile integration of NUV solar
cells with smart windows for self-powered operation and intelligent management
of the solar spectrum, with NUV photons powering the regulation of visible and
near-infrared photons for natural lighting and heating purposes, respectively.
Additionally, the aesthetically-discreet nature of flexible, transparent NUV
solar cells can enable remotely-powered internet-of-things (IoT) smart
devices/sensors. Accordingly, funding for this Phase I project will produce a
flexible, transparent NUV solar cell prototype for field-testing with smart
window and IoT device technologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.