* 1843230
* SBIR Phase I:  Manufacturable Implementation of Thin Glass for Next Generation Electronics Packaging
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Shelby Nelson, MOSAIC MICROSYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is that enabling processing thin glass
substrates for next generation communications and packaging needs will mean
faster communications with improved power efficiency. Society has an ever-
expanding need for data, due to technologies such as mobile communications,
cloud computing, the Internet of Things (IoT), and the shift of communication to
higher frequencies (1s-10s of GHz). As the frequency increases, traditional
material choices, such as silicon, can experience very high losses and therefore
there is increasing interest in using insulating materials, such as glass, to
improve power efficiency. Similarly, as device size is also important, ability
to process thin materials is also critical. Successful completion of this work
will enable cost-effective processing of thin glass substrates and enable next
generation communication initiatives impacting commercial, military and
industrial markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project is proposed to enable processing thin glass substrates in
high volume environments. There has been substantial interest in using glass for
next generation RF and packaging solutions for many years due to its
advantageous material properties, and scalability. Of particular interest is the
dielectric properties, which provide low electrical loss solutions relative to
incumbent materials such as silicon. Furthermore, the smoothness, hermetic
properties and scalability of glass provides additional advantages over
materials such as ceramics and organic laminates. There has been a lot of
progress in establishing processes to form thin glass and make precision through
glass vias (TGV), as well as demonstrating advantaged functional performance in
a lab environment. There has been a challenge to establish the ability to scale
to high volume for thin glass solutions due to gaps in the supply chain. This
SBIR project will establish a process that enables a carrier solution using a
silicon carrier that will allow processing of glass in existing infrastructure
making thin glass solutions available to the current well established and
capable supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.