* 1843476
* STTR Phase I:  Robotics Launchpad - A Design-Driven Educational Robotics Framework
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Poyu Chuang, Mechanismic Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 224,959.00

This STTR Phase I project aims to bring together computational thinking,
mechanism design, and design process to create a new framework for design-driven
robotics education for K-12 schools and camps. This work would result in a
platform for 1) teaching students Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) topics and 2) providing them critical hands-on experience
designing, prototyping, and programming machines. By enabling students to
exercise their creativity via an intuitive design interface and a minimalist
novel robot kit, this project advances the students' ability to innovate and
invent machines and robots. Driven by a need to keep pace with the evolving
techno- and socio-economic requirements and remain competitive, schools and
camps are increasingly adopting STEM and Robotics programs and products. This
framework would fill that void that currently exists in the educational market.
This project is closely aligned with the NSF's mandate to support development of
a strong STEM workforce. The proposed design-driven educational robotics
framework has the potential to fulfill these needs, improve public scientific
literacy and engagement with science and technology, and positively impact the
U.S. educational robotics market, which is expected to grow to $2.7 billion by
2021.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to develop a novel
design-driven educational robotics framework encompassing 1) a modular,
customizable, and compatible with off-the shelf electronics hardware kit
consisting of rigid and compliant parts for rapid prototyping of robot
structures and mechanisms, 2) a multi-modal mobile app for synthesis and
simulation of robot motions, 3) a web-based CAD interface for designing users'
custom robot parts that interface seamlessly with the kit, and 4) instructional
material and curriculum for middle and high-schools. The hardware would provide
a suite of planar parts with unique design capabilities to support creation of
3D geometry of robots and structures. The novel structural elements would give
rise to a new method of enforcing geometric and kinematic constraints and
provide flexibility in choice of material and manufacturing process. While the
new connection methods are much more intuitive and simpler, they also closely
mirror the way engineered structures are created in practice. The mobile app
based on the latest mechanism synthesis research imbued with a multi-modal
graphical user interface will allow creation of robot assemblies and their
motions before constructing their corresponding physical models and provide
necessary skills and experience in the design process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.