* 1843690
* SBIR Phase I:  Reducing the cost of biomanufacturing and biopharmaceutical production with smart biocatalysts that can be incorporated into continuous processing technologies
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Erika Milczek, Curie Co. Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to develop an enzyme immobilization
platform to be used in the production of biopharmaceuticals and other
biomanufacturing processes to reduce the timeline and cost associated with
discovering and manufacturing biotherapeutics. Biopharmaceutical sales have
soared in recent years and healthcare authorities have increased pressure on
pharmaceutical manufacturers to reduce the cost of biologics leaving
pharmaceutical engineers to focus on reducing bioproduction costs. To accomplish
this goal, pharmaceutical companies are aggressively investigating continuous
processing technologies to reduce the capital and other costs associated with
biopharmaceutical manufacture. The immobilization platform described in this
proposal will provide a technology that is compatible with continuous processing
strategies to reduce the timeline and cost associated with discovering and
manufacturing biotherapeutics. In addition, this platform has the potential to
reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of biomanufacturing processes across
several other industries including food, leather, and textiles.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I project is to
develop pH responsive immobilized enzymes for the production of
biopharmaceuticals. There are three key technical challenges associated with
this project: The immobilized-enzyme must demonstrate pH responsive behavior
compatible with biologics manufacture (pH 6-7); mass transfer of protein
substrates must be comparable to the native enzyme; and extended shelf-life of
the immobilized-enzyme is required for long-term storage. To mitigate these
challenges, this project aims to covalently bind an enzyme to a pH responsive
polymer that is formulated to have reversible solubility near neutral pH. The
solubility of the immobilized-biocatalyst can be tightly controlled within a
specified pH range allowing for continuous processing and facile purification of
the biotherapeutic product. Poor mass transfer often results from immobilizing
biocatalysts on solid supports. These challenges are further exaggerated in
bioconjugation reactions because the coupling partner, a protein, is generally
more affected by sterics than small molecules. Therefore, fabrication of the
solid support will be explored to produce resins of varied size, morphologies,
and dissolution properties that are compatible with macromolecule
functionalization. Additionally, the immobilized enzyme generated in this
project can be utilized under soluble conditions, which combines the positive
attributes of both immobilization and soluble enzyme catalysis. The final
challenge of developing a commercially viable shelf-life of the catalyst will be
addressed through development of novel drying protocols. Shelf-stable
immobilized enzymes will be developed so that inventory can be maintained
without requiring long lead times for catalyst
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.