* 1843693
* SBIR Phase I:  Interactive Podcast Platform For Listening Comprehension
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Meredith Halpern-Ranzer, TINKERCAST, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2019
* USD 224,950.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project intends to
enhance listening comprehension skills via an innovative interactive learning
platform that aligns with Common Core State Standards for listening
comprehension and uses best practices in game-based learning. In 2017, 63% of
U.S. 4th graders were reading below proficiency. Improving a students' level of
listening comprehension in elementary school is the single greatest influence on
his or her reading comprehension. Common Core State Standards now include
guidelines for listening comprehension starting in kindergarten. However, most
listening activities involve teachers reading aloud followed by written
assessments that require decoding and encoding. Narrative audio content models
fluency and prosody and helps bridge the gap between word recognition and
comprehension without relying on decoding and encoding text. There are no other
listening platforms designed for elementary schools and therefore there is a
tremendous opportunity for this program to have significant commercial success.
The project's long-range purpose is to improve listening skills at the time in a
child's life when it matters the most. By utilizing compelling audio content
that highlights the latest discoveries in science, technology and innovation,
this project also meets the National Science Foundation's mission of 'promoting
the progress of science'.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will break new
ground and modernize the way listening comprehension is taught and assessed with
an innovative interactive learning platform that takes traditional elements of
game play and applies them to listening comprehension activities (i.e.
vocabulary, fluency and comprehension). More specifically, each audio story will
have embedded audio cues that lead to audio/visual comprehension questions,
games and polls. The platform will include account management, student
rostering, student progress monitoring, administrative dashboards and
interactive teacher guides for using audio in the classroom. Studies show that
both game-based learning and audio content increase motivation in students,
however no studies examine the use of both game-based learning and audio
together. The research conducted for this Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I project will use a qualitative design to best understand and describe
how classroom teachers and students use and engage with the interactive audio
platform. The goal is to conduct interviews with teachers and usability testing
with students to ensure that platform features are engaging, feasible, easily
integrated and demonstrate potential for intended educational outcomes. Lessons
learned from this Phase I award will be applied during Phase II, when a more
robust platform will be developed and commercialized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.