* 1843454
* Geographic mobility, lexical processing dynamics, and perceptual adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Cynthia Clopper, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2023
* USD 208,915.00

Americans are geographically mobile: the US Census Bureau reports that over the
last decade, approximately 11% of Americans have moved each year, including
nearly 2% of Americans who have moved each year to a different state. When
people move to a new place, they are likely to encounter people who speak with a
dialect that differs from their own. In addition, even non-mobile people who
live in urban areas are likely to encounter people who have moved to the city
from a place with a different dialect. As a result of this geographic mobility,
Americans are exposed to substantial variation in regional dialects throughout
the lifespan. Some recent research suggests that exposure to different dialects
as a result of geographic mobility affects how speech is processed in real time.
In particular, greater exposure to dialect variation appears to make people more
flexible in their parsing of the speech signal, potentially leading to more
successful communication with people who speak unfamiliar dialects. The goal of
this project is to understand how this flexibility in processing arises. An
investigation of the factors underlying processing flexibility due to geographic
mobility will allow for a consideration of how processing dialect variation
compares to processing other difficult kinds of speech (such as fast speech,
foreign-accented speech, and speech in noise or with an auditory prosthesis such
as a cochlear implant), which has substantial implications for understanding the
constraints on human flexibility in speech processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will examine whether the processing flexibility observed among mobile
people is limited to the specific dialects to which a listener has been exposed
or applies more generally to all unfamiliar dialects. It will also examine how
the number of dialects that a person has exposure to and when that exposure
occurs (for example, in childhood, adolescence, or adulthood) affects their
processing flexibility for both familiar and unfamiliar dialects. Flexibility in
speech processing will be examined in a series of speech perception experiments
assessing the time course of word recognition and of adaptation to unfamiliar
regional dialects. The specificity of the processing mechanism will be assessed
by examining speech processing as a function of familiarity with particular
regional dialects, such as Northern, Southern, and Mid-Atlantic American
English. The effects of the amount and timing of dialect exposure will be
assessed by recruiting a large sample of adult participants with a range of
residential histories and travel experiences. All of the data collection for the
project will be conducted in a language research laboratory that is located
within a science museum in central Ohio. Study participants will be recruited
from among the museum visitors, leading to direct public engagement with the
research. Outreach materials related to the project will also be developed for
the participants and other museum visitors to broaden the public impact of the
work beyond the scholarly community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.