* 1843795
* SBIR Phase I:  Stackmaps: A Metacognitive Learning Support Tool To Empower Students In STEM
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Robyn Allen, Central Inventions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Diane Hickey
* 03/31/2021
* USD 224,995.00

This SBIR Phase I project will study and develop methods to provide adult
professionals and young adult students with the skills and self-confidence to
pursue studies and careers in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
fields. Today, a large segment of society identifies as being underrepresented
in the technology sector. Some individuals experience low technology-related
self-confidence as a result. At a time when the United States has an increasing
demand for technology workers, the country needs contributions from all segments
of society, and not simply those segments which have been privileged in the
past, to meet this demand and maintain U.S. competitive advantage in the global
innovation economy. Engaging people from the full spectrum of the United States
population will enable innovative companies to leverage more diverse sources of
creativity, build better solutions to today's problems, and create more jobs.
When people see themselves as future practitioners of a technical skill, it is
possible to learn topics in a deeper, more fulfilling, and more enduring manner.
Commercializing this invention will increase online learning platform retention
rates, driving revenue not only within educational companies but within the
companies who hire the resulting talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed technology is innovative because no commercially-available software
tools exist which support metacognitive development in tandem with technical
skill acquisition. This innovation is risky because no one has proven that
having a positive influence on metacognition through automated software is even
possible during single learning session. The goal of this research is to deliver
techniques for enhancing the self-efficacy of STEM learners within the context
of online learning platforms. The project combines best practices in digital
personalization and educational psychology research to deliver customized
content responsive to learner preferences and learner attitude attributes. The
proposed research will demonstrate, via a random trial, increased levels of
motivation and engagement in students who receive targeted interventions as
compared with a control population. Using survey instruments, the researchers
will measure changes in self-efficacy, challenge-seeking, and goal-setting
behavior. Because the research team has unique experience in developing proven
educational interventions which enhance self-efficacy across a variety of
learning domains, the algorithms and methods inside the proposed technology will
be difficult for competitors to replicate. This SBIR project will deliver
algorithms and automated, web-based interventions to help all STEM learners
experience personal engagement with STEM topics and find empowerment in the task
of learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.