* 1843901
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-blood contacting, less invasive device for restoration of ventricular diastolic recoil
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Christina Bolch, CORINNOVA INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project seeks to address the lack of approved device therapies
available for the almost 4 million patients in the U.S. who suffer from
diastolic heart failure (DHF) - a disease for which the potential market is
estimated to be approximately $5B worldwide. In DHF, the chambers of the heart
become stiff and cannot relax completely, reducing the amount with which they
fill with blood and thus reducing the amount of blood pumped by the heart during
each cardiac cycle. The only evidence-based therapy to treat DHF is to manage
blood pressure pharmacologically, and treat associated complications. DHF is a
major cause of hospital admissions and has poor patient outcomes, without any
discernable improvement over the last two decades. Thus, there is a strong need
for an effective device solution that can alleviate the symptoms associated with
DHF while improving patient outcomes, as well as further fundamental
understanding of the key factors and mechanisms that lead to DHF.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the development of a non-blood
contacting biventricular diastolic recoil device for the treatment of patients
with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction (HFpEF), also referred to as
diastolic heart failure (DHF). The proposed device will provide a patented
minimally invasive, non-blood contacting approach to mitigate the symptoms
associated with HFpEF, addressing a large unmet need in a market which currently
lacks any approved device therapies. Primary goals of this Phase I project
include investigating variations in device design, functionality, and mechanical
properties in pilot animal studies in order to optimize augmentation of cardiac
function and hemodynamics, as well as the development of an accelerated fatigue
test apparatus to test the durability of the device components. The
commercialization effort in bringing this novel device to market will address
the largely unmet need for the millions of Americans who suffer from DHF by
alleviating symptoms, significantly increasing quality of life, and reducing
morbidity and mortality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.