* 1843966
* SBIR Phase I:  A compact electrotactile sensory feedback system for upper limb prostheses
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Aadeel Akhtar, PSYONIC, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will primarily benefit people with hand
amputations. Touch feedback is a critical component of human manipulation, and
its loss is most poignant in people with hand amputations. There are currently
no prosthetic devices available to amputees that provide control through touch
sensory feedback. Without touch feedback, prosthetic users tend to avoid
manipulating many objects they otherwise could because they run the risk of
destroying them. Consequently, there is a market need for a richly expressive
sensory feedback system for upper limb prosthetics. The proposed research will
yield a device capable of such feedback with electrotactile stimulation. These
outcomes have the potential to restore a significant amount of function to over
10 million people with hand amputations worldwide and improve their quality of
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project involves development of a portable, energy-efficient electrotactile
stimulator that can be easily placed into the sockets of hand prosthetics to
give users useful sensory feedback. The stimulator will integrate with existing
prosthetic control systems. It will be built using standard off-the-shelf
components, have a form factor small enough to easily fit into a variety of
different prosthetic sockets, and operate for at least 12 hours while operating
alongside a prosthetic hand and its control system. To improve sensation
quality, a sensation controller that enables consistent long-term stimulation
will be deployed, reducing the likelihood of device rejection due to discomfort.
The expected outcomes of this research are 1) a portable, cost effective and
energy efficient electrotactile stimulator that can be easily placed into the
socket of a prosthetic user and integrated with their prosthetic hand; and 2) a
user study which evaluates the effectiveness of this device deployed with a
sensation controller for daily manipulation tasks. The capabilities of the Phase
I prototype will be extended in Phase II for delivery of a market-ready sensory
feedback system that is compliant with regulatory standards for medical
equipment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.