* 1843202
* SBIR Phase I:  Bright and Lightfast Fluorescent Pigments for Paints, Polymers and Inks
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Christoper Benson, STAR VOLTAIC LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 06/30/2020
* USD 224,933.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the creation of new fluorescent materials
that will provide new color technologies to the paint, polymer, and ink
industries. These new materials will overcome the undesirable properties of
commercial fluorescent pigments, like a tendency to rapidly fade, give weak
color strength, and degrade during processing. Besides giving fabrics,
packaging, and toys bright, attractive colors, improvements to fluorescent
pigments could change several parts of daily life: Brighter paints and signs
could improve road and airport safety. Product designers for next-generation
consumer electronics will have a new color palette for their newest gadget.
Agricultural scientists would have a new tool to study crop treatments. As a
result, success in this research project has the potential to claim a share of
the multi-billion dollar colorant market, disrupt expectations around
fluorescent pigments, bring new products to consumers, and create high-tech
jobs. In addition, this project leverages collaboration with academic partners,
supporting science and entrepreneurship education of university students and
postdoctoral fellows.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project provides a
revolutionary solution to a problem that has haunted chemistry for more than 150
years. Existing fluorescent materials are formulated with pigments that have
thinly dispersed colorants, which dilutes their color and makes them susceptible
to degradation. This is done by necessity, because fluorescent dyes have a
tendency to aggregate, causing unwanted color changes and loss of the
fluorescence effect. This solution utilizes a bottom-up "self-assembly" strategy
to eliminate aggregation and create stable fluorescent solids that maximize the
longevity and boldness of the color. This research will study this novel class
of fluorescent pigment to gauge its resistance to fading, improved chromaticity,
and material performance in realistic conditions. This will be done by measuring
changes to fluorescence intensity and color appearance under natural and
laboratory-accelerated weathering conditions, and creating test "products" in
the form of paints and polymers. These test materials are expected to have
stronger color for longer periods of time while still being amenable to
commercial processing techniques. In addition, this project is an opportunity to
study the behavior of self-assembling materials inside polymer formulations,
which is a new research area with broad scientific and commercial potential.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.