* 1843894
* SBIR Phase I:  Collaboration, Creativity and Computational Thinking - A Cooperative Music Tinkering Game
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Anna Jordan-Douglass, MAKEFULLY, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,649.00

This SBIR Phase I project will produce a digital + physical game for 6-10 year
olds that fosters computational thinking practices through collaboration,
listening, and tinkering through play with music. It is widely recognized that
to be ready for the future, today?s students need to develop the ability to
think critically, identify and solve complex problems, communicate clearly about
their thinking, and work collaboratively with a team. Computational thinking
(CT) is the core of Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
disciplines, and is about developing a set of problem-solving heuristics,
approaches and habits of mind. Collaboration and creativity, now seen as cross-
cutting 21st Century skills, are also viewed as CT practices. Not all learners
are motivated to learn CT through traditional programming contexts, even those
designed for young learners. Moreover, there are a lack of learning environments
to engage children in tinkering--trying things out and debugging--finding out
why things didn?t happen as expected. And, the vast majority of existing CT
learning environments for young children do not explicitly support the
development of positive attitudes towards problem solving, confidence in dealing
with complexity, and communicating and collaborating with others to achieve a
goal. This product will enhance students? grasp of collaborative problem solving
and ultimately computational thinking by engaging them in fundamental concepts
that unite computing and music.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
technical innovation of this project is the design and development methodology
that will lead to the creation of a transformative learning platform in its
approach to learning outcomes, collaborative problem solving, and engaging game
play. This multi-user, multi-device experience relies on a new approach to
collaborative problem solving, leveraging multiple user inputs responsive to
group tinkering and debugging. Players must employ critical listening,
tinkering, debugging, and communication to identify pieces of music that are
off, and work collaboratively to adjust controllers to get the music back to its
original state. This game not only requires problem solving across scales
(debugging smaller parts of the puzzle to get to an overall solution) but also
requires collaboration and communication, something largely missing in
educational games for children. This phase will focus on the build of the
digital component of the game as well as conduct research and development around
physical controllers. Additionally, this phase of development will research the
balance of visual, audio and haptic feedback mechanisms to help players through
frustrating moments, foster player communication and collaboration, and test
visual design for the most effective feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.