* 1843101
* STTR Phase I:  Flexible Quantum Dot Light Emitting Devices for Photodynamic Therapy and Photobiomodulation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Yajie Dong, QLEDCures LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project is to enable a much wider adoption of various photomedical treatments.
Broadly speaking, photomedical treatments use light to cure diseases and promote
healing. Specifically, photodynamic therapy uses light to activate a
photosensitizing chemical agent to kill cancer cells or bacterial with minimal
side effects. Moreover, photobiomodulation is the application of light to
impaired or dysfunctional tissue to reduce pain and inflammation to speed
healing and to promote or inhibit various cellular processes. The light source
is a critical part of any photomedical treatment system. Existing sources such
as lasers and LED arrays are bulky and expensive, generally require additional
optics to deliver the light to the target treatment areas. The current project
aims to develop a photomedical treatment system based on a novel light source -
quantum dot light emitting devices (QLEDs). Flexible and large area QLEDs can be
placed immediately adjacent to target treatment areas without additional optics.
Their simple driver requirements will result in much lower system costs and
facilitate at-home use. These QLED-based systems will enable the wider adoption
of photomedical treatment methodologies, including in currently underserved
areas and patient populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
leverage the recent invention of ultra-bright quantum dot light emitting devices
(QLEDs) into a low-cost and convenient-to-use photomedical treatment system that
will enable wider adoption of photomedical treatment methodologies for a variety
of pathologies and use cases. Project tasks include developing QLEDs with
emitting spectra precisely tuned to match the absorption spectra of
photosensitizers at 630 nanometers (nm), 635 nm and 660 nm; fabricating QLEDs on
flexible substrates with device structures guided by microcavity simulations;
developing a low DC voltage, current-controlled driver able to deliver a precise
light dosage; and demonstrating the photomedical efficacy of thus developed
QLEDs in a) ALA-PplX photodynamic therapy and associated dosimetry of oral
malignancies using in-vitro 3D co-culture models of oral cancers; b) determining
and optimizing parameters for photobiomodulation for wound healing applications
including incisional and pressure ulcer wounds, in-vitro using multiple cell
lines and models of cellular metabolism, cellular proliferation and scratch
wound healing. Successful completion of these tasks will result in a functional
preliminary photomedical treatment system that lays the foundation for in-vivo
animal studies of oral cancer or diabetic wound healing treatment paradigms in
Phase II of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.