* 1843530
* SBIR Phase I:  The Curio Classroom: A Software Toolkit to Spark Engagement in STEM Through Hand-drawn Art and Tangible User Interfaces
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Barry Boone, CURIO INTERACTIVE LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 04/30/2020
* USD 224,934.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes the creation of a unique, art-centric
e-learning platform aimed at sparking the interest of young learners in science,
technology, engineering, and math (STEM). This extensible software platform
implements a new category of e-learning based on the ample body of research in
educational psychology and technology that advocates the use of art and guided
play to teach STEM. This project will test the hypothesis that an e-learning
system based on scientific illustration sparks engagement and enhances learning
in young students. With students disengaging from STEM at an increasing rate, it
is critical to make more tools available to teachers that connect student with
STEM. STEM-related fields will drive innovation in our economy for decades to
come; opening new pathways to vastly broaden participation in STEM is critical
to our economic future. This project also proposes the creation of an online
community and marketplace supporting STEM education through this platform. This
will connect teacher-to-teacher for sharing best practices in teaching science
using art and can make a deep and broad impact on the way STEM is
taught.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Built on scientific illustration and
coupled with a set of tangible user interface (TUI) devices that mimic
scientific instruments, this e-learning platform brings student hand-drawn art
to life, creating interactive lessons that correlate to Next Generation Science
Standards. As this system will be extensible and customizable, a major part of
the R&amp;D effort will be to create an easy-to-use templating toolkit that any
teacher can leverage to develop custom lessons in STEM. The Phase I goal will be
to create a fully functioning product and assess this system in elementary
school classrooms. This toolkit will be developed in collaboration with Curio
Interactive?s educational partners, as well as the Pacific Science Center, where
Curio Interactive is a startup in residence, to rapidly develop this system,
continuously iterating the software with real testers, following agile
development methods. One of this project?s objectives is to appeal to groups
historically underrepresented in STEM. Because this platform will be visual and
kinetic, highly affordable, and universally available via the web, the proposed
platform will improve the equity and accessibility of learning
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.