* 1843976
* SBIR Phase I:  Multimodal Tactical Sensing for Consumer electronics &amp; Neuroprosthetics
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Mohamed Abdelmoneum, Surfasense LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 04/30/2021
* USD 224,212.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project focuses on the growing
multipoint touch sensors estimated at US $94B in 2024. Touch screens literally
allowed access to the virtual world and its capabilities at our fingertips and
enabled those who were keyboard illiterates to access the vast world wide web
capabilities through this natural interface. A ubiquitous cost effective
multipoint touch sensing technology would make a broader impact beyond consumer
electronics by improving motor skills and potentially eliminating phantom pain
for amputees fitted with neuro prosthetics limbs. As the digital world becomes
more connected and continues to permeate our physical world in the form of the
mobile Internet of Things, autonomous cars, and other wireless connected smart
technologies, it is important to reduce the cost barrier for adoption and ease
of interaction between the device and the human. A society that can enable all
its members, youngsters to aging elders, to easily interface with connected
assistive devices would have increased access to information, education,
ecommerce and consequently will see faster economic growth. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims
at demonstrating a ubiquitous multipoint touch and force sensing on planar or
curved surfaces that are either conducting (metals) or insulators
(glass/plastic). Current multipoint touch sensing technologies are limited to
transparent, insulating and planar surfaces. These technologies involve
patterning multiple layers of semitransparent films on a glass or polyamide
substrate then integrated with the display in a complex manufacturing process.
The films? semitransparent nature reduces the quality of the display image and
requires increasing the display brightness which affects the battery life in
mobile devices. The high manufacturing cost reduces deployment and hence limits
access to the wider consumer society. This project targets developing a low-cost
technology that detects force and location of multi touch points on any surface
without film patterning. Successful execution and deployment of the proposed
technology would increase deployment of multipoint touch and force sensing in
consumer electronics and hence a broader access in the society. New
opportunities for utilizing the technology both for scientific investigation as
well as for end user value will evaluated for lower limb fitting to reduce
phantom pain and in neuro prosthetics as a potential sensory
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.