* 1843539
* STTR Phase I:  Wearable Fabric Sensor for Hydration Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Hanieh Ghadimi, RooSense LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2020
* USD 250,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will provide prototype products to satisfy customer
needs in prioritized wearable sensor market segments for the endurance sports
market. One advantage of the proposed sensor is its similar feel to cloth
fabric, a benefit in comfort and convenience to the user. This is in contrast to
current hydration monitors made of thick plastic materials requiring the use of
an additional wristband or adhesive patch. This value proposition was developed
and tested based on the findings of 374 customer interviews during a spring 2017
NSF I-Corps workshop. That study determined the commercial and product potential
of a fabric sensor to monitor hydration. In 2015 alone more than 17.1 million
people finished endurance events. According to interview data, 50% of
respondents are interested in a hydration solution due to past dehydration and
cramping issues. Additionally, 40% of respondents indicated interest in a
technology-based solution. This group equates a target market of $342 million
for a hydration monitor priced at $100 per unit, a good estimation of the total
available market based on I-Corps interviews. In general, the data collected
from the developed sensor could lead to better understanding of health and
disease processes, including the analysis of common diabetic neurological
complications, the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (CF), and sweat monitoring for
advanced prosthetic limb applications, bedridden patients, or athlete
performance tracking leading to better treatments and health outcomes for all
patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A monitor that analyzes the sodium concentration
of a person's sweat would be able to notify them before they begin suffering
from exercise-induced illnesses such as hypernatremia or hyponatermia. This
early notification system would allow people to be on top of their hydration,
and be able to replenish their electrolytes as needed, without overhydrating.
The team has developed flexible, lightweight fabric materials that can
selectively determine physiological information from sweat forming on the
surface of the skin. The technology is the first lightweight fabric sensor to
provide real-time information regarding hydration levels during exercise or
training. These dehydration patterns are unique and vary based on diet, weather
conditions, and human physiological cycles. The ability to monitor an
individual's hydration parameters is unique to the proposed sensor and gives it
a competitive advantage over sweat monitors that monitor water lost or water
timers that remind the athlete to drink water every 20 minutes. Specifically,
the proposed work will focus on the large-scale development of a hydration
monitor, validation of the monitor during material testing and on the body in an
exercise physiology laboratory, and leveraging partnerships with potential
strategic partners. As athletes strive for peak performance, improper hydration
can undermine their progress in both training and competitive
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.