* 1843774
* SBIR Phase I:  General-Purpose Software for Collaborative End-User Database Management
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Eirik Bakke, ULTORG INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2021
* USD 224,995.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to make organizations more productive by
helping them organize operational data in a structured yet accessible way.
Today, organizations tend to accumulate such data in spreadsheets, scattered
across users and folders, with new copies and revisions being made every time
data must be presented, summarized, or integrated in a new way. This leads to
tedious cut-and-paste workflows, costly errors, and a lack of reliable
information for decision support. This project proposes a general-purpose
software solution, based on a recently developed method for interactive database
visualization. The system's novelty is in the ease and flexibility with which
data can be queried and laid out on the screen, covering a large range of use
cases that would previously require custom programming. Applications can be
found in all manner of organizations: corporations, non-profits, higher
education, science, healthcare, journalism, disaster response, the military,
public administration, and so on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a general-purpose, user-
friendly software product that individuals within an organization can use to
store and share structured data along with the various data displays through
which said data is viewed, queried, and edited. Such data displays could include
arbitrary database queries, visualizations such as crosstabs, calendars, and bar
charts, as well as non-tabular multi-query visualizations such as forms,
dashboards, and hierarchical reports. Using the proposed software, organizations
can decrease time spent on administrative and managerial tasks, improve the use
of data in decision-making, and, in many cases, eliminate yearlong internal
software development projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.