* 1843742
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultrasensitive chip-scale ion-sensors for mass spectrometry
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Daniel Esposito, GUARDION, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2020
* USD 223,660.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will benefit manufacturers of residual gas
analyzers, mass spectrometers, ion-mobility spectrometers, time-of-flight
spectrometers and related instruments. Implementation of these sensors will
increase the revenue, revenue streams and market share of commercial
manufacturers of mass spectrometers by significantly lowering production cost,
and by enabling penetration into new markets that require increased sensitivity,
lowered size, weight, power consumption, and instrument complexity. The product,
if successful, will lead to analytical tools that can substantially benefit the
needs of education/research, space, bio/health, agricultural, defense and
security markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop nanotechnology-based chip-scale ion sensors
with ultra-high intrinsic charge-to-current amplification factors. This patent-
pending technology allows semiconductor-processable miniaturization and
scalability, sub-microwatt intrinsic power draw, and robust ambient-pressure-
agnostic operation. With reduced size, weight, and power requirements, increased
sensitivity and dynamic range, these sensors can potentially replace expensive,
bulky, and/or high-power-consuming charged particle detectors such as
microchannel plates, Daly detectors, electron-multiplier tubes and Faraday cups.
The ability to operate under any ambient pressure and distinguish charge
polarity can significantly enhance field-portability, turnkey operations, and
enhance analytical reach of ion-sensing-based applications. Specifically, the
proposed research will seek to overcome the challenges related to generation of
high signal responses (by enhancing the electronic transport parameters), high
ion-sensor interaction (by optimizing sensor design), and lower readout noise
(by optimizing materials and design).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.