* 1843764
* SBIR Phase I:  A SWING-ASSIST KNEE PROSTHESIS FOR INCREASING MOBILITY IN TRANSFEMORAL AMPUTEES
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Harrison Bartlett, SYNCHRO MOTION LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 08/31/2020
* USD 223,589.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make walking both safer and easier for
transfemoral amputees. Falling and fear of falling are pervasive in this
population. Transfemoral amputees fall at a rate approximately 200 times that of
healthy age-matched individuals, and they seek medical attention from falls at
the same rate as the institution-living elderly. Such falls result most commonly
from a lack of full knee extension in late swing, combined with a lack of knee
proprioception, in which case the user enters a non-recoverable knee buckling
state shortly after loading. This project proposes a knee prosthesis that
provides a powered, motion-controlled knee swing which guarantees full knee
extension prior to heel strike, and it therefore substantially reduces the
likelihood of a fall. Further, powered knee movement lessens the need for
compensatory movements, and therefore the effort required for walking is
lessened. As a result, the proposed knee will provide safer and easier walking,
enabling users to walk with greater confidence. The prosthesis will be
reimbursable under current reimbursement codes and will result in improved
mobility, health, and quality of life for end users.

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project proposes a novel knee
prosthesis that incorporates a hybrid approach to providing the two major
functions of a knee prosthesis: stance and swing control. In this device, stance
control is provided by a polycentric joint, while swing control utilizes a small
motor for assistance. Consequently, the proposed device is called a polycentric
swing-assist (PSA) knee. Unlike a passive extension aid employed in a typical
polycentric knee, the swing-assist motor is able to aid both flexion in mid
swing and extension in late swing. The PSA prosthesis is intended to inject
small amounts of power during the swing phase of gait in order to guide the knee
through the swing trajectory. Since the assistance is associated with low-torque
and low-power movements, the motor, transmission, and battery can be small,
lightweight, and quiet relative to a fully-powered knee prosthesis. The goal of
this work is to design, construct, and test a PSA knee prototype. The efficacy
of the prosthesis prototype will be compared to a commercial knee. The
investigators will test whether or not the prosthesis better emulates healthy
kinematics through outcome measures such as toe clearance and peak knee flexion
across walking speeds.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.