* 1843880
* STTR Phase I:  Motion Assisted Hand Exoskeleton with Virtual Reality (MAVHEXO) for Post Stroke Rehabilitation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Muthu Wijesundara, NEUROLOGICAL REHABILITATION VIRTUAL REALITY, L.L.C.
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,893.00

This Small Technology Transfer Phase I project will realize a sensorized soft
robotic hand exoskeleton coupled with an interactive 3D virtual reality (VR)
gaming environment that provides fine motor training for stroke patients' hands.
There is a currently a lack of available devices that provide fine sensory and
motor training of the hand. The potential benefit is to fill this niche market
opportunity, especially when considering the high incidence of hand disability
due to stroke and other neuromusculoskeletal injuries. This system can provide
structured therapy sessions which requires minimal therapist supervision while
improving patient engagement which enhances the broader participation. As a
complimentary technology for current rehabilitation practice, it has a potential
to lower health care and labor costs associated with neurological
rehabilitation. The outpatient physical rehabilitation market is a $30 billion
industry growing at a rate of 7% in the US, mainly due to the growing elderly
population. The robot-assisted rehabilitation market is expected to grow
dramatically, reaching $2 billion by 2020. As robot-assisted treatment becomes
widely available, the customer base will grow from acute care clinics to long-
term rehabilitation centers and finally to home-based care.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project results from the
combination of a soft robotic system with fine motor control synced to VR games
for both sensory and motor stimuli. The robotic exoskeleton provides individual
joint control to practice complex grasping while the VR environment provides
targeted rehabilitation games. This system addresses the fine motor control
needs that have not been met by current hand rehabilitation devices, which only
offer gross motions. Adaptive algorithms will adjust to the patient's level of
ability to accomplish the assigned tasks in virtual game scenarios, providing
accessibility for a wide range of population with different levels of severity.
There are three main goals for the project. First, we will develop a VR
environment simulating real-world hand motion via interaction with objects in an
immersive game. Second, we will develop adaptive control algorithms for the soft
robotic exoskeleton to provide active assistive motion in performing
rehabilitation-oriented tasks in the VR environment. Third, a pilot study will
be conducted with both healthy individuals and hand-impaired stroke patients.
The Phase I project will produce a system with assistive hand motion in a
targeted rehabilitation virtual game environment, which can be tested for
efficacy in a larger clinical population of stroke
survivors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.