* 1843676
* CAREER: Combining physical and numerical modes to characterize the contribution of semi-brittle rheology to deformation dynamics and strain transients.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Jacqueline Reber, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 589,892.00

Tectonics faults are cracks in the Earth's crust accommodating the slow motions
of tectonics plates. The stress accumulated around faults can be released slowly
when faults creep over long periods of time. This viscous behavior is called
aseismic because it does not produce earthquakes. Faults can also slip abruptly
by brittle failure. Most tectonics faults exhibit both viscous (no earthquake)
and brittle (earthquakes) behaviors. Understanding how fault behaviors interplay
is critical to explain earthquakes and improve hazard forecasting. This task is,
however, challenging because these behaviors occur on very different time
scales. Here, the researchers use experiments and numerical modeling to explain
fault dynamics. They use a unique combination of viscous and brittle materials
which, mixed together, behave like faults. By deforming the mixture, they
identify the factors producing slow deformation and abrupt slip. Using modeling,
they apply their results to natural systems and explain the behaviors of fault.
The project has strong implications for earthquake hazard forecasting. It
provides support to an early-career female scientist, a postdoctoral associate
and a graduate student. It offers training opportunities to undergraduate and
high-school students. Furthermore, it fosters the development of teaching
materials for a science communication class. The goal is to increase students'
awareness of scientific methodology and strengthen their ability to communicate
their results to a broad audience. This five-year award is co-funded by the
Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semi-brittle materials cover short time scales
associated with rupture events (earthquakes) and much longer ones associated
with viscous flow (ductile crust). Their range of behaviors can potentially
explain the observed various fault dynamics. Yet, there is limited data
available on the rheology of semi-brittle materials; and even less on materials
involving grain comminution in the presence of fluids, as can occur in fault
gouges. Here, the researchers use a mixture of viscous Carbopol and brittle
hydro-gel spheres, which exhibits the semi-brittle behaviors underlying tectonic
fault motions. Specimens are sheared in a new state-of-the-art apparatus which
allows imaging fluid-flow, and particle motions and comminution. The team
systematically investigates the effects on slip dynamics of grain comminution,
distribution between brittle and viscous materials, normal force, total strain
and viscosity. Experimental results are input into a numerical modeling which
captures the physics of Earth materials on geological time scales. The model
outcomes explore the parameter space and whether semi-brittle deformation can
lead to the continuum between steady creep and stick-slip fault
motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.