* 1843435
* Symposium: Advances in Intermetallic-Based Alloys for Structural &amp; Functional Applications; 2018 Materials Research Society Fall Meeting; Boston, Massachusetts; 25-30 November
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2019
* John Lewandowski, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 04/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

Intermetallic compounds are an integral part of materials design for structural
and functional applications and understanding their behavior is critical to
improved performance. Extensive research has been underway to understand the
fundamental aspects of intermetallics and the knowledge base is continuously
evolving. Nevertheless, significant knowledge gaps exist in the fundamental
science of intermetallics, as well as in processing and scale-up for eventual
application. This award supports a symposium on fundamental understanding of the
processing, microstructure, and properties of these materials at the Materials
Research Society (MRS) Fall Meeting in Boston, Massachusetts, November 25-29,
2018. This symposium series was started in 1984 and is one of the longest
running symposia in MRS history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable the
attendance at the symposium of graduate students, post-doctoral researchers,
early career faculty and researchers from underrepresented groups. Support for
students and early career researchers for travel and registration at the MRS
meeting is a critical part of broadening and educating the field of researchers,
as well as advancing knowledge and information exchange about this important
class of materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.