* 1843642
* SBIR Phase I:  Building Emotional Intelligence Through the Connected Readers Program
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Christin Shelton, DIVERSE EMERGENT ENGINEERING PROSPECTIVE -DEEP- DESIGNS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,986.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will address the
challenge of developing students? empathy and emotional self-awareness with a
mobile-based platform. Aligning with the NSF's mission to develop innovative
education programs to enhance aspects of emotional intelligence, this project
will address three major pain points for young learners with far-reaching
implications. First, the need to develop emotional intelligence; which has been
identified as a 21st-century literacy that is crucial for younger learners to
thrive. Current school climate issues with bullying and violence consistently
reinforce the need to address social and emotional learning. Next, the need to
integrate social and emotional learning into regular classroom activities. With
the demands placed on schools for testing, having a program that integrates with
what schools are already responsible should support more widespread adoption.
Finally, the program addresses a widespread need to combat the deleterious
effects of the current uses of social media by young students. This project will
bring a positive spin to social networking that can improve the emotional
intelligence skills of students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
innovation is an augmented reality-based experience that immerses fourth and
fifth-grade students in activities designed to build their skills of emotional
intelligence; namely, emotional self-awareness and empathy, as they interact
with a network of peers. The key technical challenges the project must solve
include: refining core methods for developing emotional self-awareness and
empathy, defining and refining a user experience that teachers/parents will find
educationally compelling and with which learners will love to engage, designing
a curating process for learner-generated content that will ensure the safety and
security of all users and developing virtual interactions that engage students
in emotional skill development, and connecting activities with the materials for
which students are already responsible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.