* 1843556
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3: Using synthetic energy-harvesting materials at the cell surface to reduce low potential ferredoxins within the cytosol for metabolic applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* George Bennett, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Cells utilize many chemical sources of energy. Photosynthetic cells can use
sunlight to create chemical bonds that store energy. That energy is used to
shuttle electrons around the cell, driving reactions. Despite that, cells cannot
utilize external sources of electrical energy directly. If they could utilize
electricity as a power source, that would greatly reduce the burden on the cell
to create energy on site, freeing it to be directed to more productive
activities. This project is an attempt to create a cellular interface that
allows that to happen. The external power source will be electricity generated
by solar panels. The electricity will drive the production of an amino acid.
Graduate students and undergraduates will be trained in advanced bioelectronics
research techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to build a modular cell-material interface that couples external electrical
energy sources to the reduction of ferredoxins. The material side of the
interface will enable attachment to a range of energy harvesting devices. The
cell side will facilitate the transport of low potential electrons across the
cell membrane to a ferredoxin, which will then be used to enhance the production
of a reduced metabolite, the amino acid cysteine. The first objective is to
engineer efficient electron transfer across the membrane. A high-throughput
selection will be used to couple the growth of Escherichia coli to the electron
cycling efficiency of low potential ferredoxin (Fd) electron carriers. The
second objective is to build a biocompatible material (an organic electrode)
that functions as a cell-surface coupling module. Diffusible mediators will be
incorporated into the electrode and the effectiveness of organic phospholipids
in mediating long-range electron transfer will be examined. The final objective
is to use biological-organic hybrids to increase metabolic pathway yields and
characterize electron transfer efficiencies. The interfaces arising from this
project will be modular, and potentially useful in powering natural and
synthetic cell processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.