* 1843409
* SBIR Phase I:  The Smart Study Recommendations Engine
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Gerald Meggett, CIRCLEIN, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is focused on continued development of a software
platform that is used by students for peer to peer homework and studying help.
After school help has historically been delivered by tutors and homework
hotlines but those avenues have been proven to be inadequate in closing learning
gaps for students after they exit the classroom. The proposed technology is
expected to further democratize homework and studying help. Being peer to peer,
the proposed technology can radically shrink the cost of personalized homework
and studying help for students at their own time and pace - especially the ones
from economically or socially more challenged backgrounds. The project will also
explore use of an innovative business model to optimize commercial viability
with impacting a broad range of students irrespective of their backgrounds. It
is expected that when fully developed, the technology would emerge as a scalable
low-cost option to help improve student learning outcomes both nationally and
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key intellectual merit of this project is in
the development of a Smart Study Recommendations Engine. This involves
harvesting the data from the class notes uploaded by students, analyze it to
surface predictive insights and automatically deliver the notes or wide-ranging
peer-reviewed study materials directly to the student users based on their
learning styles, learning abilities, and learning gaps, without requiring them
to perform a search. It will also provide them with an ability to connect them
with peers who can provide additional support. Thus, this project seeks to
provide personalized study playlists based on a student profile and pair them
with a peer mentor who can provide deeper clarifications as required. The key
outcome to be demonstrated is that 1 in 5 students engages favorably with the
auto delivered math notes, helped by a peer who can provide clarity and tutoring
as needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.