* 1843221
* STTR Phase I:  Intelligent Scoring of Inflammatory Skin Disease Progression
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2019
* Kelsey Gross, 3Derm Systems, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 08/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer&lt;br/&gt;(STTR) Phase I project is to empower providers with the
unprecedented ability to treat patients&lt;br/&gt;with chronic inflammatory skin
disease effectively and at a lower cost. Today, primary
care&lt;br/&gt;physicians often refer patients with these conditions to
dermatologists for the initial diagnosis&lt;br/&gt;and multiple follow-up
appointments, especially when patients are prescribed high cost,
high&lt;br/&gt;touch therapies like biologics or procedures, such as
phototherapy. By introducing this&lt;br/&gt;automated severity scoring system,
these providers will have the expertise of dermatologists at&lt;br/&gt;their
fingertips, giving them the ability to assess disease severity and provide
systemic&lt;br/&gt;treatments previously available only through specialists. It
will also establish more objective&lt;br/&gt;assessments, evaluating patient
progress to adjust dosage and treatments as necessary.
For&lt;br/&gt;pharmaceutical companies, the ability to have non-specialists make
these severity assessments&lt;br/&gt;during clinical trials reduces expensive
and restrictive staffing requirements. Less expensive trials can&lt;br/&gt;help
expedite new drugs to market. This innovation will enhance scientific and
technological&lt;br/&gt;understanding by applying known machine learning
techniques in a novel manner to solve a&lt;br/&gt;difficult visual
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will prototype a clinical tool&lt;br/&gt;that can assess images
of a chronic skin inflammation, determine its severity, and
suggest&lt;br/&gt;treatment. This system will be able to guide users with
minimal training through the image&lt;br/&gt;collection process, determine if
the information is sufficient, and request additional information
if&lt;br/&gt;required via novel machine learning techniques. Currently,
clinicians trying to assess the&lt;br/&gt;severity of chronic inflammatory skin
diseases rely on a series of estimations and manual&lt;br/&gt;weighted averages,
a time consuming and biased process. This Phase I research will
explore&lt;br/&gt;what information is necessary for an algorithm to determine
the severity of a psoriasis case. It&lt;br/&gt;will determine if it is possible
for a machine to guide an imager through imaging regions of&lt;br/&gt;interest
at higher detail, rather than the entire body at large. It will also explore how
quickly and&lt;br/&gt;practically such a calculation can be performed. The end
goal of the project is a working&lt;br/&gt;prototype that can consistently score
a few psoriasis cases and serve as a proof of concept for&lt;br/&gt;expansion of
the prototype in future work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.