* 1843578
* SBIR Phase I:  Chemical Mechanical Planarization pad with controlled micro features for sub 7nm semiconductor technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Goo Youn Kim, SMART PAD LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to offers a way for semiconductor chip
fabricators to extend Moore's Law and simultaneously allowing them to reduce
costs in consumables and scrap wafers that have been damaged during polishing.
Currently chip fabricators are challenged to continue Moore's Law due to the
complexity and scale down sizes of semiconductor device structures. Improved
computer chip performance is critical to countless applications as
computers,mobile phones, tablets, and Internet of Thing have become ubiquitous
in everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I project will address the challenges which the semiconductor industry
faces trying to move beyond 14 nm technologies by using Chemical Mechanical
Planarization. Polishing pads are used to planarize wafer surface for multilayer
stack integration. Conventional polishing pad technology has randomly
distributed micro pores that lead to non-uniform polishing and scratched due to
stress concentration on asperities with less than 1% real contact area.
Additionally, conventional pads require a pad conditioning process to re-
generate pad surface. This project proposes engineering micro features on the
pad surface using micro fabrication technologies. In addition, the real contact
area between the pad and wafer will be controllable increasing to 5-10 percent
of the total pad-wafer contact. This will make the polishing performance more
precise and consistent. The micro features are designed to retain polishing
slurry longer so to increase the number of active slurry abrasives for
polishing. The contact area and feature design will be tunable to specific
polishing performance requirements per customer applications. The independent
multi-body structure of a hard top-pad with a soft sub-pad will increase the
conformity of the pad and distribute the pressure from polishing evenly across
the pad surface. This will significantly improve the chip-level planarization
and wafer-level uniformity, as well as reducing the pad wear during
polishing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.