* 1843135
* SBIR Phase I:Design and optimization of non-invasive fetal oxygenation sensing hardware and algorithm
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Nevan Hanumara, Raydiant Oximetry, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is developing a breakthrough technology to non-
invasively monitor fetal oxygen levels in utero, to enable the more accurately
detection of fetuses in distress and facilitate safer births for mothers and
babies. Currently, obstetricians struggle with a 50-year old monitoring
technology, which reports fetal heart rate and maternal contractions, and that
is associated with an 89% false positive rate for detecting babies in distress.
This is a major contributor to high cesarean section rates worldwide and up to
40% in some US hospitals. Because of the costs, risks for mothers and negative
implications for babies' health, C-section rates are coming under scrutiny from
insurers and accreditors, however, clinicians lack the means to accurately
identify oxygenation starvation and, to date, no non-invasive means of directly
measuring fetal oxygenation has been developed. Raydiant's system builds off
traditional pulse oximetry and will employ safe levels of light, through the
mother's abdomen, to monitor fetal pulse and report oxygen saturation, the
crucial, but missing diagnostic. This technology will be applicable to over 2.9
million births per year in the US as an enhancement to traditional monitoring
whenever a heart rate signal of concern is observed. Both the absolute
oxygenation value and its trend over time will enable more informed decision
making throughout the birth process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pushes
the fundamental boundaries of pulse oximetry and bio-photonics. Unlike
traditional finger pulse oximetry, sensing non-invasively through the maternal
abdomen presents a body in a body problem, where the fetal pulse signal is
orders of magnitude weaker than and intertwined with the maternal. Photons are
scattered and absorbed by multiple tissue layers and there are tradeoffs between
signal strength, noise and the ratio of fetal to maternal signal. Non-
homogeneities from subject to subject makes calibration difficult. Addressing
these challenges will require innovation in photonics hardware and signal
processing and this proposal has a three specific aims: the development of a
specific sensor hardware architecture that will facilitate detection of the
fetal signal; development of Raydiant's algorithm to separate fetal from
maternal signal, reject noise and report saturation; and validation of the
combined system in a pregnant animal model, where fetal oxygenation levels are
actively controlled and compared to the device reading. This proposal
encompasses developing a second generation prototype system and represents
critical technology de-risking aiming towards a commercial system for
integration with current monitoring technology and clinical
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.