* 1843816
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Method To Quantitatively Assess Spinal Alignment Intraoperatively With Reduced Reliance On Radiation-Based Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2021
* David Gullotti, Spine Align LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase 1 project will advance technology to significantly improve the
standard of care within corrective surgery for spinal deformity. Approximately
55,000 patients with spinal deformity seek improvement in their reduced quality
of life through surgery each year in the US. The goal of these surgeries is to
mechanically adjust and fix the spine into a biomechanically balanced position.
It is common for surgeons to plan these intensive surgeries before the
operation. However, the operating room environment introduces many challenges
that make it difficult for the surgeon to measure the contour of the patient's
spine as it changes during surgery. Current commercial offerings rely on
radiation-based imaging which involves significant operative delays, ionizing
radiation exposure, and narrow 2-dimensional fields of view. These suboptimal
solutions contribute to the high rates of continued postoperative deformity
along with the need for repeated surgeries. This project focuses on the
development of imaging technology that will enable real-time, 3D, whole-spine
assessments of a patient's spinal alignment with significant reduction in both
time per alignment assessment and radiation exposure compared to current
standards. By providing real-time, quantitative feedback to surgeons during
these cases, the technology stands to greatly improve surgical outcomes and
reduce the need for repeat operations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
repurposes the functionality of an off-the-shelf optical tracking system by
coupling it with novel hardware and software registration algorithms. When
coupled with these enhancements, the camera system will enable rapidly-
generated, quantitative measurements of a patient's spine while in the operating
room. By leveraging technology that is already present in the majority of
surgical centers, the path to commercialization for this innovation is greatly
accelerated. This removes the need for most centers to purchase additional
capital equipment, while also integrating seamlessly into a system that is
familiar to many surgeons. The expansion of this high-precision technology will
also enable more data-driven and patient-specific decisions to be made for a
variety of surgeries The project is led by a multidisciplinary team of
scientists, engineers, and world-class neurosurgeons with experience in
translating medical devices into impactful commercial products. The aims within
this project include the development of novel tracking-system augmentation
hardware, image-analysis algorithms, optimization of accuracy via benchtop
testing, and validation via testing with cadaveric
specimens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.