* 1843954
* SBIR Phase I:  Controlled Organoid Synthesis with Fluorescence-Activated Cell Printing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* christian siltanen, Scribe Biosciences, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to provide the biomedical research community with a
new tool for next-generation tissue culture platforms, including those derived
from patient samples. If successful, this technology will enable researchers to
automate and standardize 3D cell culture techniques in a format that is broadly
compatible with current laboratory infrastructure. It would bridge a gap between
commercial biomanufacturing/pharmaceutical development and the academic state-
of-the-art. Moreover, the proposed technology will provide the scientific
community with novel tools to perturb and observe how individual cells interact
with each other and with their microenvironment. Probing biological signatures
at single-cell resolution underpins major current trends in biomedical research,
from clinical applications in cancer therapy, diagnostics, and immunology, to
global basic science initiatives such as the Human Cell Atlas project. The goal
of this grant is to facilitate commercialization of a single-cell handling
instrument for use in research universities and pharmaceutical R&amp;D
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I
project is to develop an automated instrument for seeding organoids or other 3D
tissue cultures with single-cell resolution. Organoids have the potential to
transform personalized medicine and disease modelling, but current culture
methods are poorly controlled, leading to wide variability between individual
samples and across labs. It is recognized that standardization, reproducibility,
and tight control of cell seeding parameters will be paramount for drawing
predictive value from organoids in the clinic, particularly when many
statistical replicates are required. The technology developed is a high-
resolution robotic cell printing instrument capable of rapidly and
deterministically seeding single cells contained within sub-nanoliter liquid
volumes. The goal is to evaluate the feasibility of implementing the proposed
cell printing technology to seed organoid cultures with complete control of the
type and number of constituent cells in each organoid. Using Lgr5+ stem cell-
derived intestinal organoids as a model culture system, protocols will be
developed for preparing "printer-ready" input single stem cells from primary
tissue. Then, the plan is to evaluate the effects of cell seeding state on
organoid morphology by varying cell number, cell type and ECM components, to
test the hypothesis that controlled seeding will result in improved
morphological reproducibility, as assessed by high-content
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.