* 1843098
* SBIR Phase I: Increasing community resilience through actionable data and analytics
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Sarah Tuneberg, GEOSPIZA, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable emergency managers, first
responders, and elected officials across the country to increase community
resilience in disaster to save countless lives, save key critical
infrastructure, and save the environment from otherwise catastrophic outcomes
during disasters, some of which continue to increase in frequency and severity.
It will allow for significant advances in protecting our society's most
vulnerable populations in disaster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project develop a platform to integrate,
interpret, and organize a multitude of relevant data sources in order to deliver
actionable insights to those responsible for intervention before, during, and
after disaster. This project will enable a fully integrated, dynamic web-based
tool capable of generating estimated and real-time results for a broad set of
hazards across the nation down to the neighborhood level granularity. As a real-
time, dynamic tool, it will operationalize population vulnerability data and
provide forward-leaning decision support and actionable intelligence to first
responders, emergency managers, and elected officials that will save lives by
identifying those populations with the greatest needs and highest risk during a
disaster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.