* 1843776
* SBIR Phase I:  Digital Loft--An online platform for innovation education
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* My Nguyen, ForgeWorks, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,982.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop educational technologies to better train
university students to innovate. To become innovators, students must gain
practice solving real-world problems, such as reducing hospital acquired
infections, narrowing education achievement gaps or reducing poverty. However,
universities struggle to provide the labor intensive, face-to-face coaching
necessary for student innovators to tackle real-world problems. This project
develops a novel online project-based learning platform that helps instructors
more effectively coach innovation project teams. The platform allows instructors
to (a) create libraries of project goals to help students plan, (b)
collaboratively author and remix design guides to help students develop
technical skills, and (c) crowdsource large group, face-to-face critique to
provide feedback on in-progress innovation work. The research and development in
this project focus on overcoming the technical risks associated with creating
the software libraries necessary to create new project-based learning platforms
and supporting the complex computer-supported collaborative learning
interactions necessary to achieve desired learning outcomes. By developing the
technologies necessary to enable more effective project-based learning, this
project will improve university education and create a more capable innovation
workforce better able to tackle societal
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will
conduct research and development of the Loft platform, which combines a novel
project-based learning environment, social media platform, and software
components to transform how universities train social innovators. Technical
risks in this project stem from software engineering, learning sciences, and
computer-supported cooperative work obstacles associated with creating novel
software platforms to enable new pedagogical strategies that achieve more
effective learning outcomes in project-based learning environments. Software
libraries will include a more powerful and flexible set of components for
creating complex object hierarchies and social media interfaces required for
rapid development of the crowdsourcing and real-time collaborative editing
features needed for online project-based learning platforms. The platform will
introduce new computer-supported collaborative learning strategies, such as
collaborative remixing of instructional content, technology-supported tailoring
of instructional goals to individual project teams, and crowd critique to
provide feedback as good or better than individual instructors. Research and
development will test the impact of the platform on learning outcomes for
innovation teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.