* 1843483
* SBIR Phase I:  Energy Efficient Neural Network Accelerator Featuring a Logic Compatible Non-Volatile Synapse Array
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Seung-Hwan Song, Anaflash Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,931.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate the adoption of AI features in
Internet of Things and mobile devices. The proposed multi-bit non-volatile
memory (NVM) based Deep Neural Networks (DNN) IP is based on the standard CMOS
logic processes. Existing solution for the DNN hardware typically requires off-
chip access to retrieve neural network parameters from external memories,
incurring additional communication latency and power consumption. Additionally,
when critical neural network parameters are transmitted off-chip, security or
privacy concern may arise, which is unacceptable especially for the applications
such as personalized AI devices. Alternative approach integrating the DNN engine
in a special NVM process requires as much as 10 additional masks beyond the
conventional logic CMOS process which is not cost-effective for medium density
DNN engine in cost-sensitive edge devices. With this proposed IP, any existing
or new system on chip requiring persistent AI functionality can be built quickly
and cost effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project seeks to develop a cost-effective non-volatile
neural network accelerator IP for edge devices. To solve the security, latency,
power consumption, and cost issues associated with the traditional approaches, a
single-poly based low cost, non-volatile, multi-bit eFlash cell is proposed.
Multi-bit cell operation however presents significant challenges due to inherent
reduction in signal-to-noise ratio. Key technical hurdles include solving
disturbances of unselected cells, improving sensing margin, and overcoming
reliability issues associated with high voltage operation in readout circuits as
well as developing robust neural network cell arrays. To address these
challenges, several new ideas related to multi-bit cell, high-voltage circuits,
and cell programming methods have been proposed. Once verified successfully in
this project, the multi-bit cell IP can then be integrated as logic compatible
non-volatile memory to store neural network parameters on-chip, or as logic
compatible non-volatile neural network IP to execute entire neural network
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.