* 1843099
* SBIR Phase I:  Solar Concentrator Unit for Low-Cost Metal Additive Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Andrew Brewer, BLUESHIFT, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 04/30/2020
* USD 224,877.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide access to a solar heat source for
controlled high temperature applications using minimal, low-cost equipment. The
proposed Solar Concentrator Unit (SCU) is the first step to providing
individuals and underserved communities with the freedom of a low-cost
alternative to many of their most pressing manufacturing and materials
processing needs. The SCU produces no emissions in its heat generation, requires
no fuel costs, and can be used in remote locations to deliver precision control
to high temperature thermal processes. Many new applications become available to
market participants through the proposed innovation with the most notable
commercial outcome being a multi-material additive manufacturing (i.e. 3D
printing) system capable of producing custom metal and glass parts. Additional
applications for the SCU include welding; recycling of waste material into
useful feedstocks; pyrolysis of waste streams to render them chemically and
biologically inert; sanitizing medical equipment in disaster response
operations; and very high temperature materials science research by individuals
and research institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores the design and performance of a SCU for
delivering high temperatures in the range of 65 ?C to 2,200 ?C over long
durations (6+ hours). The technology relies on concentrated solar energy as the
primary heat source with the proposed innovation being a feedback control system
for maintaining temperature of a receiver plane to within +/-5% of an operating
value. The proposed innovation addresses the limitations of existing methods for
concentrating solar energy which lack temperature control and whose consistency
of output thermal flux varies with time of day, sun position, cloud cover, and
atmospheric conditions. This Phase I project will consist of development of a
SCU prototype to conduct characterization tests on output solar flux and flux
density under varying solar conditions. The expected outcome of this project
will be to prove feasibility of the proposed design concept and evaluate its use
for controlled, high temperature applications. The performance characteristics
of the SCU will be fully explored in Phase I and the design of the SCU will
allow for development of modular Thermal Processing Units in Phase II to
interface with the concentrated solar spot produced by the
SCU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.