* 1843514
* STTR Phase I:  Smartphone-based blood pressure monitoring via the oscillometric finger pressing method
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Ramakrishna Mukkamala, DIGITOUCH HEALTH LLC
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 10/31/2020
* USD 188,394.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to drive hypertension awareness and control
rates around the world, through the availability of low-cost, portable blood
pressure monitoring. High blood pressure (BP) is a major cardiovascular risk
factor that affects up to 1 billion people worldwide. It is treatable, yet
hypertension awareness and control rates are low. Ubiquitous BP monitoring
technology could improve hypertension management, but existing devices require
an inflatable cuff and therefore do not afford anytime, anywhere measurement of
BP. The market for a portable, cuff-less blood pressure monitor is estimated in
the tens of billions of dollars. Successful completion of this project via
demonstration of measurement accuracy across a broad range of blood pressures
will provide the company with a strong position in this large market.
Ultimately, the success of this project could translate to much greater
awareness and control of hypertension, helping reduce the incidence and burden
of cardiovascular disease around the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project aims to develop a technology
for cuff-less and calibration-free measurement of blood pressure via a button on
a smartphone. Existing automated cuff-based monitors are bulky and do not enable
anytime, anywhere measurement of BP. The 'oscillometric finger pressing
method'is an emerging approach that uses the same measurement principle that is
employed by most automatic cuff devices, but instead of inflating a cuff, the
user presses his or her finger (and the underlying artery) against a combination
of optical and pressure sensors to determine the blood pressure. The objectives
of this program are to shrink the current prototype design and validate its
accuracy. The proposed R&amp;D plan includes miniaturization of the circuit
components to mount them on a single board and optimization of the sensing
technology and algorithm to work in a broad range of normotensive and
hypertensive individuals. This work will be followed up by a clinical test of
the monitor. The resulting device is expected to be small and thin enough to
mount to the back of a smartphone and demonstrate clinical-grade accuracy for
the measurement of blood pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.