* 1843682
* SBIR Phase I:  Tunable Mechanical and Functional Properties of Peptide Films
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Manav Mehta, Gel4Med
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project focuses on developing chemically cross-linked
synthetic nanomaterials to address the unmet clinical need in promoting
infection free tissue regeneration in surgical, traumatic, ocular, burn, and
chronic wounds. While small wounds heal naturally, larger chronic wounds
demonstrate delayed wound healing with infections, and affect over 6.5 million
patients costing over US $25 billion annually in treatments. In addition,
annually, 2 million Americans suffer from serious infections due to drug
resistant bacteria resulting in severe morbidity, serious complications, huge
economic losses with an estimated 23,000 deaths. As conventional antibiotics are
failing, our ability to fight drug resistant pathogens is diminishing and the
pipeline of new potential antibiotic drugs is very skim. Thus, there is an
urgent need to develop a product that can fight multiple pathogens through a
mechanism against which bacteria are less likely to develop further resistance.
Hence, the current project evaluates the feasibility of developing a novel,
easily handleable dry film with potential to eliminate a variety of infectious
pathogens while improving wound healing in a single application. This product is
pliable, easily rehydratable, has intrinsic tissue scaffolding properties and is
inherently antimicrobial against a broad range of pathogens without the use of
any additional agents. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will
demonstrate the feasibility of developing a shape retaining, pliable, easily
handleable antimicrobial cell-scaffolding gel matrix into a product that is
simultaneously toxic to antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains, while remaining
conducive to tissue regeneration. This current product has a nano-porous gel
matrix that promotes cellular infiltration and attachment along with utilizing a
charge-based mechanism to lyse bacterial membranes upon contact. Although there
is on-going research on such self-assembled hydrogels, the formation of films
using these nanofibers has never been assessed before and stands to be the key
technological advancement. Thus, this current proposal explores two methods for
making films such as i) solvent casting methods relying on non-covalent
crosslinking - where the hydrogel is applied to a surface and then allowed to
dry into a film overnight, and ii) Covalent crosslinking by - incorporating
cysteines by oxidizing using H2O2 or crosslinking using Schiff base formation
followed by reductive deamination. The films so formed will be structurally and
functionally evaluated for their ability to eliminate infections and
biocompatibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.