* 1843840
* SBIR Phase I:  Utilization of a Combustion Process to Rapidly Solidify a Photocuring Composite Structure
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Alfram Bright, Helios Applied Science Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2021
* USD 224,973.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase 1 project will be the research and development of a new
class of extremely portable deployable structures that allows easier
transportation and simplifies the deployment of bulky structure. This
fundamental technology covers a wide variety of potential commercial products
including large easily transported rescue equipment and large tents for
earthquake and other widespread humanitarian disaster scenarios; large space
satellite structures such as antennas and optical arrays; large deployable UAV
wings; large volumes for habitation or material storage; piping for water,
sewage, oil or gas. This technology can help save lives during disasters, ease
the transportation of potable water, sewer and energy with lower construction
and deployment costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) phase I project will entail the systematic analysis and
development of a novel highly compact, rapidly deployable composite tube
technology. The challenge is to harness and combine the extremely energy dense
properties of chemical combustion with a photocuring high-performance structural
composite material to create an easily transported structure that can be rapidly
deployed. The project will entail experiments to better understand the polymer
material properties and tailor them to the electromagnetic spectrum emitted by
the combustion. Customization of an adhesive that will combine the necessary
viscosity, structural and curing properties. A multiphysics simulation,
validated with laboratory experiments, will be used to predict the technology's
limitations. The qualifying components will be utilized in a refined design and
evaluated by manufacturers for large scale production. These efforts will
culminate in scale prototype construction and testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.