* 1843044
* EAGER: Wafer-scale manufacturing of long-lived rare-earth qubits
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Tian Zhong, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2020
* USD 149,946.00

Part 1: &lt;br/&gt;Scalable manufacturing of long-lived, fully controllable
quantum bits (qubits) remains a central theme in quantum engineering, and is
poised to revolutionize computing, data analytics, material and pharmaceutical
discoveries. Current state-of-the-art superconducting quantum circuits triumph
over other platforms because of their wafer-scale production where qubits are
patterned lithographically with mature circuit fabrication technologies. On the
other hand, atom-like solid-state spins constitute an appealing system that
simultaneously possesses long coherence times and accessible optical
transitions, while allowing for chip-scale integration with other quantum
systems. In particular, rare-earth ions in solids feature numerous 4f- intra-
shell transitions that are effectively shielded from their crystalline
surroundings by closed outer shells, allowing for long spin coherence times (up
to 6 hours in Eu:Y2SiO5) and narrow optical transitions (&lt;100 Hz in
Er:Y2SiO5). Yet, the lack of a wafer-scale synthesis technique for such high-
performance qubits severely limits their prospects as a functional building
block of quantum information processing. Here we propose a new technology of
solid-state qubits based on rare-earth ions doped in epitaxial oxide thin films
on silicon wafers. The thin film host matrix is synthesized by molecular beam
epitaxy, offering the highest possible crystalline quality and ensuring
consistent, long coherences of qubits throughout the wafer. This wafer
architecture with embedded qubits can be processed with standard fabrication
techniques into scalable quantum electronic and photonic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond quantum science and engineering, this
project will generate substantial knowledge and technical advancements to push
the limits of wafer manufacturing and optoelectronic technologies by enabling a
new class of thin film based electrical and optical devices including lasers,
modulators, switches, and transducers. These technologies are poised to
revolutionize the existing fields of communications, computing and sensing. The
complex and highly interdisciplinary nature of this project will provide a
unique opportunity for training graduate students and postdocs as new generation
quantum scientists and engineers. The project will also highlight outreach
efforts to engage undergraduate, women, and underrepresented minority students
via sponsored summer research programs at the University of
Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2:&lt;br/&gt;Qubits based on rare-earth ions
possess long spin coherences and optical transitions in the telecom wavelength
(erbium in particular), making them ideally suited for long-distance quantum
network with existing fiber-optic telecommunication infrastructure. So far, the
exceptional coherence of rare-earth ions has been routinely measured when they
are doped in macroscopic bulk oxide crystals (e.g. Y2O3, Y2SiO5). These bulk
materials, while having superior structural and optical quality, do not allow
standard wafer processing to fabricate large-scale quantum devices as desired by
state-of-the-art quantum technologies. In this EAGER proposal, we explore a new
approach to epitaxially grow rare-earth qubits in oxide thin films as host
matrix on industry-standard silicon wafers using molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).
This concept is entirely new and exploratory given that there is little prior
knowledge on the wafer-scale qubit manufacturing technique for long-lived rare-
earth ions, which makes this research particularly fit for the NSF EAGER
program. While the inherent risk is significant, the potential impact of this
technology can be paradigm-shifting in the following aspects: 1) it vastly
increases the packing factor of qubits (atomic length-scale) compared to the
current superconducting circuit technology (micron scale). 2) high structural
and optical quality of the epitaxial film enhances the rare-earth qubit
coherence to ~1 second compared to ~100 microsecond in leading superconducting
qubits; 3) qubits on silicon wafers enable seamless integration with silicon-
based quantum electronics and photonics technology; 4) thin film topology
enables large-scale top-down device fabrication using standard lithography and
etching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.