* 1843233
* SBIR Phase I:  Non-crystallizable charge transporting organic materials as OLED functional layers and thermally activated delayed fluorescence emitter-layer hosts
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,02/29/2020
* David Weiss, Molecular Glasses, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 02/29/2020
* USD 224,958.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to accelerate the commercialization of
organic light-emitting diode (OLED) technology. For color displays (TV, cell
phone, computer, virtual reality, watches, etc.) OLED is superior to all
existing technologies in terms of energy usage, display color space, viewing
angle, etc. For lighting, OLED fixtures use very low energy, the light is soft,
casts no shadow, and is architecturally flexible. OLED is the display and
lighting technology of the future. However cost and short device lifetime has
retarded commercial advancement. The introduction of an entirely new class of
materials for OLED manufacturing will enable this advancement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will reduce OLED cost and improve
performance by utilizing a new class of photoelectric materials for the
nanometer thick layers that comprise an OLED. OLED layers utilize single-
component small molecules for the charge transporting and light-emitting layers.
These molecules tend to crystallize and are poor solvents for the emitting
molecules leading to decreased light emission efficiency and shortened device
lifetime. The innovation is using isomeric mixtures of designed molecules that
are amorphous and non-crystallizable in all three layers. These molecules are
chemically designed to meet all the required photophysical and electrical
characteristics necessary for superior OLED performance. Preliminary device
fabrication and testing has confirmed that these new materials dramatically
improve both emission efficiency and device lifetime with the standard emitter
molecules. Due to the physics of charge recombination in the emitter layer there
is only one technology which has the potential to harvest 100% of the injected
charge as emitted light: thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF). OLEDs
using TADF technology have demonstrated high efficiency but with very short
device lifetime. This project will couple the new non-crystallizable technology
with TADF to design and fabricate OLED devices with both high efficiency and
long life to meet commercialization requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.