* 1843379
* SBIR Phase I:  Real-Time Pose and Grasping Affordance Estimation for Vine Crops
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Joshua Lessing, ROOT AI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2019
* USD 220,982.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project affects one of the most
critical problems facing the United States agricultural industry, a shortage of
available labor. This shortage has had a particularly pronounced effect on the
fruit and vegetable industry, where even a brief loss of labor can result in a
total loss of harvestable products. More recently, U.S. produce suppliers have
been forced to rely heavily on imported produce sourced from greater distances
and of lower quality. Advancements in agricultural technology have already
dramatically improved the efficiency of produce farms in terms of land
utilization and water consumption by enabling produce to be grown indoors using
highly sophisticated commercial greenhouses, automated nutrient delivery, and
light control. However, to date, these commercial greenhouses still lack a
comprehensive solution for automating routine harvesting, pruning, and crop care
labor tasks. Thus, newly developed agricultural technologies which can automate
these tasks have the potential for substantial commercial impact by making
domestic farming operations more profitable and efficient. Commercial adoption
of automated harvesting technology will also benefit consumers by enabling
higher quality produce grown closer to market and position the U.S. agricultural
sector as a new area of growth for highly skilled technical
jobs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project will focus on the development of new deep learning techniques used to
identify harvestable fruits (initially tomatoes) using computer vision cameras
and to accurately estimate their orientation and connectivity (bunches of fruits
that are connected by the same stem or vine). Successful development of a method
capable of running in real-time would resolve substantial technical risks which
inhibit the ability to commercialize robotic automated harvesting solutions.
Such advancements would also contribute newfound insights to the broader
computer vision and robotic manipulation communities into the unique challenges
that sparse and deformable ?vine? like structures present to traditional methods
of object pose estimation and grasping. In the later portion of this Phase I
project, Root AI will incorporate these new methods of sensing tomato fruit
orientation into an improved motion and task planning system which uses the
additional information to intelligently plan a complex movement path to harvest
individual fruits in congested and heavily occluded natural growing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.