* 1843045
* SBIR Phase I:  Generating HLB and canker resistant citrus trees using CRISPR/Cas9
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Kara Boltz, Soil Culture Solutions, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 11/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to engineer resistance to two bacterial
diseases in citrus trees, Huanglongbing (HLB) and citrus canker. HLB and canker
have cost growers billions of dollars in destroyed trees and are decimating the
Florida citrus industry. In Florida, annual citrus production has fallen from
242 million boxes in the 2003-2004 growing season to 45 million boxes in
2017-2018. Further, citrus canker may be found in 98% of the citrus production
regions in Florida. Working with the University of Florida, the goal of this
project is to use CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing to advance natural selection to make
citrus trees resistant to both HLB and citrus canker. If successful, this
approach could be used to protect the 93 million tons of citrus production
worldwide.

The intellectual merit of this SBIR project is to develop HLB and canker-
resistant citrus varieties by using gene editing with CRISPR/Cas9. Florida
citrus growers need a solution to these diseases, and producing a genetically-
resistant citrus variety is a promising strategy. The approach is to modify
plant genes that are the targets of proteins secreted by the disease-causing
bacteria. The first objective is to conduct the gene editing in commercially
viable citrus varieties. This will be accomplished non-transgenically by
transforming a non-integrated plasmid or purified Cas9 protein and in vitro
transcribed sgRNA in citrus protoplasts. To identify gene edits, protoplasts
will be grown into callus, which will be screened by PCR and DNA heteroduplex
digestion as well as Sanger and/or high-throughput sequencing. The second
objective will be to take plants with confirmed edits, clonally propagate them,
and conduct preliminary testing for HLB or canker resistance. Plants will be
inoculated with the disease-causing bacteria and then monitored for disease
progression by observation of physical characteristics and measurement of
bacterial titers by PCR. The best performing mutations from Phase I will be
combined and used for more extensive greenhouse and field testing during SBIR
Phase II.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.