* 1843859
* STTR Phase I:  Portable Ultra-Resolution EEG for Improved Diagnosis and Treatment of Brain Disorders: Instrumentation and Algorithms
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2019,12/31/2020
* Pulkit Grover, Precision Neuroscopics
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2020
* USD 224,999.00

This SBIR Phase I project will advance novel techniques for developing high-
resolution noninvasive brain imaging systems, capable of recording unprecedented
spatiotemporal resolution inferences of the brain activity for a portable
system. These systems leverage novel fundamental analysis and results, and
experimental demonstrations, that show that spatial resolution of
Electroencephalography (EEG) is not saturated at densities of a few hundred
electrodes, unlike what has been widely believed in clinical and neuroscience
community. They also build on recent work by the PIs that enables faster and
reliable acquisition of EEG signals. The success of the proposed work will help
diagnose worsening brain injuries before the injury occurs. Brain injuries
affect 1.7 million Americans every year. Commercially, it will enable higher
resolution brain-machine interfaces for applications such as virtual reality
interfacing and neuroprostheses, generating novel avenues for jobs and revenue
through creation of an entirely new industry. This transdisciplinary effort
brings together neuroscientists and engineers and the concepts developed in this
effort will inform material for basic neuroscience and neuroengineering courses.
The team will continue to publish and publicize their work at clinical
conferences. One of the core employees will be a minority female who has
contributed to the research, guided several other minority (and non-minority)
female students, and now wants to lead the development end of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort builds a systematic platform that
challenges the widely held belief that increasing electrode-densities of EEG to
beyond a few hundred electrodes does not improve spatial resolution. There are
several problems with the traditional EEG that the platform overcomes: (i)
typically only 9-32 electrodes are used for clinical diagnoses and these are
fundamentally limited to only providing poor spatial resolution; (ii) because
traditional EEGs have low resolution, surgical treatments often require invasive
procedures. E.g., for diagnosing severity or worsening of Traumatic Brain
Injuries (TBI) by measuring parameters of cortical spreading depolarizations
(CSDs), which are mediators of worsening brain injuries; (iii) long-term EEG
measurements are cumbersome, and high-density systems can take hours of manual
labor to install. The PIs' preliminary work provides strong evidence supporting
the claim that ultra-high-density EEG will provide the first non-invasive and
portable modality for high spatial and temporal resolution brain imaging. Novel
brain-imaging algorithms will be developed and benchmarked against existing
techniques and assessed using novel fundamental limits. Novel techniques will be
deployed in the design of conductive sponges and in lowering power, enabling the
platform to be portable and usable over long term. These improvements will be
rigorously tested through simulations, experiments, and real data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.