* 1843658
* SBIR Phase I:  Medical Device for Monitoring Respiratory Disease
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Justice Amoh, Clairways LLC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 06/30/2021
* USD 269,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be a novel wearable device for
unobtrusively detecting changes in the lung health of patients with chronic
respiratory disease. This Passive Unobtrusive Lung function Monitor (PULMO) will
be the only device that can automatically measure a patient's lung health
information without requiring any active engagement from the clinician, and
without imposing any obtrusive changes to the patient's daily routine. The PULMO
is useful in a broad range of respiratory disease applications, such as lung
transplant post-operative care, asthma management and respiratory therapy
research, that require continuous, objective and unobtrusive monitoring of lung
function change. Since PULMO technology is compatible with low-cost
microcontrollers, it has the potential to dominate the spirometry market and
respiratory clinical trials space with high-volume production. The spirometry
market has an expected CAGR of 9.4 % from 2018 to 2025, reaching a $1.4 billion
market value by 2025, while clinical trials expenditures on new respiratory
therapy drugs is forecast to reach $1.7 billion in
2025.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project addresses the major drawback of the state-of-the-art in continuous
monitoring of respiratory disease, which is that it demands daily discipline,
effort and proper technique of the patient, resulting in missing, invalid or
fabricated data. In this project, a manufactured PULMO test device will be
implemented with an intelligent event detection unit combined with a low power
microcontroller, and the total average power consumption will be less than 300
microWatts. The measurement error of the PULMO will be within +/- 5 %, which is
necessary for detecting changes in lung impairment. The intelligent event
detection unit will be implemented as a nonlinear dynamical system in a custom
integrated circuit. A gated recurrent neural network that is optimized for
embedded low resource systems will be implemented in the low power
microcontroller and will be used to detect respiratory disease symptoms.
Controlled tests will be performed with a silicone phantom chest to evaluate the
measurement accuracy of the PULMO device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.