* 1843472
* MSU Workshop on Quantum Information Science: Are we at the crossroads?
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Johannes Pollanen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2022
* USD 10,000.00

This is a proposal to support the participation of graduate students and
postdoctoral researchers at a&lt;br/&gt;workshop at Michigan State University in
Quantum Information Science (QIS). The workshop will be held on the campus of
MSU at the Kellogg Conference Center from October 1-3, 2018. The field of
quantum information science (QIS) is in a nascent state with several academic,
industrial and government groups striving to understand the basic physics, and
to build and control many-qubit systems. QIS is approaching a tipping point
where the realization of practical quantum computing systems is imminent.
Considering this a workshop at Michigan State University will be held to bring
together a broad community of researchers working on QIS to discuss the near
future of the field, including the physical implementations of quantum
computers, the most interesting open questions in the field, and the challenging
fundamental and applied problems of quantum science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
primary goal of the meeting is for the scientific program is the exploration of
the ideas and open questions in the field of QIS. The workshop will provide a
venue where these ideas and questions will be discussed as intellectual leaders
in the field come together to present new results and discuss how to navigate
the scientific and technological landscape of the field as it develops. The
broader impacts include scientific, application-oriented, and
educational/outreach components. Researcher from both inside and outside of
academia will be attending the conference. The inclusion of participants from
outside of academia will provide an opportunity to student and postdoctoral
attendees to learn about the quantum research and technology development going
on at companies and industry labs such as Google, IBM, and MITRE. In this sense
the workshop will provide an excellent complement to the cross-disciplinary
training of a diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.