* 1843179
* SBIR Phase I:  Enhancing the skin microbiome for mosquito repellency: Next generation mosquito repellent derived from big data analysis
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Nicole Scott, Cybele Microbiome Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to develop a safe, natural, long-lasting and
effective mosquito repellent product by exploiting the natural repellent
compounds present in the skin microbiome. Mosquito-borne illnesses affect 700M
people worldwide and cause several million deaths each year. Chikungunya, West
Nile, Malaria, Zika, Dengue, are just some of the debilitating vectors spread by
mosquitoes. Mosquito-derived diseases cost &gt;$6.8B/year and the market for
mosquito repellents is &gt;$3.2B and growing. Many solutions are aimed at
killing and disabling mosquitoes, but mosquitoes are a crucial part of the
ecological food chain. Further, many repellents are extremely toxic, and
mosquitoes are developing resistance. The proposed technology will be used to
identify compounds that will drive the endogenous skin microbiome to a more
mosquito repellent phenotype. Using these methods, it is possible to harness the
biochemistry contained in the native skin microbiome to create an endogenous
repellency that is a safe, natural, environmentally friendly, and effective
barrier to mosquitoes. It is expected that this repellency approach may be used
safely even with children and pregnant women. In addition, it may be possible to
use this approach to develop repellents for multiple insects, repellent products
for companion animals, and additional over-the-counter skin
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I
project is to develop a new class of topical insect repellents by influencing
repellency in the skin microbiome. This will be accomplished by developing and
validating a platform technology to identify compounds produced by the
microbiome that are associated with biochemical pathways of interest, and use
the identified compounds to target those pathways whose end-products comprise
natural mosquito-repellent compounds. The goal is to create a topical mosquito
repellent product. For this project, the plan is to complete metagenome
sequencing on skin samples collected from individuals that are either naturally
repellent or attractive to Anopheles mosquitoes (the mosquito that carries
Malaria). The next step is to predict metabolite compound turnover and use
metabolomics to validate the results. In vitro assays and in silico models will
be used to provide proof-of-concept for the use of those predicted compounds to
induce the microbiota to produce mosquito repellent
metabolites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.