* 1843260
* STTR Phase I:  Wireless Vibration Micro-Sensors for None Intrusive Real Time Monitoring
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Nicholas Stoll, LORAND TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 07/31/2020
* USD 249,916.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is mainly in the area of
machine condition monitoring. Vibration monitoring is an integral part of any
machine condition monitoring regimen. All equipment that comprise belts, gears,
bearings, drive motors, or other moving components have a specific vibration
signature during normal operating cycles. Change in equipment vibration serves
as an early warning of a decline in operating condition and signals the need for
preventative maintenance to avoid more serious equipment faults and failure. Due
to extremely small form-factor and wireless signal detection scheme of the
sensing tag in the proposed vibration monitoring system of this project, simple
and cost-effective direct measurement of vibration from hard-to-access parts of
machinery (e.g. rotor in an electric motor) is enabled. This will have a
significant impact on widespread use of such vibration monitoring techniques,
hence improving the performance and safety of the equipment, extend their
lifetime and avoid any unplanned downtime or maintenance across a host of
existing and new industries and applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will initially focus on
developing wireless battery-less accelerometers that can achieve very high
resolution. The operating principle of the resonant accelerometer to be
developed has never been demonstrated in the past and it is through this novel
concept that high-sensitivity wireless measurement of acceleration is made
possible. The proposed sensor consists of a piezoelectric resonant cavity
coupled to an antenna that utilizes the piezoelectric stiffening effect to
produce an acceleration-dependent resonance frequency. The center frequency of
the resonator is wirelessly interrogated through pulsed excitation signals. One
main and particularly attractive feature of the sensors is the simplicity of the
sensor tag where no electronics are required. An acceleration detectivity of
less than 50mg for a device operating in the 27.12MHz ISM band is targeted in
this project which meets the requirement for a wide variety of application
including motor vibration monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.