* 1843587
* SBIR Phase I:  Chemically Resistant Membranes for Water Purification
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Judy Riffle, NALA SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project will provide new opportunities for purifying waters that
cannot be economically treated using existing commercial membranes. Increased
market growth to include recycle and re-use of contaminated water that is
currently slated for disposal or long term environmentally risky storage will
increase water availability for industry and agriculture and reduce
environmental impact from these same users. More available water, especially in
higher demand locations, will lead to higher production and lower costs for
industrial and agriculture based consumers, leading to job
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to validate a
new method of thin film composite membrane fabrication using new materials
strategies to produce game changing anti-fouling and chlorine resistant reverse
osmosis membranes. Current market dominating polyamide thin film composite (TFC)
membranes are inherently susceptible to fouling and degraded by chlorine
disinfectants used to mitigate bio-fouling, which is the greatest challenge to
membrane operation. The established TFC production technique provides very thin
active layers on the order of 100?s of nanometers but is limited to polyamides.
The proposed technology will produce TFCs with alternative polymers. Polymers
that are chlorine resistant and inherently non-fouling are targeted for use but
the unmet challenge has been the opportunity to manufacture them with membrane
thicknesses down to the 100?s of nm thickness regime necessary to challenge the
flux properties of current commercial membranes. Combining this new fabrication
technology and new polymers is the technological breakthrough needed to develop
innovative membranes. The project will synthesize a target polymer composition,
develop the formulation and fabrication parameters within the new process and
produce TFC samples for testing. TFC samples will undergo comparative testing of
fouling and chlorine resistance, water flux and salt rejection in a variety of
simulated test waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.