* 1843285
* "Carbon isotope fractionation in Archaea using the 3HP/4HB pathway: Prospects for paleo-geochemistry and paleo-barometry"
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Ann Pearson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 03/31/2022
* USD 491,551.00

A better understanding of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) concentration and its
relationship to Earth?s temperature is essential to climate research. Records
from ice cores show that the partial pressure of carbon dioxide (pCO2)
correlates with global temperatures -- high pCO2 implies a warm Earth. However,
ice core records are limited to the age of Earth's oldest ice, which is only ~1
million years (Ma). All estimates of pCO2 from older than 1 Ma rely on other
indirect measurements that track CO2. These indirect measurements are called
proxies. This project will test a new pCO2 proxy called the Archaea (EpsilonAr)
proxy, which is based on lipids (a class of biochemicals) recovered from
microbes living in marine systems. The basis for the EpsilonAr proxy originated
from some limited field observations and from a theoretical model. The primary
objective of the current research is to test the theory behind the EpsilonAr
proxy, both using controlled laboratory experiments and by studying marine
sediments that record a recent glacial-interglacial cycle. The project crosses
disciplinary lines, requiring geobiological methods along with isotopic analyses
and applications to the sedimentary record. The project will train a post-
doctoral investigator and two summer undergraduate and/or high school
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of laboratory experiments and
natural samples will be used to test the hypothesis that the carbon isotope
fractionation recorded in lipids of marine Thaumarchaeota reflects the
extracellular CO2 concentrations during growth. Thaumarchaeota use the
3-hydroxypropionate/4-hydroxybutyrate (3HP/4HB) pathway of carbon fixation in
which the primary enzyme, acetyl/propionyl-CoA carboxylase, is specific for the
substrate HCO3-. The current hypothesis is that Thaumarchaeota are dependent on
CO2 diffusion, followed by intracellular catalysis to HCO3 . The initial focus
of the project will be to conduct controlled experiments on the model taxon
Nitrosopumilis maritimus to test a quantitative model of the carbon isotope
effect and its dependence on CO2 (by varying pH, dissolved inorganic carbon
(DIC), and growth rate). The results will be compared to control experiments
with the thermophile Metallosphaera sedula, a 3HP/4HB taxon predicted to be
CO2-insensitive. The second stage of the project will be to examine whether the
predicted isotopic sensitivity of EpsilonAr is observed in a glacial-
interglacial sedimentary record from the subtropical Atlantic Ocean. Outcomes
will be evaluated by comparing the observed EpsilonAr response to CO2 and growth
rate with the existing theoretical framework, updating and refining the theory
as needed to reflect the experiments and observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.