* 1843246
* SBIR Phase I:  A Diagnostic Catheter for Treating Obstructions/Occlusions Within a Body Lumen or Vessel
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Rainier Betelia, Embark Medical
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 12/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project intends to design and develop an innovative medical
device solution that can potentially save $1.16B to the overall US healthcare
system by reducing the procedural time and decreasing the number of catheters
and devices used in Peripheral Vascular lnterven6on procedures. Lower extremity
peripheral arterial disease affects more than 8 million people in the United
States alone. The annual healthcare expenditure spent on treating peripheral
arterial disease is $4.37B. Since 2008, US Center for Medicare and Medicaid has
been stressing for greater efficiency and lowering costs for Peripheral Vascular
Intervention. Commonly performed Peripheral Vascular Intervention procedures in
the CathLab, to treat PAD, encounter loss of guidewire access. This complication
is amplified in the case of difficult to cross stenotic lesions and, in many
cases, is frustrating for the physician as they have to spend several
hours/procedures trying to regain guidewire access. Guidewire access is the key
for a successful procedural outcome. The Project intends to reduce Peripheral
Vascular Intervention cost by improving procedural efficiency by eliminating
guidewire/catheter exchanges in current practice thereby reducing Cath Lab
overhead costs and by reducing procedure time and effort required to acquire a
good quality angiographic image. An important ancillary benefit of the
innovation is that the radiation exposure to the healthcare providers and the
patient can potentially be minimized due to the decreased fluoroscopic activity.
The project aims to continue beyond SBIR Phase I to become a commercial product
and be the standard of care for Peripheral Vascular Intervention procedures.

This SBIR Phase I project is for the design and development of a .014-inch
guidewire compatible low profile PTA balloon catheter with a proprietary
contrast injection mechanism. This product is ideal for performing PTA
interventions in difficult anatomical spaces e.g. below-the-knee peripheral
vasculature. The proprietary inflation and injection system allows for treatment
visualization without needing catheter exchanges or loss of guidewire access.
The output of the Project intends to provide focused and sharper visualization
along the entire treatment length and allows for judicious usage of radiopaque
contrast in contrast sensitive patients. A feasibility prototype of the concept
was tested in an animal model with promising results. The SBIR Phase I project
is focused on overcoming technical challenges to design and develop the unique
device design to maintain a statistically significant rated burst pressure,
develop and evaluate device bond joints per ISO standard 10555-1 2013, Sterile
Single Use Intravascular catheters, develop the manufacturing process and tools,
to integrate the catheter multi functionality. The Project intends to design and
fabricate a test fixture to simulate clinical usage of the Innovative device per
FDA Class II Guidance Controls for Percutaneous Transluminal Balloon Catheters
and confirm that the catheter satisfies customer requirements. The Development
efforts as part of SBIR Phase I project involve utilization of iterative design
process. 3-dimensional design modeling and optimization, creation of a test
fixture to simulate clinical usage, iterative prototyping and testing efforts to
ensure the desired device specifications are met.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.