* 1843616
* SBIR Phase I:  Improving MRI Guided Thermal Therapies by Designed Magnetic Nanoparticles
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Janusz Hankiewicz, MRX ANALYTICS PBC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 06/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project involves the creation of particles that will allow one
to see a map of temperature within a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
measurement. This is a significant advancement because conventional thermometry
is usually invasive, allows only single point temperature measurements, and may
interfere with the therapeutic and imaging instrument. The proposed technology
is designed to be biocompatible and minimally invasive, leading to fast 3D
temperature mapping deep in the human body. The proposed materials and
techniques can be used with MRI-guided thermal procedures which can replace
scalpel-based surgery for a variety of cancers, improving patient outcomes and
reducing surgical time. The method can also be used to improve treatments for
essential tremor, uterine fibrosis and arteriovenous malformation. In these
treatments, the temperature in the entire affected region must be constantly
monitored. Due to the limitations of the currently used temperature measurement
methods, these minimally invasive MRI-guided procedures are not frequently used
or take considerably longer time than desired because surgeons often must work
around failed temperature measurements. The work in this proposal could
transform current methods of MRI-guided thermometry, significantly reducing
surgery time and cost as well as improving patient outcomes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal develops a novel, minimally-invasive method
of creating temperature maps superimposed on anatomical MRI images. The
technology uses a new type of temperature-sensitive sensor, in the form of
magnetic nanoparticles, and could ultimately be used within human or other
tissues. The key idea is that magnetic particles embedded in tissue will create
a local dipole magnetic field that will modulate (statically or dynamically) the
homogeneity of the main static magnetic field of the MRI scanner. This changes
the nuclear relaxation times of the tissue and broadens the Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) linewidth, ultimately leading to local changes in the brightness
of the MRI image. The magnetization of the particles is engineered to change
with temperature, and therefore the results are temperature dependent. Different
shades of gray in the weighted gradient echo MR images, can then be calibrated
to obtain a spatial map of temperature. This has immediate application in
providing real-time temperature information to the surgeon during MRI-guided
thermal interventional procedures to treat cancer, for example. These new
contrast sensors can operate in a wide temperature range both below and above
the human body temperature, producing spatial maps of temperature with an
accuracy better than 1 degree Celsius.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.