* 1843169
* SBIR Phase I:  Expercoin Republics: Protocol for AI-Powered Decentralized Learning Economies on Blockchain
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Harpreet Singh, EXPERCOIN LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,788.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is that it will reskill those being displaced by the
disruption caused by the impending AI and automation that is sweeping every
industry. By providing training and fully integrated career services platforms
at significantly lower cost than traditional models, Expercoin Republics will
make education more accessible to organizations seeking to upskill their
employees and professionals looking to reskill. According to Harvard Business
School professor Clayton Christensen, 50% of all American colleges are bound for
bankruptcy in the next few decades. Due to the rapid pace of technological
change and new employment requirements, we are moving away from credentialing to
continuous learning. This project will allow organizations of all kinds to use
its protocol to create expert networks and content platforms, while leveraging
tokens to reward participation among their users. 400 to 800 million people
globally need to be reskilled. This is estimated to translate to $8.5 trillion
in unrealized revenue due to lack of talent by 2030.

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to embrace a novel intellectual approach and
business model that empowers employees and employers through upskilling,
continuous learning, and skill verification. The mission of Expercoin Republics
is to instantly allow anyone to create a specialized community with marketplaces
for training, assessments, mentorship and work opportunities. Expercoin will use
blockchain to create decentralized autonomous organizations that advance
learning and facilitate employment through the creation of thousands of
specialized learning communities. A notable achievement of Expercoin would be to
create the underlying infrastructure that helps businesses and governments
launch learning economies that consist of self-regulated decentralized entities
with features such as transparent voting, effective governance, fraud
adjudication, spam prevention, account verification and rewards. An Expercoin
token will provide a wide range of functions necessary to create a decentralized
economy that is not governed by any central authority.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.