* 1843702
* SBIR Phase I:  The DNA Barcode Scanner: Democratizing Genetic Information For Conservation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Paul Bunje, CONSERVATION X LABS, PBC
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 04/30/2020
* USD 224,953.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to place the power of genetic identification
in the hands of those who need it, at the front lines of conservation. The DNA
Barcode Scanner will enable anyone, anywhere, to perform a low-cost, rapid,
automated DNA test to validate the identity of a tissue sample, without
specialized training, expensive lab-based equipment, reagents, or reliable
power, where it is needed most - in the field. This technological advance has
the potential to revolutionize species identification to prevent species
extinction, to protect consumers and our food supply, and to combat threats to
global biodiversity. The innovation's commercial potential includes improving
the safety and sustainability of our supply chains, combatting costly
environmental fraud, and detecting pests and pathogens that threaten our
nation's economy, security, and health. The initial market opportunity is to
address unmet demand from seafood suppliers, distributors, and retailers;
government regulators and enforcement agents; and conservation and natural
resources entities, for increased transparency and integrity of seafood supply
chains by ending seafood mislabeling and fraud, which occurs in over 30% the
$17.1 billion dollar U.S. seafood market and is worth up to $250,000 per illegal
import.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop the customizable
DNA collection, extraction, and amplification cartridge that enables a user to
go from tissue sample to species identification in a single device. This project
focuses on the scientific and technical challenge of automating sample
preparation. The company's goal is to create an integrated device that will
validate seafood products (our first market) from sample collection to DNA
extraction, DNA amplification, and, ultimately, species identification. The
goals of this project are to 1) determine a reliable and intuitive method for
collecting DNA from a seafood product and create a prototype collection tool, 2)
prototype an easy-to-use and highly flexible DNA extraction and sample
preparation component to provide DNA suitable for analysis, and 3) fully
integrate microfluidic processes and molecular chemistry (DNA amplification and
analysis) with clear validation of multiple species. They will design and test
several prototypes of the collection, extraction, and amplification cartridge
and test these with users to identify the most robust and simplest method for
delivering confident species identification. Their objective is to deliver a
fully functional prototype that is intuitive for users and can perform a seafood
species validation test in multiple field
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.