* 1843634
* SBIR Phase I:  Cloudseal: Software Testing with Deterministic Containers
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Logan Wendholt, CLOUDSEAL INC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,444.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from enabling efficient repeatable
computing using commodity technology. While computers should, in principle,
operate the same way each time, we have all seen how a program that ran fine
yesterday somehow crashes today. Our current computing infrastructure betrays
its fundamentally unrepeatable nature in a thousand careless ways, by letting
processor and operating system details affect how programs run. Popular
computing abstractions like containers and virtual machines improve
repeatability, but do not provide any guarantees. This project conducts R&amp;D
on a new repeatable container, which provides repeatability for arbitrary
programs running inside it. Repeatable containers will allow for reproducible
software builds, software testing that runs the same on all machines, and faster
software debugging with "one click" reproduction of failures. Repeatable
containers reduce software development and QA costs. Repeatable containers can
also facilitate archiving software and scientific research, and trustless grid
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project involves the development of new container runtime systems that
can enforce repeatability with low performance overhead. This project will focus
on technical improvements that yield a robust container runtime which can handle
a wide range of legacy software that collectively exercises the full range of
processor and operating system behaviors. The container will integrate smoothly
with both existing container technologies and existing container users, to
facilitate easy adoption by software developers. Key technical results will
include developing a "fingerprinting" technology to uniquely identify container
executions, and a stress-testing methodology to increase confidence that the
repeatability guarantee holds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.