* 1843063
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Lithium-Ion Batteries via Solution-Deposited Nanolayers on the Surface of Formed Electrodes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* SOURAV BASU, CORESHELL TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,945.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to dramatically improve Lithium-Ion Battery
(LIB) technology in order to advance renewable energy penetration and reduce
greenhouse gas emissions. LIBs are not only a major component of the current
consumer electronics industry - they are also becoming a key linchpin in the
development of clean energy applications such as electric vehicles and grid
storage. Their limited cost-competitiveness relative to fossil fuels, finite
energy density, and limited lifetime are all still road blocks against
mainstream adoption of these emerging applications. These issues all point
toward a need for significant technical advancements that cannot be satisfied by
simple economies of scale alone. Coreshell?s innovation is to introduce a cheap
and scalable electrode coating technology that protects batteries against
cycling degradation. The technology has the potential to yield a marked
improvement in battery cost and performance, as well as a reduction in
manufacturing rates by replacing a slow electrochemical step that can take days
with a fast coating step that can be completed within minutes. If fully
actualized, Coreshell?s coatings have the potential to revolutionize the LIB
industry and enable widespread commercialization of clean energy technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to
demonstrate the effectiveness of Coreshell?s unique electrode coating
technology. The state-of-the-art electrode surface protection in LIBs is formed
electrochemically and is termed ?SEI? (Solid-Electrolyte-Interphase). SEI is
slow and expensive to make, inherently unstable, and consumes lithium thereby
reducing capacity. This proposal is based on a novel proprietary coating in
place of SEI, using a roll-to-roll process that can be seamlessly integrated
into existing LIB manufacturing lines. By depositing well-formed coatings on the
surface of battery electrodes, Coreshell?s technology can protect against many
of the degrading reactions that occur during LIB cycling. The proposed
technology has the promise to deliver greater initial capacity, greater depth-
of-charge over equivalent cycle-life, reduced manufacturing costs and,
ultimately, the potential to reduce LIB cost per kWh by up to 25%. In Phase I,
Coreshell will demonstrate part of this value through two main objectives. The
first is to increase initial battery capacity by &gt;5% and retain the total
capacity to &gt;90% of original after 200 cycles. The second is to show that
batteries incorporating Coreshell?s coated electrodes can eschew SEI formation,
which would demonstrate the feasibility of ~7% reduction in manufacturing
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.