* 1843405
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of DNA-Encoded Peptidomimetic Library for High-Affinity Binders Against Disease-Related Proteins
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Kurt Gish, TRILO THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of a new class of high
affinity compounds that would be small enough to be delivered into challenging
environments such as living cells. Inhibitors of disease-related proteins are
central to modern therapeutics across the spectrum of diseases, from cancer to
autoimmune diseases, to viral infections, and even to certain hereditary
disorders. Many of these drivers of disease are transcription factors or signal-
transduction molecules, yet these proteins are commonly thought of as
"undruggable," due to a lack of small pockets for drug binding or due to large
protein-protein interaction interfaces. This proposal is aimed at developing an
easily screenable library, consisting of DNA-encoded peptidomimetics, whose
members have the necessary properties to inhibit these "yet-to-be-drugged"
proteins. Of highest commercial importance, these compounds could address many
of the currently "undruggable" molecular drivers of diseases such as cancer and
autoimmune disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR
Phase I project is to create a DNA-encoded library of constrained peptidomimetic
compounds. Current DNA-encoded libraries are primarily limited to small
molecules (DNA-encoded chemical libraries; DECLs) or to natural amino acids in
the context of translated-protein display (e.g., phage display or mRNA display).
In contrast, member molecules of this library will have a much larger binding
surface than current small molecules from DECLs, and will be both protease
resistant and have a wide range of chemical side chains, unlike the natural
peptides from phage display. The goal of this project is to demonstrate the
ability to synthesize compounds with conformational rigidity along with parallel
DNA encoding. A library of these compounds could be screened to discover new
therapeutic candidates (human and veterinary), life sciences research tools, and
heat-resistant diagnostic reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.