* 1843286
* SBIR Phase I:  A Mobile Learning System to Reduce Unconscious Bias Among Healthcare Providers
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2019
* Anurag Gupta, Be More, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 06/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop a mobile technology that can train
healthcare professionals in science-based skills to break the habit of
unconscious bias. Unconscious biases result from learned sets of mostly false
and negative associations between a trait and a social group, i.e. stereotypes,
that distort how people perceive, reason, and make decisions about other people.
In healthcare, these biases often begin a chain of discriminatory interactions
that lead to misdiagnoses, increased hospitalization, and unnecessary repeat
visits that sustain health disparities and cause tremendous suffering to
millions of Americans. Furthermore, these disparities cost the American economy
multibillion dollars annually. This project aims to address both these
challenges through a scalable mobile technology that will create learning
experiences for providers to adopt skills that break the habit of unconscious
bias. The project will further NSF's mission by advancing health, prosperity,
and welfare of all Americans so they can receive the highest quality of care
untainted by unconscious bias. The project's success would contribute to
creating a healthier and productive American population, workforce, and economy.
A successful outcome of this effort could spur its extension to other sectors,
including education, law enforcement, and business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of this project lies in demonstrating that the company's
proprietary methodology enables healthcare providers to develop greater self-
awareness about their unconscious biases and thus reduce health disparities. The
project will create novel employment of technological, discursive, and
experiential learning using a mobile application that offers and incentivizes
the practice of bias breaking tools to fully and sustainably break the habit of
unconscious bias. The mobile platform will be intentionally designed with the
end user's experience and interactions in mind to incentivize them every day to
learn and practice activities that transform unconscious biases in themselves.
The goal in Phase I is threefold: to determine user preferences in design and
experience for adopting new skills and building new habits; develop a high-
fidelity beta-test for a limited number of experiences that teach breaking bias
skills over a mobile platform; and test its usability and desirability with a
representative number of healthcare providers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.