* 1843757
* SBIR Phase I:  Affordable Multi-Wavelength Lidar and Thermal Imager for Autonomous Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Shimon Maimon, NBN TECHNOLOGIES, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2020
* USD 222,500.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to provide a low cost
Lidar+Thermal camera to the autonomous car market that will eventually enable
level 4 and level 5 autonomy. The proposed innovation incorporates both a Lidar
and a thermal detector to locate objects but also classify them, as this is the
most crucial aspect of autonomous vehicles. The dual polarity Lidar+Thermal
photodetector solves a few major issues in the current Lidar industry. First,
current Lidars have to use advanced algorithms to classify the objects, whereas
a Lidar+Thermal detector can easily distinguish between animate and inanimate
objects, while continuing to establish their location. This is done due to the
drastic heat signature of animate objects. Second, the dual polarity detector is
able to detect and locate hazards on the road such as snow or puddles, which is
vital if autonomous vehicles are used in northern regions. In addition, the
frame rate of the Flash Lidar+Thermal is up to 200 Frames per second, which will
drastically reduce smearing effects and allow for driving at speeds of 70+ MPH.
Lastly, the high thermal resolution of the camera will ensure operation in bad
weather conditions including fog and rain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will provide a proof-of-
concept of the dual polarity Lidar+Thermal detector. An array of 32x32 pixels
will demonstrate that in one polarity, a thermal hot-mid-wave image and in the
other polarity the pixels will operate in a time-of-flight mode for Flash Lidar
operation. The pixel?s spectral response will range from 500nm up to 3.5?m in
the Lidar mode. Characterization of the detector array will use the eye-safe
1550nm laser. The goal is to show a 200m Lidar operation with a high resolution
of a few centimeters and thermal imaging with a thermal sensitivity of 4mK. The
transition to Phase II will include an array size of 1000x500 with 10?m pixel
pitch. The detector will be evaluated outdoors to demonstrate the detection of
animate objects, snow and puddles and will be tested under fog
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.