* 1843623
* SBIR Phase I:  A New Approach for Isolating Leukocyte Sub-populations to Enable Efficient Manufacturing of Cellular Therapies
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Sean Gifford, HALCYON BIOMEDICAL, INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be to develop a microfluidic device for
cell therapy manufacturing. Advantages in terms of cost and quality of the cell
products produced by the proposed technology should benefit clinical researchers
and cell therapeutics. Further, by providing an efficient, standardized, and
scalable approach to the manufacturing process, the translation of lab-scale
discoveries to curative therapies that are widely-available should be
significantly accelerated. On a fundamental level, this project will enhance
technological understanding of how to apply microfluidic technology concepts to
clinically-relevant applications (requiring macroscopic flowrates) in a
practical manner, while also establishing a new medical device sector centered
on a suite of easily implemented cell separation devices for use in cellular
therapies and related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this SBIR Phase I project is to employ a cell separation approach to create a
high-throughput proof-of-concept prototype to help simplify and streamline the
manufacture of cellular therapies. To accomplish this objective, a two-stage
microfluidic module will be designed to achieve isolation of separate
lymphocyte- and monocyte-rich subpopulations from blood samples, while removing
undesirable red blood cells and platelets, at levels sufficient for successful
culture growth. In addition, the plan is to fabricate a full-scale prototype
system of parallelized lymphocyte/monocyte isolation modules to achieve a
volumetric throughput capable of processing 200mL of peripheral blood-, buffy
coat-, or mononuclear cell (MNC) leukapheresis-derived product within ~30
minutes. Once developed, this technology will overcome many drawbacks that
plague current cell isolation approaches including high per unit cost,
laborious/time-consuming workflow, and potential to compromise sterility. This
device will require no expensive or complex equipment on-site to drive the
separation/concentration of the cells of interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.