* 1843738
* STTR Phase I:  ActivSignal Protein Profiling from Serum Exosomes for the Early Detection of Pancreatic Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Ilya Alexandrov, ActivSignal, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 11/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

This STTR Phase I project will develop a transformative platform for inexpensive
screening for pancreatic cancer detection, based on profiling of cancer-related
proteins from a small blood draw. Pancreatic cancer is one of the deadliest
types of cancer, killing over 50,000 each year in the US, and with a five-year
survival rate below 7%. However, currently there are no reliable diagnostic
tests for pancreatic cancer, and the great majority of cases are detected at a
late stage, with bleak mortality rates as a result. As cancer is driven
fundamentally by a dysregulation of key protein networks, directly measuring the
activity of key proteins provides a robust bio-signature for cancer detection.
The project will develop a scientifically novel diagnostic technology based on
broad protein profiling for the accurate and low cost detection of pancreatic
cancer, and thereby shift the therapeutic field of battle to an earlier stage of
the disease, where the current treatments can be more effectively harnessed to
improve patient outcomes and save lives, avoid unnecessary and ineffective
procedures, and generate health system cost savings across the US and elsewhere.
Commercialization of this diagnostic platform is expected to drive creation of a
substantial enterprise, and related employment and tax-
revenues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major innovation of this project is the
breakthrough technology for monitoring the state of dozens of cancer-related
proteins in biological samples and its application for diagnosing pancreatic
cancer from a minute sample of a patient?s blood. The innovative platform has
superior levels of sensitivity and accuracy compared to existing technologies,
and also offers substantially lower costs, which are critical advantages for the
diagnostic application. A further innovation in this project is the development
of the analytic engine and the bio-signature knowledge base, that will be used
for analysis of the patient?s protein profile. In this project, the Company will
focus on several key technical challenges to develop and validate a 1.0 version
of its diagnostic platform for pancreatic cancer detection: i. identifying a
robust, differentiated multi-target, bio-signature for pancreatic cancer; and
ii. doing so with an accuracy and at a sufficiently early stage in the cancer
emergence and progression to be medically useful. This project will extensively
profile biobank samples from various stages of pancreatic cancer and normal
patients to generate the differentiated bio-signatures, develop a diagnosis
prediction engine to match the bio-signatures and inform diagnoses, and validate
those results using additional samples. This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worth of support through evaluations using the
Foundation?s intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.