* 1843395
* EAGER: RF Switches Using 2D Phase Change Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Spyridon Pavlidis, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 01/31/2021
* USD 141,980.00

Non-technical:&lt;br/&gt;Telecommunications architectures have become
increasingly more complex as the number of people and devices connected to the
world's wireless infrastructure grows. One key characteristic of multi-purpose,
high performance systems is reconfigurability--the ability to tune the frequency
band at which a radio operates. Switches are the devices that form the backbone
of reconfigurable radio-frequency (RF) front-end circuits and are therefore the
subject of intense research. Phase change switches are a particularly promising
technology. These devices rely on changing electrical conductivity of a
nanomaterial by changing the crystal structure through the application of
voltage or heat. Previous generations of phase change switches have relied on
films that are tens of nanometers thick. This EAGER project aims to demonstrate
the first atomically thick (&lt; 1 nm) phase change switch. The switch will be
based on molybdenum telluride (MoTe2), an atomically thin semiconductor that
belongs to a class of materials known as transition metal dichalcogenides.
Atomically thin materials, often referred to as two-dimensional materials, offer
a number of interesting benefits. These include high strain limits for flexible
electronics and higher electron mobilities than competing thin film
technologies. Different two-dimensional materials can also be stacked vertically
to form new materials with unique properties. Critical to RF switch performance,
atomically thick phase change materials have been projected to require lower
voltages to induce a phase change. This will lower the energy consumption of the
switches themselves, as well as the overall systems that they are built into.
Overall, low-energy reconfigurable RF circuits could have a profound impact in
the development of portable, flexible or transparent wireless systems. Their
development could also lead to new applications such as portable nano-radios,
remote nodes for telecommunications and sensors for health
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the
proposed work is to demonstrate the operation of low voltage, 2D material-based
phase change switches at radio-frequency (RF) frequencies. Switches are required
for reconfigurable RF front-end circuits in wireless systems with multi-band
transmit/receive capabilities. Compared to solid-state or electro-mechanical,
phase change switches promise low loss, high cut-off frequencies, high isolation
and rapid switching. Two-dimensional (2D) molybdenum telluride (MoTe2) has been
shown to demonstrate phase change properties, with theoretically projected
voltage requirements significantly lower than traditional thin film phase change
materials. Low voltage switching, coupled with flexibility and transparency make
2D phase change switches attractive candidates for next-generation, mobile
nanosystems. The proposed work will experimentally validate and characterize
large area, 2D MoTe2 RF switches. This will involve fabrication of the devices,
as well as experimental exploration of the low-voltage and frequency response
performance limits. These results will be key to the future development of phase
change devices, the establishment of predictive models and the demonstration of
reconfigurable nano-circuits. The intellectual merit of this EAGER proposal
comprises of the following: (1) exploring and establishing a fundamental
understanding of trade-offs between phase control techniques, such as heat and
voltage, applied to 2D MoTe2 and related allows in order to establish behavioral
models and achieve low-energy switching devices; (2) unlocking large-area
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of 2D phase change films, paying particular
attention to thickness control for low-energy phase transitions, as well as
increased mobility for high-frequency operation; and (3) establishing basic
design procedures for the first RF switches using 2D phase change materials,
which will be validated through fabrication and characterization. This results
of proposed work stand to have immense implications for low-power wireless
circuits and accelerate the advent of wireless sensor nodes within the Internet
of Things and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.