* 1843319
* STTR Phase I:  Wirelessly Enabled and Distributed Energy Storage Systems Technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Amer Abu Qahouq, JAQ ENERGY LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 09/30/2021
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project includes the development
and proof-of-concept prototype demonstration of a new wirelessly-enabled and
distributed battery energy storage system technology which can result in
significant contributions to wide range of applications that critically depend
on energy storage systems and energy availability. These applications include
electrification of transportation via Electric Vehicles (EVs) and Electric
Aircraft (EA), off-power-grid homes, green homes, and other buildings. This
technology seeks to and supports the adoption increase of EVs, EA, and renewable
energy sources. As a result, the project contributes to the increase in energy
efficiency, the reduction in greenhouse gas emissions and the reduction in the
dependence on foreign oil imports. The project enhances scientific and
technological understanding by demonstrating the visibility, robustness, and
stability of distributed wireless control methods and power electronics
architecture for the wirelessly enabled and distributed energy storage system.
The results of the project will be used to evaluate and determine the technical
and commercial feasibility of the wirelessly enabled and distributed battery
energy storage systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will focus on conducting research and
development tasks that will address key technical challenges that are crucial to
successful commercialization of the wirelessly-enabled and distributed energy
storage system such as robust and stable controller realization, wireless
communication link realization for continuous wireless control, realization of
efficient light-weight multi-link wireless power transfer, high-density light-
weight power electronics with high-efficiency, and electrical and mechanical
integration of the overall system. A proof-of-concept prototype for Electric
Vehicles application will also be developed under this project and used for
several demonstrations to potential partners, customers, and investors. This
proof-of-concept demonstration prototype will be used to demonstrate the
feasibility of the system and related desired functionalities such as fast, easy
and safe exchange of modules in the system without the need for specialized
personnel and distribution infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.