* 1843381
* SBIR Phase I:  Tactile sensing for spinal-needle placements
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,03/31/2020
* Yashar Ganjeh, INTUITAP MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop an innovative imaging device that applies
tactile sensing to the surface detection of vertebrae to help clinicians place
needles for the nearly 13 million diagnostic and therapeutic spinal punctures
performed in the United States each year. The standard of care involves manual
palpation of the back to estimate a vertebral gap for needle insertion. This
technique is highly inaccurate, often requiring multiple attempts, which lead to
pain and complications, unpredictable procedure times, poor throughput, and high
rates of referrals to radiology for fluoroscopic guidance. By offering an
accurate means of localizing bony landmarks, this project will enable successful
insertion in fewer attempts, thereby improving clinical outcomes and reducing
costs across the $3.2 million market, including emergency medicine, neurology,
anesthesiology, and pain medicine. The device can also be introduced for
training and to reduce errors in clinical testing of intrathecal drugs; and can
increase procedure access by offering an alternative, bedside solution for
challenging cases. To date, tactile imaging has only been applied clinically to
soft-tissue evaluations. This project will pave the way for expanded use of this
low-cost, non-radiative modality; to possibly replace palpation for other
procedures, such as joint injections and thoracenteses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
innovation is the first standalone, clinical tactile imager. Its imaging
subsystem comprises a sensitive, high-resolution pressure-sensing array, which
detects vertebral landmarks when pressed against the back, and communicates them
as a 2D pressure map to an integrated display. The device also includes a novel
needle guide, which allows for flexible and reliable insertion. Positive gap
localization has been verified in early development. This project will first
confirm accurate insertion relative to imaging output by characterizing the
relationship between guide and visualized-landmark locations, and by developing
a mechanism to stabilize the device over unpredictable lumbar curvatures. Next,
2D pressure information will be evolved into an optimally robust and intuitive
image. Advanced algorithms will be developed to detect, track, and highlight
features of interest; and to understand and predict device use across cases. At
each stage, the device will be tested on phantoms and through IRB testing on
anesthesiology patients. Performance will be evaluated across anatomical
variations, and compared with the standard of care. The resulting device will
have demonstrated feasibility as a comprehensive spinal-puncture localization
and insertion solution, rendering it suitable for further development and
testing toward a regulatory submission, and providing compelling evidence for
continued optimization in Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.