* 1843790
* STTR Phase I:  Next Generation Of Environmental-Friendly Marine Coating With Superior Durability And Antifouling Performance
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Zhiqiang Cao, Repela Tech, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2020
* USD 224,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be the development of a coating product
with superior durability and antifouling performance in the targeted
environmental-friendly marine coating market. This innovative solution requires
a less frequent application and reduces the amount of subaquatic growth on the
hull of ships and static objects in bodies of water. Potential economic benefits
include improving fuel efficiency and saving the maintenance cost of ships and
static marine structures. At the same time, this product provides enormous
environmental benefits by reducing the greenhouse gas emission from cargo ships
and avoiding the potential species invasion caused by current marine coatings.
In particular, this product is the first non-biocide environmentally friendly
product of its kind. It addresses the current and future needs highlighted by
global regulations to replace the existing harmful biocide-leaching coatings
with an eco-friendly solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop and commercialize a
novel marine coating product to deliver a high-performing eco-friendly
antifouling solution that is currently lacking in the marketplace. Current self-
polishing coating products were subject to increasing regulatory restriction,
while alternative environmental-friendly option such as fouling-release coating
suffered low antifouling performance. This novel coating technology potentially
achieves the durability and high antifouling performance for targeted marine
applications, and the eco-friendly feature without leaching biocide into the
aqueous environment. The objective of this project is to explore the key
fabrication factors in coating formulation and identify their impacts on the
coating stability and antifouling performance. Critical knowledge will be
obtained enables the development of prototype product showing year-long
reliability and top marine antifouling function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.