* 1843331
* SBIR Phase I:  Vasoreactive Perfused in Vitro Vascular Network
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Francis Duhay, ARACARI BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project proposes to commercially develop an in vitro (cell
culture) platform to enhance the efficiency of drug discovery. Every drug
delivered to a human engages the network of blood vessels for delivery to the
target tissue or as part of the removal. An essential feature of the blood
vessel network is an extensive network of small vessels surrounded by smooth
muscle which can contract and dilate to control blood flow, and thus drug
delivery. There are no in vitro human platforms that can mimic this biological
function, despite the fact that cardiovascular toxicity is the leading cause of
failure in clinical trials. As such, a pre-clinical tool to assess vascular
toxicity would significantly impact the drug development process. Developing a
successful drug averages 10-12 years and nearly $2.6 billion. Despite the fact
that ~60% of the total development costs are spent on human clinical trials,
fewer than 1 in 10 entering clinical trials will succeed. There is a significant
opportunity to improve the accuracy of preclinical drug screening which, in
turn, will generate dramatic cost savings and shorten time-to-market. The
company's proposed vasoactive human vascular network represents a leap forward
in technology to simulate the human response to new and existing drugs.
Furthermore, the platform technology has broad future applications including the
incorporation of tissue specific function (e.g, human tumor cells) and patient
specificity which will further advance drug development and precision
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are currently no in vitro platforms that
can mimic vasoconstriction or vasorelaxation, processes which require
vasoresponsive smooth muscle cells. Competing technologies line prefabricated
tubes or membranes with endothelial cells to mimic the vasculature which will
never be able to simulate vasoactivity. Since the company's platform is
comprised of living dynamic microvessels, the company is uniquely positioned to
create a platform with this functionality. The primary objective is to develop a
3D perfused human vascular network with smooth muscle providing the capacity to
characterize vasoactive substances. The company will achieve the primary
objective by completing two specific aims: 1) Incorporate human smooth muscle
cells into a 3D in vitro vascular network; and 2) Quantify the dose-response of
the 3D perfused vessel network to a panel of vasoactive drugs. Achieving
vasoactive functionality in an in vitro vascular network will be the first
demonstration of this critical biological phenomenon, and will meet an important
commercial need in the pharmaceutical industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.