* 1843847
* STTR Phase I:  Extremely fouling-resistant nanofiltration membranes treating organic-rich wastewater
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Ayse Asatekin, ZWITTERCO, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project will be a low-cost, high-performance nanofiltration
membrane technology for removing oils, pollutants, and organic materials from
highly contaminated wastewater. Industrial activity in the U.S. produces more
than 25 billion gallons of wastewater every day, much of contaminated with oils,
greases, solvents, and other harmful chemical compounds. Existing filtration
membranes are easily clogged and damaged by these oily materials, suffering a
rapid decline in performance. Safely processing this wastewater by conventional
means costs U.S. industrial facilities more than $40B per year. A breakthrough
in nanofiltration technology will allow industries across the country - such as
food processors, landfills, power plants, and paper mills - to easily and
affordably clean their wastewater. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I
project proposes to develop the technology and processes to produce commercial-
scale anti-fouling nanofiltration membranes for use with highly contaminated
industrial wastewater. The project will combine large-scale manufacturing
techniques such as high-precision spray coating with a novel chemistry platform
based on zwitterionic copolymers to produce high-performance, low-cost
membranes. These polymers exhibit extraordinary resistance to organic fouling as
well as pore self-assembly at the nanometer scale. To achieve the required
performance, the project will develop the process and materials to achieve a
thickness of less than one micron in the selective layer of a thin-film
composite. Currently, layers of this thickness are only achievable using in-situ
polymerization of nylon-based polymers, which are costly, have low permeability,
and are intolerant of oxidizing conditions. This project will overcome these
limitations by exploiting the unique self-assembly behavior of zwitterionic
copolymers to achieve ultrathin, uniformly porous films in both flat sheet and
hollow fiber forms. The project will furthermore demonstrate the chemical
robustness of these membranes with accelerated lifecycle testing relevant to
industrial conditions. Commercial-scale production of self-assembling polymer
membranes will represent a significant breakthrough for materials in this
class.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.