* 1843983
* SBIR Phase I:  Proposal For The Assessment Of The Feasibility Of An Objective Surgeon Assessment Platform.
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Justin Barad, OSSO VR INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2020
* USD 222,596.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will lead to broader adoption of newer medical
technologies and increased revenue for medical device companies, decreased
training costs, and decreased liability from misuse or lack of appropriate
training on medical devices. Research has shown that surgical skill is directly
related to a variety of patient outcomes, yet there are few tools that can
reliably and affordably measure surgical proficiency. Providing objective
measurements of surgical proficiency is not enough; the assessment method must
also identify areas of difficulty during a task to improve the surgeon's future
performance. The proposed innovation is an objective and scalable way to measure
procedural competency using head and hand motion-tracking data collected in a
surgical simulation and applying novel, deep-learning algorithms to the
analysis. By providing surgeons with real-time feedback during training, this
project will allow surgeons to rapidly improve training on specialized devices,
thus leading to wider adoption of new technology. Adoption of this surgical
assessment platform in medical schools and operating rooms across the country
will enable an objective assessment of surgical proficiency, thus reducing
training time and costs and lowering risk of medical error due to underdeveloped
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project seeks to develop an innovative, deep-learning Surgical Training
and Assessment Platform to increase the commercial viability of a Virtual
Reality (VR) surgical training program. VR surgical training technology holds
enormous potential in improving the efficiency of learning by allowing for
unlimited practice and rehearsal of surgical procedures; however, without the
ability to reliably assess performance, such platforms cannot be used to their
full potential. This application will translate the simulation environment into
a vehicle for technical skills assessment to prevent trainees from graduating to
independent practice without first proving competency in critical areas. The
novel, proprietary software algorithms developed in this proposal will allow for
the above applications and broad improvements to training efficiency and patient
safety through the tracking and analysis of hand and head motion as a surrogate
measure for surgical expertise. The Surgeon Assessment Platform will be
developed by determining the most vital head and hand motion data to collect and
validating the resulting assessment dataset in a small proof-of-concept study,
while meeting the challenge of collecting, storing, and analyzing such a large,
high-fidelity dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.