* 1843399
* STTR Phase I:  Self-powered underwater light system for photosynthetic cultures
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Jin Choi, ENVIROTRONICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 10/31/2020
* USD 211,834.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project is to transform the
culture of photosynthetic aquatic microorganisms. Although microalgae and
cyanobacteria have high volumetric productivities, the cultures cannot be too
deep, due to restrictions of light penetration. This proposed technology removes
the light penetration limit inherent in current technologies. The results of
this project will allow the production of medical and food grade biomass in
controlled conditions, as the light source will not be connected to the exterior
of the culture reactors. This approach will provide the advantages of a
fermentation production using phototrophic species, without the need to supply
organic carbon. The photosynthetic biomass production makes use of carbon
dioxide and light for growth. This project will result in a
microalgal/cyanobacterial biomass production in areas where it is not currently
feasible and with higher productivity. The increase of the depth of the cultures
two, five or more times of what is currently possible, practically reduces the
area required for biomass production. A reduction of cost will improve the
economic outlook for microalgal-based commodity products, including feed, food,
fuels, nutraceuticals and pharmaceuticals and lower the environmental
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project addresses one of the most significant problems found in
achieving the promise of microalgae and cyanobacteria as source of food, fuels
and other products is the limitation of light penetration. Most outdoor cultures
are limited to less than 60 cm depth. In reactors with artificial light, besides
the light penetration high electrical costs limit their use to high value
products. This project will result in a light system that takes advantage of the
water movement in cultures to generate electricity for LED lights in untethered
units that move with the culture. The proposed generator uses methods more
efficient and lighter that traditional electromagnetic and piezoelectric
generators. The developed energy harvester can be used in other applications
such as power for water quality monitoring and other sensing equipment. In this
phase, a unit with a miniaturized energy harvester coupled with passive
switching, charging, discharging and rectifying modules in the same substrate,
in a waterproof casing will be developed. Data proof of the suitability of these
units to support photosynthetic microorganisms? biomass production will be
obtained. The results will inform further development of the units in a future
phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.