* 1843485
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Multimodal Interface for improving independence of Blind and Visually-Impaired people
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Hari Prasath Palani, UNAR LABS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 01/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this project will be to promote
empowerment of millions of blind and visually-impaired (BVI) people by enabling
greater independence, supporting increased educational attainment, proliferation
of vocational opportunities, and enhancing their overall quality of life. There
are currently no commercial solutions for providing BVI users with an assistive
technology (AT) solution that allows BVI users to seamlessly access textual and
graphical information via a unified system. Towards meeting this greater goal,
this Phase I SBIR project addresses key challenges relating to technical
feasibility in creating the core algorithms of Midlina and the functional
viability proving that BVI users will find practical utility in its application.
By providing a much-needed AT solution leveraging touchscreen devices such as
smart phones as a platform (which is already owned and used by more than 80% of
BVI users), this project has a high probability of user adoption and market
acceptance when commercialized. Given that vision loss is expected to double in
the next 20 years owing to age-related eye diseases experienced by the rapidly
aging population, this project will have significant economic benefits for the
State/Federal agencies providing support services to BVI and aging
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will show that a novel touchscreen-based information access
software, called Midlina, will allow blind and visually-impaired (BVI)
individuals to independently access textual and graphical information from
digital media. The key innovation and strength of the proposed solution is in
its ability to achieve this convergence of seamless text and graphical
information access by integrating with native mobile operating systems (OS) used
on smart touchscreen-based devices, the fastest growing computational platforms
among BVI users. This project builds on strong theoretical underpinnings derived
from 5-years of NSF-sponsored academic research involving hundreds of human
testers and represents an excellent translational path towards
commercialization. Two objectives will drive this Phase I project: (1)
Developing a novel visual-to-multimodal conversion algorithm that is seamlessly
integrated with a native mobile operating system, and (2) Establishing technical
feasibility and practical usability of a prototype system through rigorous human
user testing. A successful outcome of this Phase I project would lead to: (1)
development of core algorithms for a novel touchscreen-based information access
software, called Midlina, and (2) demonstrate feasibility that Midlina will
enable BVI people to independently access both textual and graphical contents
from digital media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.