* 1843570
* STTR Phase I:  A Machine Learning Toolbox to Identify Therapeutics for Rare Genetic Disorders from Phenotypic Screens on Micropattern-Based Organoids
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Eric Siggia, RUMI SCIENTIFIC, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to develop a widely applicable, innovative
pipeline for drug discovery against rare genetic disorders. While each orphan
disease affects a small fraction of individuals, thousands exist, affecting 400
million people world-wide. The challenge to bring therapies to the clinics for
diseases that currently have no cure, which is coupled with an expanding market.
Orphan drug sales are expected to reach $262 billion in 2024. Over the last few
years, organoids made from human embryonic stem cells have raised the
possibility of understanding the mechanisms leading to a genetic disorder by
reconstituting, in vitro, a similar arrangement of the specific cell populations
that are implicated in a certain disease. By comparing organoids made from
healthy cells to those carrying the associated genetic mutation, drug testing
may be performed in vitro to discover new therapeutics. However, this potential
has not been harnessed due to technical limitations. In this proposal, as a
necessary step towards this goal, the plan is to develop the analytical tools
based on machine learning algorithms that will allow the analysis of drug
therapeutic potential and toxicity when applied to organoid
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this STTR Phase I
project is to develop and validate an unbiased analytical scheme to quantify the
results of high-throughput phenotypic screens performed on micropattern
organoids. Organoids have the potential to revolutionize the pre-clinical part
of the drug discovery pipeline as they provide unbiased endpoints, they are
disease relevant, and sensitive to toxicity. However, the use of multi-cellular
organization in a high-throughput platform requires analysis of large amounts of
information-rich microscopy images. The tools developed in this proposal will
allow turning the biological complexity of tissue scale phenotypes into
information predictive of the clinical potential of a compound. In the first
aim, the goal is to demonstrate that the proposed method allows quantifying
compound toxicity. The plan is to calibrate the toolbox against known methods
quantifying cell viability, applying known toxic agents and withdrawn drugs.
This will constitute a stringent test for the efficiency of the proposed method
at quantifying deleterious effects of a compound. Second, the goal is to
optimize the algorithm to measure therapeutic potential, using positive controls
on micropattern-based organoids modeling Huntington's Disease (HD). The
objective is to demonstrate the ability to analyze results of a screening
campaign aimed at phenotypic reversal on the HD organoids, and detect hit
molecules from a small library of FDA-approved drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.