* 1843975
* SBIR Phase I:  A Real-time Artificial Intelligence Dysplasia Detection (AIDD) system for Barrett's Esophagus and Early Esophageal Cancer
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,09/30/2019
* Andrew Ninh, DOCBOT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 09/30/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to, through development of a Real-time
Artificial Intelligence algorithm, bring expertise in endoscopic imaging
interpretation to physicians taking care of patients at risk for esophageal
cancer, to detect precancer earlier, and lower the cost of healthcare.
Esophageal cancer is one of the fastest growing cancers in the US with a 6 fold
increase in incidence in the last 4 decades. Most endoscopists are not trained
well to detect pre-cancer in the esophagus as &lt;5% have received dedicated
advanced imaging training to identify dysplasia (advanced precancer) within
Barrett's Esophagus. There are well-proven minimally invasive endoscopic
treatments for dysplasia and early esophageal cancer that are &gt;95% effective
in providing cure to the patient. On the other hand, when cancer is caught at a
later stage the only option is removal of the esophagus with surgery in
combination with expensive chemotherapy and radiation. Creating this real-time
Artificial Intelligence system will assist endoscopists to detect precancer
earlier, prevent this deadly cancer and expand access to esophageal cancer
screening to the community at large and also to the underserved community, who
typically have fewer well-trained physicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop the first
system that can detect dysplasia in Barrett's Esophagus in real-time during
endoscopy. This proposed research will expand on the company's preliminary work
in detecting dysplastic lesions in colonoscopy and applying transfer learning
methods to develop the first ever dysplasia-detection algorithm for upper
endoscopy. It will initially be trained using static, annotated images, and will
expand on the company's software platform to be able to eventually process video
feeds, in real-time, from device makers without frame-drop or lag. The company
has begun engaging with endoscopy OEMs to define metrics for success in running
real-time algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.