* 1844729
* CAREER: Co-Design of Information and Incentives in Societal-Scale Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Lillian Ratliff, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 514,959.00

The objective of this CAREER project is to develop a theoretical and
computational framework for the co-design of information and incentive
mechanisms targeted at humans in Societal-Scale Cyber-Physical Systems (SCPS) in
order to encourage efficient shared resource consumption while mitigating
unintended consequences. The application focus is on intelligent transportation
systems, a prototypical SCPS with humans in the loop, rapid technology adoption,
and emerging mobility markets. CPS and internet of things (IoT) infrastructure
is pervasive in the mobility landscape, allowing operators and intelligently
augmented humans to make decisions rapidly as they interact with one another and
engage with the system. Market mechanisms that support interactions occur on
multiple timescales, are constrained by CPS dynamics, and are exposed to
exogenous uncertainties, information asymmetries, and behavioral aspects of
human decision-making. Through the design of algorithms with guarantees for
learning in and shaping of SCPS, this project will address two fundamental
components missing in the state-of-the-art: (i) models that capture the
interactions and learning processes of different SCPS stakeholders, and (ii)
certifiable algorithms with high-probability guarantees for the co-design of
adaptive information and incentive mechanisms that achieve measurable
improvement in system-level performance while ensuring individual-level quality
of service and avoiding discriminatory policies. The validation approach uses a
data-informed experimental platform with simulation and living lab components.
The research agenda will aid in revising the design of operational mechanisms
for both private and public CPS-enabled mobility platforms to include efficiency
and measurable fairness as valued criteria. The proposed agenda includes an
integrated research and education plan: (i) course development leveraging the
experimental platform; (ii) undergrad research in which students aid in building
out the experimental platform, and engage with municipal/industry partners;
(iii) development of Girls In Research Labs (GIRLs), a week-long summer program
in which middle school girls explore research labs across campus through hands-
on projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contributions to the science of CPS will be
made through the study of intelligent infrastructure, with a special focus on
behavior unique to human-in-the-loop CPS, and applications to multi-modal
transportation systems. The technical plan is based on fundamental methods in
decision sciences (control theory, game theory, behavioral economics, and
mechanism design), statistics, and online learning. The research agenda is
organized along two key thrusts: (i) algorithms for learning in SCPS and (ii)
algorithms for shaping SCPS via incentives and information. The proposed tool
set will enable analysis of multi-timescale decision-making of autonomous
agents, including humans, coupled with CPS infrastructure in resource
constrained environments, and will allow for the certifiable design of
algorithms for learning and control (e.g., co-design of slow policy changes and
real-time control). The modeling, synthesis, and validation approach will
provide a principled, scientific basis for SCPS engineering design and
operations, and supports CPS education by providing a platform for future
engineers to discover realities associated with real-world implementation (e.g.,
socio-technical constraints). The unique perspective of co-designing information
and incentives will also lead to new tools for modeling risk and uncertainties
and thus, expose potentially new approaches to resilience in the engineering of
CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.