* 1844854
* CAREER:  Decoding alternative ribosomes in bacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Sladjana Prisic, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,013,491.00

This project aims to determine how bacteria adjust protein production to match
their cellular needs. All living organisms manufacture proteins using complex
molecular machines called ribosomes, the number of which is tightly regulated to
meet demands. However, not all ribosomes have the same composition and
structure. Such differences among ribosomes may influence the kind of proteins
that bacteria can make at any given time. Thus, changes in the ribosome
population in response to diverse signals are likely to reshape the protein
composition of the cell and its physiology. In this project, a model bacterium
Mycobacterium smegmatis (Msm) will be used to understand how restructuring of
ribosomes influences bacterial physiology when triggered by deficiencies in
zinc, an essential trace element. A better understanding of bacterial physiology
will advance what is known of their adaptability and interactions in mixed
microbial communities. Knowing how to manipulate protein synthesis, or providing
new ways to do so, may significantly enhance biotechnology, ecological
engineering, and sustainability. Graduate and undergraduate students will mentor
and train students one step junior to them, guiding them in "traditional" and
advanced scientific techniques that match their proficiency with the various
sub-Aims of the project. In addition to maximizing training opportunities, this
approach allows undergraduate and high school students to have role models with
whom they identify. The mentorship system will broaden participation, empowering
women and other groups to pursue careers in STEM. This project is expected to
build the foundation of long-lasting research and training that will challenge
the current dogmatic view of ribosome regulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Half of
known bacterial strains have paralogs of ribosomal proteins. These "alternative
ribosomal proteins" (AltRPs) likely have a role in regulating protein synthesis.
AltRP expression is tightly linked to zinc depletion and this essential nutrient
dramatically affects Msm cell morphology. These findings support the hypothesis
that zinc may control bacterial physiology by regulating AltRP expression. This
CAREER project tests this hypothesis by identifying the molecular mechanisms by
which zinc limitation promotes incorporation of AltRPs into ribosomes and
thereby regulates ribosomal function. Experiments will assess the extent to
which AltRP-containing ribosomes, or Alt ribosomes, are distinctly localized,
stabilized, activated, and/or are specific in their ability to facilitate
bacterial cell growth, morphogenesis, and/or adaptation to environmental
stresses. This project will elucidate the function of Alt ribosomes and identify
pathways regulated by these specialized ribosomes in Msm by employing genetic
manipulation, biochemistry, advanced microscopy, and in vitro and in vivo
translation techniques, coupled with transcriptomics and proteomics analyses.
Determining that Alt ribosomes in Msm translate particular mRNAs or localize in
parts of the cell distinct from those primary ribosomes will define a new level
of regulation for bacterial protein expression not previously recognized. Like
Msm, other bacteria and eukaryotes also have paralogs of ribosomal proteins.
Revealing novel mechanisms of ribosome regulation and the role of zinc in cell
growth and morphogenesis in Msm will profoundly impact molecular biology, and
provide insight into how other cell types respond and adapt to environmental
stresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.