* 1844427
* BTT EAGER:  Harnessing the power of cellular memory to enhance the breeding potential of crops
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Robert Schmitz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 01/31/2022
* USD 299,904.00

Significant efforts are dedicated to identifying causal links between genetic
and trait variation for crop improvement. Missing from these efforts is the
pursuit of epigenetic variation, whereby stably inherited traits arise in the
absence of genetic changes. It was recently discovered that clonal propagation
of plants can induce epigenetic variation that is stably inherited in clonally
regenerated plants. The goal of this project is to use this newly developed
approach that couples a variety of environmental stresses with traditional plant
clonal propagation techniques to produce maize plants with enhanced stress
resistance. This project is a joint collaboration between the Schmitz Laboratory
at the University of Georgia and the Gutierrez-Marcos Laboratory at the
University of Warwick in the United Kingdom and is supported as part of the
Breakthrough Technologies competition, which is jointly funded by the National
Science Foundation and the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research
Council. The ability to uncover stress-responsive variation using this novel,
clonal plant propagation strategy could lead to a rapid improvement of stress
resilient maize varieties. In addition to the agricultural impact, this project
will fund graduate student training in experimental and computational biology.
The graduate students will participate in mentoring high-school summer intern
students from the Young Dawgs program sponsored by the University of Georgia.
These students will focus on biological computer programming. Additionally,
hands-on workshops for experimental biology will be hosted at the University of
Warwick through the Nuffield Foundation Research Program to inspire students and
teachers to explore the area of plant biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to create Zea mays plants with enhanced responses to abiotic and
biotic stresses. To accomplish this goal, a novel method to clonally regenerate
maize plants in concert with different stress conditions to induce novel yet
heritable epigenetic variation will be used. Transcriptome analyses will be
performed to assess the functional significance of the stress-induced epigenetic
variation a transcriptome analysis on regenerated plants. For the induced
epigenetic variation to be relevant it must be stable over generations.
Therefore, the stability of induced epigenetic variation by studying the DNA
methylome and transcriptome of progeny plants derived from clonal regenerants
will be assessed. In parallel, phenotypic characterization of the regenerant
plants and their progeny in comparison to controls will be carried out to
determine if enhanced responses to stress exist. These results will potentially
lead to novel methodologies for inducing novel yet stable epigenetic variation,
thus enabling innovative avenues for trait improvement in maize and possibly
other crop species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.