* 1844850
* First Steps Towards a New High Resolution Proxy for Paleomagnetic Field Instabilities:  Tritiogenic 3He Archived in Speleothems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/05/2018,05/31/2021
* Andrea Balbas, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 05/31/2021
* USD 265,000.00

The terrestrial magnetic field is critical to life on Earth because it shields
the planet from harmful cosmic radiation. It also protects technological
infrastructure from damage from solar storms. The Earth's magnetic field is
generated by organized motions of liquid iron in the Earth's outer core - the
geodynamo - by processes that are not fully understood. Key observable features
that can be used to inform models of the geodynamo include magnetic field
strength and orientation, both of which change over geologic time. Existing
records of the temporal variation of magnetic field strength are incomplete and
potentially compromised by secondary processes. A potential new archive
originates from the protective nature of the field. Cosmic rays continually
strike the atmosphere, but their flux is modulated by the magnetic field.
Stronger magnetic fields provide greater deflection of cosmic rays from Earth,
and weaker fields provide less deflection. The flux of cosmic rays in turn
controls the production rate of cosmogenic nuclides - rare isotopes produced
when cosmic rays collide with gases in the atmosphere. Several cosmogenic
nuclide archives have already been used to establish the history of magnetic
field strength. This project will take exploratory steps towards development of
a new high temporal resolution archive: the abundance of tritium - a cosmogenic
nuclide with a half-life of 12 years - in fluid inclusions trapped in cave
deposits of various ages. As an isotope of hydrogen, the post-production
behavior of tritium will be controlled by the atmospheric water cycle, and will
not suffer the same complications as previously measured cosmogenic nuclide
archives of magnetic field strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The decay product of
tritium (3He) will be measured in water pockets that are trapped by stalagmites
as they grow. The working hypothesis is that these water inclusions take in
tritium in proportion to its production by cosmic rays in the atmosphere via the
delivery of local rainwater into the cave system. After entrapment, tritium
decays to 3He, which is thereafter retained in the water inclusion until
analysis. Stalagmites often have annual bands, and can be dated accurately using
U/Th geochronology. Taken together, these ideas suggest stalagmites offer a
potential record of geomagnetic field changes with better temporal detail than
those provided by alternative methods and with independent sources of potential
error. This project will take the first steps for creating such a record by
developing the necessary analytical methods and then by analyzing stalagmites
that captured atmospheric tritium created by nuclear weapons testing in the
latter half of the 20th century to confirm that the putative archive works as
expected. Because the atmospheric tritium production from bomb testing is well-
documented, the archive will be subjected to a very rigorous test. The two
products sought by the end of the proposed work are a) a methodology that can
successfully liberate and measure the tritiogenic 3He in speleothems, and b) a
confirmation or refutation of the key hypothesis of this proposal: Tritiogenic
3He preserved in water inclusions in speleothems can be measured and will change
as a function of the concentration of tritium in local precipitation.