* 1844632
* Reinforcing and motivating properties of social conformity
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Mimi Liljeholm, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 424,556.00

The social groups to which we belong -- families, friends, teams, companies,
organizations -- have a pervasive influence on our decision making. Indeed,
people often abandon their own personal judgments and choices in favor of
conforming to a group majority. In some cases, such alignment with the group may
protect against social rejection and grant access to shared resources. However,
research has shown that people also conform even when there is no social or
economic gain for them. One explanation for this result is that the act of
reaching consensus with one's group might be valuable in itself -- an idea that
is supported by recent neuroscientific research showing that the brain's reward
circuit is involved in social conformity. This project combines computational
cognitive modeling with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and
behavioral economic procedures to better understand the subjective value of
conforming and dissenting decisions. By uncovering the motivating and
reinforcing properties of majority alignment, this research will shed light on a
fundamental aspect of organizational, professional and personal interactions.
Among the broader impacts is a priority to share data and code to benefit
research in cognitive and social neuroscience, to involve the participation of
women, underrepresented groups and high school students, and to inform the
development of tools that can improve the social competency of impaired
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses model-based cognitive
neuroscience to investigate the motivating and reinforcing properties of social
conformity. The main approach is to make the desire to conform compete with the
prospect of economic gain, and to assess the transfer of conformity-based
valence to other features of the environment. A second objective is to
investigate how the relative size and perceived competence of a majority opinion
influences the value associated with consensus and dissent. A third objective is
to explore a common neural representation for conformity and conventional
reward. All of the studies use variations of standard tasks employed in research
on economic decision-making. Reinforcement learning models are used to make
quantitative predictions about behavioral choices and neural activity. Model-
based fMRI analyses are combined with connectivity and multi-voxel pattern
analyses to investigate interactions between social and motivational neural
networks, and to explore a distributed overlapping neural code for social and
economic currencies. By formalizing consensus-seeking behavior as reinforcement
learning, the project contributes in several ways to the behavioral and
neuroscientific literatures on social conformity. In particular, the
reinforcement learning framework provides a mechanism for how apparently
inconsequential consensus decisions may be motivated by previously acquired
valence, and for how that valence may then be transferred to other contextual
and interpersonal features. This approach bridges a critical gap, at both neural
and behavioral levels, between complex socio-cognitive representations and basic
mechanisms of reward-based learning and decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.