* 1844416
* Clarifying the relationship between socioeconomic status and early psychological reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Rose Scott, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 05/31/2024
* USD 523,393.00

This project will investigate the impact of economic inequality on children's
psychological reasoning -- specifically false-belief understanding, children's
ability to reason about other people's behavior by considering their underlying
mental states. Children from disadvantaged backgrounds lag far behind their more
advantaged peers in an essential component of psychological reasoning, false-
belief understanding. This is troubling because psychological reasoning is vital
for navigating everyday life, and deficits in this skill could have serious
negative consequences for the intellectual, social, and moral development of
disadvantaged children, as well as their long-term well-being. This project will
substantially advance understanding of how and why economic inequality
influences children's psychological reasoning. This project thus has significant
potential to understand perspective taking processes in children, as well as to
improve the developmental outcomes of disadvantaged children. The findings could
inform interventions designed to enhance psychological reasoning
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there is considerable evidence for an
economic disparity in false-belief understanding, the nature of this disparity
is unclear because prior studies have used a single type of paradigm that
children could fail for many reasons. To address this issue, a sample of
socioeconomically diverse preschool children will complete multiple types of
false-belief paradigms that target different facets of false-belief
understanding, including several novel paradigms that have not previously been
used to examine this disparity. Patterns of associations between socioeconomic
status and task performance will be used to characterize the underlying nature
of the socioeconomic disparity in false-belief understanding. Few studies have
examined the mechanism by which socioeconomic status affects false-belief
understanding, and thus little is known about the cause of this disparity. This
project will test the hypothesis that this disparity arises via socioeconomic
effects on parent-child interactions. Specifically, the researchers predict that
less stressed and more knowledgeable parents will use more terms that refer to
mental states such as "think" and "know". Parents' language use will be assessed
during several interactive activities with their child. Structural equation
modeling will be used to evaluate the proposed pathways from socioeconomic
status to false-belief understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.