* 1844455
* Student Travel Support for ACM BCB 2018: Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2019
* Dongmei Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 12/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This project provides travel support for students (graduate, undergraduate, and
high school) to attend ACM SIGBio (Associate Computing Machinery Special
Interest Group in Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics)
annual International Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and
Health Informatics (ACMBCB) in Washington DC during Aug. 29-Sept. 01, 2018
(http://acm-bcb.org/). ACMBCB2018 aims to provide an interactive forum that
bridges computer science, mathematics, statistics, with biology and health, and
to support advanced research, training, and outreach. It brings together top
researchers, educators, practitioners, and students around the world to share
innovative biological and medical discoveries, new informatics algorithms, new
computational tools that will advance biological and health science, and improve
national health. It consists of systematically organized activities such as
plenary keynotes, workshops, tutorials, research oral sessions, poster sessions,
and panels for researchers and practitioners from different disciplines to
interact, to discuss, and to collaborate. It will encourage diverse groups of
students, especially the underrepresented minority (women, minority, and
disabled) to actively participate in conference activities, to grow ACM SIGBio
community, and to advance the fast-growing interdisciplinary education and
research.

As part of this award activity, ACMBCB2018 will organize a Student Forum and
"Women in Bioinformatics" panel with senior academic and industrial experts
serving as the mentors. These mentors will provide feedback to attending
students' research, and will share their personal experience and wisdom in
career development. These students will write a short summary to report their
ACMBCB2018 experience. Overall, the project will assist students in gaining
knowledge, to improve their visibility and to advance novel advancements in
bioinformatics, computational biology, and health informatics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.