* 1844791
* CAREER: Transforming Implantable Neural Interfaces through Computing: From Circuits to Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Visvesh Sathe, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 425,986.00

Understanding and engineering brain function has been identified as a grand
scientific challenge in recognition of its potential to revolutionize a number
of fields including computing and medicine. Fully-implantable Bidirectional
Brain Computer Interfaces (BBCI) are the focus of this project. These are
electronic systems capable of recording, processing and stimulating neural
activity, and they play a foundational role in enabling better understanding of
the brain. Implantable BBCIs will enable neuro-scientists to explore brain
function in unprecedented detail, and help realize neuro-prosthetic devices
capable of restoring mobility, vision and brain function among the disabled.
However, critical technological barriers facing BBCIs are hindering progress in
neuroscience. Existing BBCI architectures do not scale well, in terms of power
or area, to support ever-increasing numbers of recording and stimulation
channels needed for finer examination and control of brain function.
Furthermore, neural stimulation produces artifacts - electrical disturbances in
the brain - that hamper the ability to perform neural recording. Finally, the
desired level of computational performance required to perform neural signal
processing and data-communication to external devices consumes power in excess
of thermal limits of implantable devices. The technologies resulting from this
project will be translated into a fully implantable, bio-compatible and
versatile closed-loop neuroscience platform that overcomes these existing
challenges. Collaborations with neuroscientists, the medical-device industry,
and fabrication partners, to be pursued during this project, are critical to the
realization of this goal. The resulting platform will be made available to the
broader neuroscience community to enable experiments at unprecedented levels of
scale and scope, accelerating progress toward understanding the brain. Both
graduate and underrepresented minority students will be involved in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award addresses the critical BBCI barriers of
power, area, performance and recording quality by investigating and devising
cross-cutting technologies that span digital/mixed-signal circuit design,
architecture, systems theory and system integration. Exploiting domain-specific
structure across every level of abstraction, from algorithm partitioning down to
package- and circuit-design is central to this project. The effort is organized
into three threads: 1) Development of novel, computationally-enhanced neural
interfaces to achieve desired levels of efficiency and scalability; 2)
Exploration of domain-correspondence to Multiple-Input Multiple Output (MIMO)
communication systems through low-energy computing, which will allow systems
capable of rejecting artifacts and allowing recording to be focused to a
targeted set of neurons; and 3) Leveraging an understanding of neural signal
processing algorithms and preliminary results in ultra-low power computing to
devise domain specific architectures that meet BBCI processing requirements
under severe power limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.