* 1844890
* CAREER: Approximate Scheduling Algorithms via Mathematical Relaxations
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jinhui Xu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,034.00

The problem of scheduling a set of possibly dependent tasks over a collection of
machines arises in many modern application domains. In spite of intensive study,
however, the general understanding of many fundamental scheduling problems is
still far from satisfactory. This research will enhance understanding of the
mathematical relaxation techniques to solve scheduling problems that appear in
many contexts. Successful completion of the project will yield improved
approximation algorithms for fundamental scheduling problems. This project will
provide research and educational opportunities to both graduate and
undergraduate students, and foster cross-field collaborations between different
institutions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The major goal of the project is to leverage
cutting-edge techniques in mathematical programming to close the gaps in the
understanding of scheduling problems. The specific techniques the investigator
intends to explore include: (1) leveraging the LP (linear programming) hierarchy
in approximating precedence-constrained scheduling problems on identical
machines, (2) exploring time-indexed LP relaxations to solve scheduling problems
with weighted-sum objectives, and (3) the use of knapsack covering inequalities
in capturing resource constraints arising naturally in scheduling problems. The
project is centered around three mathematical-programming techniques. (1) The
recent breakthrough result of Levey and Rothvoss gave a (1 +
epsilon)-approximation algorithm for the makespan minimization problem for
scheduling precedence-constrained unit-size jobs on constant number of machines,
based on the Sherali-Adams hierarchy lift of the natural time-indexed LP
relaxation for the problem. The investigator will continue this line of
research, by improving these results from various angles and extending them to
many other settings. What if jobs have different sizes? How can the problem with
the weighted completion-time objective be handled? Can the results be extended
to more general machine models? (2) Time-indexed LP relaxations are natural ones
for scheduling problems, given the important role the notion of time plays in
the problems. However, for many problems, their power in deriving improved
algorithms has not been fully exploited. This investigation will advance the
understanding of the technique by studying the scheduling problem on unrelated
machines to minimize weighted completion time, directed-acyclic job scheduling
and coflow scheduling problems. (3) The knapsack covering inequalities have been
introduced to strengthen the basic LP relaxation for the many problems with
knapsack covering constraints, and have been used to derive LP-based algorithms
for many scheduling and other types of problems. The investigator aims to
further advance the understanding of the technique in tackling relevant
scheduling problems including weighted flow time minimization for open-shop
scheduling, the single-machine scheduling problem with general cost functions,
and the capacitated lot-sizing problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.