* 1844403
* CAREER: Advancing Constrained and Non-Convex Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Tianbao Yang, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 12/31/2022
* USD 413,857.00

Machine learning has emerged to be an indispensable tool for addressing many
decision-making problems, e.g., autonomous driving. As applications of machine
learning algorithms for decision-making broaden and diversify, the requirements
on security, fairness, interpretability and generalization have been pushed to
higher standards. These emerging issues have brought great challenges to the
design of machine learning algorithms in the presence of big and complex data.
Traditional machine learning methods by minimizing an unconstrained or simply
constrained convex objective have become increasingly unsatisfactory. This
project seeks to advance learning with complex objectives and constraints by
designing and analyzing efficient and effective optimization algorithms for
addressing computational challenges in new machine learning paradigms. The
project will enhance the ability to solve large-scale, real-world problems from
more diverse and broad applications. Furthermore, the project will strive to
communicate the significance of machine learning and optimization and provide
excellent research experience to students at different
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although both constrained optimization and non-
convex optimization have been studied and applied to machine learning in the
literature, great challenges and many problems remain unaddressed. The primary
focus of this project is to design and analyze a set of efficient optimization
algorithms and statistical learning methods for advancing machine learning with
complex objectives and constraints at large scale. The technical aims of the
project are divided into two thrusts. The first thrust is to (i) develop faster
and provable stochastic algorithms for learning with complicated non-convex
objectives, and (ii) improve the generalization performance of deep learning by
advanced regularization and compression methods through design of efficient
optimization algorithms. The second thrust is to (i) design computationally
efficient constrained optimization algorithms for learning with complicated and
complex constraints, and (ii) investigate their applications in adversarial
learning, fair learning, interpretable learning, etc. The optimization tools and
techniques developed will enable more advanced regularization and loss
minimization methods in machine learning, and should greatly influence other
areas, such as operations research, signal processing, data mining,
etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.