* 1844157
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: People, Land, and Water along the Lower Colorado River
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Daniel Grant, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 03/31/2021
* USD 17,997.00

This doctoral dissertation project analyzes how the use and development of
rivers has shaped territory, society, and conflicts in borderlands.
Paradoxically rivers fix political boundaries yet shift unpredictably across
their floodplains, posing problems of jurisdiction and questions of
international sovereignty. Additionally, governments manipulated rivers for
irrigation, changing river channels so drastically that they no longer adhere to
the boundaries they supposedly demarcate. This research examines how rivers have
shaped landscapes of belonging and exclusion by focusing on socially
differentiated river communities whose shared boundaries shifted when rivers
shifted. In response, these communities formed alliances and negotiated
conflicts among one another. The doctoral student will evaluate how communities
are differentially impacted by contemporary water controversies such as drought
and river restoration. Findings will be disseminated to water managers,
conservation groups, and the public through publication of written materials in
regional outlets and a broadly accessible book. Findings and oral history
interviews will be converted into digital narratives to contribute to public
debate about the contemporary legacy of past river use and development and can
serve as instructional material in classrooms. Results will be shared with the
relevant communities. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this project will provide support to enable a promising graduate student to
establish an independent research career.

Through its focus on the physical manifestation of boundaries, this project will
reveal how power has been routed through rivers to shape landscapes of belonging
and exclusion for different social communities. Integrating ideas from
environmental history, political ecology, and borderlands studies, the doctoral
student will investigate: (1) how river development in the form of dams, canals,
and reservoirs made and re-made territorial boundaries separating Native
American and African-American river communities; and (2) how these communities
responded to shifting river boundaries through alliances, oppositions, and
internal divisions to remain rooted to an increasingly managed landscape.
National archival material will demonstrate how river development caused these
boundaries to shift, while local archival collections and oral history
interviews will demonstrate how these local communities responded in turn. Case
studies will focus on communities that have been historically divided by
changing boundaries set by this transnational, dynamic, and essential river.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.