* 1844935
* CAREER: Content and function of hippocampal replay
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Matthijs van der Meer, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 04/30/2024
* USD 700,000.00

The mammalian hippocampus, a brain structure important for the initial storage
and subsequent recall of memories for specific experiences, spontaneously
replays traces of experience during sleep and wakeful rest. Disrupting replay
causes memory deficits, but it remains unclear why. Early theories of replay
function suggested that replay should recapitulate previous experience as
accurately as possible, but recent work has shown that replay content is much
more diverse -- including, for instance, spatial paths to a goal, paths not
taken, and never-experienced paths. The proposed work investigates what factors
determine the content of replay, and what function(s) replay serves. The content
of replay is measured under various conditions, and the consequences of
disrupting its effects on a target brain region tested. This work will provide
new insights into the mystery of how the brain organizes experience to build
knowledge structures and then draws upon that knowledge to support adaptive
behavior. Accessing replay content, and many other questions in systems
neuroscience, rely crucially on statistics and computational models, which are
barriers to entry for many otherwise talented young neuroscientists. This
project provides a multi-pronged training environment for quantitative skills in
neuroscience, with activities ranging from short, visually driven introductory
workshops aimed at demystifying terminology, to fully immersive research
experiences at summer schools and in the laboratory. The project plans include
making all materials, including videos and hands-on tutorials working with real
neural data, publicly available online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prominent theories
of hippocampal replay posit that specific factors such as experience,
surprise/uncertainty, and economic value determine what is replayed. However,
the effects of manipulating these factors have rarely been tested with
controlled, parametric experimental designs. Similarly, the suspicion that
replay content should differ depending on whether a task actually requires the
hippocampus or not remains untested. The proposed work addresses these issues
through the recording and decoding of hippocampal replay content on tightly
controlled tasks that manipulate these factors while holding the others
constant. Complementing these classic proposals about replay are new ideas
derived from reinforcement learning models, which suggest that replay serves to
update state and/or action values following errors in the prediction of reward.
This idea is tested by optogenetically inhibiting neural activity in the ventral
striatum, a structure important for reward learning, specifically during
hippocampal replay events, and observing the effects on behavior and on replay
content. Supporting these experimental aims are two methodological aims that
seek to improve rigor and reproducibility of replay analysis: (1) construction
of open data analysis pipelines that follow best practices in software
engineering such as unit testing, and (2) development of models that generate
synthetic replay events so that the outcomes of different analysis approaches
can be tested against a known ground truth. Together, this work provides strong
tests of the leading proposals regarding the content and function of hippocampal
replay. This project is jointly funded by the Modulation Program of Integrative
Organismal Systems in the Directorate for Biological Sciences, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Mathematical Biology
Program of the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.