* 1844140
* Creating a Theory of Decimal Arithmetic Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* David Braithwaite, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 550,000.00

Proficiency with rational numbers-fractions, decimals, and percentages-is
essential for success in more advanced mathematics such as algebra. It is also
important for occupational success; majorities of both white- and blue-collar
workers report using rational numbers in their jobs. Yet, many children struggle
with rational numbers even after years of instruction. The goal of this project
is to create a theory of children's learning in one area of rational numbers:
decimal arithmetic. The project will identify types of knowledge that help
children to learn decimal arithmetic more easily, clarify the mechanisms by
which this facilitation occurs, and develop a computational model that simulates
the process of learning decimal arithmetic. Based on the results,
recommendations will be generated for improving children's learning of decimal
arithmetic including recommendations (1) to focus classroom and practice time on
conceptual approaches that are used by successful learners, (2) to place special
emphasis on types of problem that pose difficulty for children, (3) to devote
classroom time to illustrating common errors and explaining why they are
incorrect, and (4) to use discussion of common errors as an opportunity to
illustrate general concepts. These recommendations are anticipated to have
implications for improving mathematics instruction in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Learning mathematics involves learning both
concepts and procedures. Concepts include principles and relations; procedures
are step-by-step action sequences for solving problems. Understanding of
concepts is believed to help children learn procedures, but how this occurs is
not known. This project aims to create a theory of how conceptual understanding
- when present - facilitates learning of procedures within a particularly
difficult and important area of math: decimal arithmetic. To accomplish this
goal, the project will adopt a three-pronged approach including longitudinal,
microgenetic, and computational modeling methods. Longitudinal methods will
identify specific types of conceptual knowledge that predict success in learning
decimal arithmetic procedures; microgenetic methods will provide evidence for
specific mechanisms by which these types of conceptual knowledge facilitate
learning; computational modeling will be used to describe these mechanisms
precisely and to simulate the empirical phenomena observed using the previous
two methods. The computational model will build on and extend a modeling
architecture previously employed in a model of fraction arithmetic learning,
FARRA; its success will be assessed based on its ability to generate levels of
accuracy, patterns of errors, and correlations between conceptual and procedural
knowledge similar to those observed among children. The proposed research will
advance scientific knowledge in three ways: by connecting individual differences
in learning outcomes with a theory of learning processes, by advancing
understanding of the relations between conceptual and procedural knowledge, and
by extending theories of numerical development into a new domain, decimal
arithmetic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.