* 1844963
* CAREER:  Protein evolution in high-dimensional sequence space
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Michael Harms, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 775,012.00

Proteins are molecular machines that living things use to eat, grow, and
reproduce; they evolve over time and yet we have no tools to predict their
adaptation to novel environments. Protein evolution is key to how germs become
resistant to drugs, for example. As another example, engineers can apply the
evolution of new protein functions to help break down oil spills. Predicting
these adaptive changes in advance would greatly enhance our understanding of
adaptation but would also open the door for new biological tools to confront
environmental challenges. This project will develop computational tools to help
scientists both predict and understand how proteins evolve. To do so, the
researchers are experimentally studying the evolution of brightly colored
proteins isolated from coral. They are then using the information from these
experimental studies to develop general computational models to understand and
predict protein evolution. Such tools will be powerful, enabling both more
effective protein engineering and intervention in the evolution of undesired
features such as drug-resistance. Finally, the project is designed to provide
opportunities for high school STEM teachers in Oregon to directly participate in
the research. Teacher research experiences demonstrably improve educational
outcomes in STEM classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As an experimental model for
protein evolution, the researchers are studying a collection of possible
evolutionary trajectories between an ancestral and modern green fluorescent
protein (GFP)-like protein from a coral in the genus Favia. The ancestral
protein was green; the modern protein is red. This phenotypic change was
achieved through 15 historical substitutions. The researchers are constructing
all combinations of these mutations and characterizing the fluorescence of each
genotype. This will allow them to map the collection of possible trajectories
connecting the starting and end states. In parallel, they are developing
computational tools to dissect epistasis, to describe connectivity, and to
predict unmeasured phenotypes. This work will provide: 1) A publicly available,
high-dimensional genotype-phenotype map covering the evolution of a new protein
function; 2) Powerful software for studies of evolutionary trajectories; and 3)
Deep insight into the determinants of protein evolutionary trajectories in high-
dimensional genotype-phenotype maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.