* 1844565
* CAREER: Spatial Network Database approach for Emergency Management Information Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* KwangSoo Yang, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,011.00

Emergency Management Information Systems (EMIS) are an increasingly important
tool for understanding, managing, and governing transportation-related systems,
as well as for testing the stability or vulnerability of these systems against
interference. Recently, EMIS have benefitted from both volunteer geographic
information (VGI) and crowdsourcing as powerful methods of collecting user-
generated datasets. However, these data sources are challenging due to their
very large size, variety, and update rates required to ensure the timely and
accurate delivery of useful emergency information and response for disastrous
events. Developing fundamental data processing components for advanced relevant
queries which can clearly and succinctly deliver critical information in the
case of an emergency is critically important and challenging. This research
focuses on three interrelated domains: 1) evacuation route planning 2) resource
assignment, and 3) transportation resilience. This research investigates
innovative queries in these three domains in the context of emergency
management. The outcome of this project has potential benefit to a wide range of
societal applications, such as transportation management, logistics, public
safety, resource assignment, and service delivery and thus aligns well with the
NSF mission: to promote the progress of science; to advance the national health,
prosperity and welfare . Educational objectives of this project include
broadening participation of Hispanic women, increasing undergraduate research
opportunities including research-intensive course development, and promotion of
team science skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to
identify promising solutions for addressing the challenge of EMIS and to develop
an advanced spatial query processing platform that clearly and succinctly
delivers critical information in emergencies. First, this project designs and
develops the problem-solving framework that can integrate different technical
components, including geometry, topology, graph theory, and optimization
techniques. Second, this project investigates multiple inherent constraints for
spatial networks and identifies main bottlenecks for query processing. Third,
this project develops fast and scalable query processing mechanisms that
overcome these bottlenecks and produce simple and concise information for
emergency management. A key research challenge is to identify structural
patterns or optimal substructures of the spatial network optimization problem
that can enhance the scalability and efficiency of spatial network query
processing. The components of the query processing framework include frequent
suffix tree mining, graph simplification, bi-partite graph clustering, minimum
polygon covering, graph partitioning, spectral method, random walk, and expander
graph mining. These components are integrated to develop fast and scalable
spatial network queries and to provide simple and concise information for EMIS.
The outcomes of this project include data processing tools, spatial and spatial
network optimization algorithms, queries, and visualization tools. This project
validates the performance of new spatial network queries using historical and
real-time datasets and provides a web-based educational system to enhance
student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.