* 1844807
* CAREER: A Framework for Automated Verification of Hypervisors
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Xi Wang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2024
* USD 569,590.00

Hypervisors are an essential component of modern computing devices, from
personal laptops to cloud servers. They create the illusion of having multiple
physical machines and provide vital support for resource management. Software
bugs have proliferated due to the increasing complexity of modern hypervisors;
such bugs can cause issues ranging from performance degradation to security
vulnerabilities that allow malicious virtual machines to compromise the entire
system. This project, IsoV, is to build highly reliable and secure hypervisors
through the use of automated verification techniques that effectively eliminate
entire classes of software bugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IsoV will provide novel
programming support for developing hypervisors and for formally verifying their
correctness and isolation guarantees. The novelty in the project lies in the
ideas behind the push-button approach to hypervisor design. The main idea of
push-button verification is to design the interfaces of these systems to be
finite and amenable to automated verification. The research goal of IsoV is to
develop new designs and techniques for automated verification of hypervisors.
This project focuses on two common classes of hypervisors: those that provide
isolated execution environments to shield applications from untrusted or buggy
operating systems; and those that safely partition resources among mutually
distrustful virtual machines. The practical and educational goals of this
project are to apply IsoV in building real systems; to release the tools and
systems as open-source software; and to disseminate results
widely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.