* 1844182
* Deciphering Lithospheric and Deeper Mantle Contributions to the Surface History of the North American Arctic From the Unique Mantle to Surface Record of Kimberlites
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Shijie Zhong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 388,842.00

Fundamental questions exist about the deep-time surface history of vast
continental interior regions. In Arctic North America, diamondiferous kimberlite
magmas of diverse age that bear fragments of rock entrained from deep in the
Earth erupted through continental blocks of contrasting age, structure, and
history. The disparate relationships provide the opportunity to evaluate the
deep and shallow evolution across the region to illuminate how the histories at
different depths are linked. This project will develop new and reinforce
existing cross-disciplinary research relationships among U.S. and Canadian
scientists studying processes at different depths in the Earth, train a CU-
Boulder PhD student, and foster diversity through support of an underrepresented
minority summer intern. A workshop will gather the project team and other
members of the geologic, petrologic, and geodynamic communities to improve ties
among these groups and enhance understanding of how deep Earth through surface
processes are connected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's goals are to
decipher the Phanerozoic surface history across the North American Arctic,
identify relationships with the architecture and history of the lithospheric
mantle, evaluate connections with the history of kimberlite magmatism, and
consider the role of sublithospheric processes in these records. This will be
accomplished by exploiting the unique mantle to surface record preserved within
Arctic kimberlite pipes. Specifically, this project will (1) decipher the Arctic
surface history and its spatial variability by integrating AHe data for
kimberlite and basement samples with geologic constraints on the surface
evolution borne by the pipes, (2) compare this surface record with the
composition and evolution of the underlying mantle roots, which are being mapped
by the project's University of Alberta collaborators through intensive study of
these same kimberlites and their mantle xenolith suites, and (3) use a
3D-dynamic model of thermochemical convection to predict the Phanerozoic thermal
evolution of the upper asthenosphere below North America. This project is
jointly supported by the Petrology &amp; Geochemistry, Geophysics, and Tectonics
programs in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.