* 1844773
* CAREER: A National Strategy for a Resilient Food Supply Chain
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Megan Konar, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 509,877.00

Distribution through complex supply chains is critical to food security. In the
United States, the food supply chain has largely been sheltered from
disruptions. However, this could change in the future unless preventative
actions are taken. Several risks to food supply chains in the U.S. are
increasing in potential frequency and severity. Extreme weather disruptions to
agricultural production, reliance on unsustainable irrigation resources, and
degraded infrastructure represent future threats to food supply chains in the
United States. This project seeks to (1) articulate the interdependent
infrastructure networks that support the national food supply chain, (2)
evaluate the exposure of the food supply chain to key risks, and (3) pinpoint
vulnerabilities in the interdependent infrastructure networks that underpin the
food supply chain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching scientific question of
this research is: How resilient is the food supply chain of the United States to
unsustainable water use, extreme weather, and degraded infrastructure? The
supporting science questions are: What infrastructure supports the food supply
chain? How exposed is the food supply chain to risk? What vulnerabilities exist
in the interdependent infrastructure systems? What is the buffering capacity of
irrigation to extreme weather? To address these questions, it is essential to
evaluate the national food supply chain as a complex interdependent network.
This is because food supply chains in the U.S. depend on an intricate web of
interconnected infrastructure, such as irrigation, roads, ports and harbors,
rail lines, and navigable waterways. This research will develop a framework to
enable the scientific and policy communities to assess the resiliency of food
supply chains. The hypothesis of this research is that there are "hot spots" of
vulnerability to these risks in the U.S. food supply chain. Hot spots may exist
that are not obvious when each infrastructure is considered in isolation. This
research will provide a detailed understanding of the interdependent
infrastructure networks that support national and global food security.
Discovery of critical vulnerabilities in the food supply chain of the United
States could be used to prioritize national infrastructure investment funds. Now
is an opportune time to identify infrastructure investment priorities, as calls
for investment in U.S. infrastructure systems are increasing. As part of this
project, formal communication training will be incorporated into the Civil and
Environmental Engineering Department curriculum to train the engineer of the
future. The PI will develop and introduce a short course on science
communication for engineers. This project will utilize the scientific knowledge
obtained to develop an online, interactive Food Supply Chain Risk map. This
visualization system will be used to engage K-12 students in a Girls Adventures
in Mathematics, Engineering, and Science (GAMES) camp, undergraduate and
graduate students at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC),
policy makers and the media through the Institute of Government and Public
Affairs (IGPA), and the general public through farmers market
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.