* 1844794
* Toolbox Workshop for the AccelNet PI Meeting
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Marisa Rinkus, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/2020
* USD 71,909.00

The ability to communicate and collaborate is key to effective research teams
and networks. This project focuses on enhancing this ability through a dialogue-
based workshop to be held in Washington DC for newly funded members of
international network-to-network collaborations as part of an awardee project
meeting. The workshop builds on a decade of work by the Toolbox Dialogue
Initiative to design and deliver evidence-based facilitated discussions that
increase the communicative and collaborative capacity of cross-disciplinary
teams. The workshop will advance knowledge along two fronts. First, the
reflective discussion among participating members of the networks of networks
will increase their own understandings of potential obstacles to project success
and opportunities for project development. Second, the extension of the
facilitative approach from research teams to larger, distributed networks of
networks will provide new insights to science collaborations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this workshop is to provide members of
international network-to-network collaborations the opportunity to examine
beliefs and values that inform their contributions as collaborators,
researchers, and networks members. Workshop participants will represent newly
funded projects in the Accelerating Research through International Network-to-
Network Collaboration program. The workshop will be crafted for each network
represented, maximizing the value of the time they spend in dialogue. The
workshop will generate: (1) a team-focused conversation about the conceptual
foundations of their project that can coordinate their collective thinking going
forward; (2) products of a co-creation activity that will contribute to the
team's process; (3) a report that offers communication and collaboration
recommendations for the team's consideration; (4) a communication-focused survey
tool that the teams can use to check in periodically about the status of their
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.