* 1844401
* The Geo Futures Program: A Workshop for Undergraduates: Oct 30-Nov 2, 2019 - Honolulu, HI
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2019,06/30/2020
* Corey Garza, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2020
* USD 98,471.00

Conferences provide students with a scaffolding experience that enhances their
understanding of the culture of STEM while also helping them develop a peer
network that enhances their identity in science. Set within the annual Society
for the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science (SACNAS)
Conference, a national conference that specifically engages with the cultural
structures of students from underrepresented groups, this workshop will pilot
engagement strategies for recruiting, engaging, and retaining a diverse
assemblage of students. This workshop will provide forty undergraduate students
with support and mentorship that is important for their retention in STEM
fields, particularly in the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A workforce with
diverse perspectives will be required to address the emerging needs of 21st
century geosciences. A primary goal of the workshop is to support the new
generation of geoscientists that includes students from underrepresented groups
and students with diverse backgrounds. Forty undergraduate students and
approximately fifteen mentors will participate in the week-long workshop and the
SACNAS conference in October, 2019. The workshop contributes to NSF's "Strategic
Objective 2.2 : STEM Workforce: Foster the growth of a more capable and diverse
research workforce and advance the scientific and innovation skills of the
Nation." (NSF Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years
2018-2022)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.