* 1844834
* I-Corps: Next Generation Polymeric Stabilizer: Stabilization of Soil with High Shrink/Swell Potential
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Priyantha Jayawickrama, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be found in
civil engineering infrastructure development projects where construction is
undertaken in areas affected by expansive soils, i.e. soils that shrink and
swell in response to changes soil moisture level. Such shrink/swell activity in
foundation soils is a leading cause of structural damage to roadways and other
infrastructure systems built upon them. In the United States Texas, Colorado,
Louisiana, Arkansas, Mississippi, Alabama, Nebraska, North Dakota and South
Dakota are among the states with major problems due to presence of expansive
soil. Expansive soils have reportedly caused problems in other parts of the
world as well. Traditionally, lime and Portland cement have been used to
stabilize such expansive soils. However, these traditional stabilizers cannot be
used in all soil conditions. In such situations, the only viable solution is to
remove the native soil and replace it with better quality materials. The
proposed I-Corps technology involves a sustainable soil stabilizer that
overcomes many of the limitations found in the traditional stabilizers. It
provides a more economical alternative in projects where remove-and-replace
strategy is currently used. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores
opportunities for commercialization of a novel soil stabilizer which uses an
inorganic compound known as geopolymer as the key ingredient. Geopolymers are
synthesized using abundantly available natural materials and/or industrial by-
products such as fly ash and ground blast furnace slag. Unlike traditional soil
stabilizers (viz. hydrated lime and Portland cement) which require vast amounts
of energy during production, geopolymers are synthesized at or near ambient
temperatures. Accordingly, the new stabilizer represents a more sustainable
alternative to traditional soil stabilizers. Extensive laboratory testing and
microstructural studies conducted during the product development phase
demonstrate that the new stabilizer can achieve more than 90% reduction in
shrink/swell potential. The experimental data also confirm that the geopolymer-
based stabilizer can be used effectively to overcome a number of significant
limitations that exist in the traditional stabilizers, such as inability to
treat sulfate-bearing soils. Traditional lime stabilization requires a waiting
period of 4-7 days for the stabilizing reactions to take place; this causes
interruption in work flow and delay in construction. In such situations, the new
stabilizer can be used to treat the native soil and improve its engineering
properties and thus eliminate need for expensive remove-and-replace
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.