* 1844880
* CAREER: Amplifying Developer-Written Tests for Code Injection Vulnerability Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Jonathan Bell, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 196,587.00

Code injection vulnerabilities are a class of security vulnerabilities that have
been exploited increasingly often, including in the high-profile 2017 Equifax
breach as well as in many recent attacks on our country's election and financial
systems. These vulnerabilities are very tricky to detect, and there are no
existing automated techniques to protect critical software from being released
with these dangerous flaws. This project is developing new and transformative
approaches for detecting code injection vulnerabilities in complex, large-scale
systems. The line between high-assurance and general-purpose software is
increasingly blurred, as nowadays nearly any insecure software can have severe
economic consequences. Hence, this project is developing, validating and
disseminating better tools that any engineer can use to detect code injection
vulnerabilities in their applications during testing (without requiring
specialized security knowledge).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To detect these
vulnerabilities, this project harnesses the combined power of both human
developers and automated dynamic program analysis, combining existing test
suites with dynamic dataflow analysis. Given an existing (and perhaps low
quality) developer-written test suite, this project simultaneously increases the
depth of each test (adding new security-related checks to each test) and the
breadth of each test (ensuring that the test suite thoroughly validates each
security check). When one of these tests suggests that there might be a
vulnerability, the tool will generate a proof-of-exploit test case that
demonstrates the existence of the exploit and allows developers to understand
and debug the issue, preventing it from escaping to the wild. The tools will be
carefully designed to be adoptable by everyday software engineers without
requiring specialized knowledge of program analysis, with easy integration with
existing tooling and continuous integration infrastructure. This project
involves undergraduate and graduate students in research. All software and
curricula resulting from this project will be freely and publicly available; the
resulting tools will be publicly disseminated and are expected to be useful for
other testing and security researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.