* 1844358
* SBP: Disaggregating Racial Groups to Understand the Contexts that Shape Discrimination
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Sapna Cheryan, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2024
* USD 406,528.00

The United States population is composed of many different racial and ethnic
groups. Among the fastest growing of such groups are Asian American and Latinx
people. As members of minority groups, Asian American and Latinx people
frequently experience discrimination and prejudice. Many decades of research in
the social and behavioral sciences has made significant progress in
understanding the nature of such discrimination, its harmful consequences, and
how policies and practices can be shaped to reduce those harmful effects. This
body of theory and research has helped to develop a much better understanding of
the many forms of discrimination, and how racial minorities respond to
discrimination. Yet the vast majority of this work is based on the Black-White
relationship in the U.S. and the specific experiences of African American
people. As a result, the unique forms of discrimination faced by Asian American
and Latinx people may be overlooked and poorly recognized by those in power.
This is important to understand because policies and practices that are meant to
remedy forms of discrimination may actually be harmful to the health and success
of some people of color in the U.S. This project seeks to refine basic
understanding of discrimination in a way that more fully accounts for the forms
of discrimination experienced by Asian American and Latinx people, which can
ultimately improve the productivity, health, and welfare for all of
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses large-scale audit studies and
controlled laboratory experiments to investigate whether racial and ethnic
minority groups face different forms of discrimination. The research considers
the implications that different forms of discrimination have on the likelihood
of reporting discrimination, and how different strategies may be required to
reduce discrimination based on which racial and ethnic group is targeted. The
project offers a conceptual refinement by distinguishing two dimensions of
social stereotypes: perceived inferiority and cultural foreignness. By
systematically integrating these two dimensions, new insight will be gained into
the distinct forms of discrimination faced by groups who have less-frequently
been the focus of theory and research in this area. The research investigates
whether Asian American and Latinx people face more discrimination in the labor
market than do White and African American people for jobs that require
stereotypical American characteristics (e.g., English language abilities). The
project also examines whether discrimination based on cultural foreignness is
likely to be unrecognized as discrimination by those in power. Experiments also
consider unique strategies used by Asian American and Latinx people to cope with
these forms of discrimination. Understanding the varying forms of discrimination
faced by different racial and ethnic minority groups is a critical step in
recognizing, attending to, and eventually eliminating these forms of
discrimination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.