* 1844493
* CAREER: Engineered Oxide Heterointerfaces With Tunable Vacancy Distributions
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Stephen Nonnenmann, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Many energy conversion and storage applications
require chemical reactions along some critical surface or interface to
effectively operate. Replacing scarce, expensive noble-metal materials with
abundant, cheap, efficient complex metal-oxide alternatives remains a primary
challenge facing energy conversion. Missing oxygen atoms in the structure of
these alternative oxide materials dictate their functional properties. This
research uses novel microscopy methods and classic semiconductor analysis to
visualize and quantify the location and amount of missing oxygen atoms across
the critical interface under the operating conditions of actual energy
conversion systems, in real time. Understanding the fundamental mechanisms of
how missing atoms affect energy conversion at the interface is vital to rapidly
advancing the development of devices such as fuel cells and electrolyzers. This
work trains undergraduate and graduate students across the disciplines of
materials science, surface science, and electrochemistry for placement in the
energy conversion/storage, electronics, and nanotechnology sectors. This project
also includes a fully integrated educational component where an undergraduate
student team develops microscopy modules that are demonstrated in both senior
capstone and graduate level courses using a portable atomic force microscope.
This "flipped" instruction model also allows the undergraduate team to extend
their module demonstrations to summer high school programs, and on social media,
to inspire underrepresented groups to pursue science and engineering as exciting
and worthwhile academic and career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: Oxygen vacancy-mediated reduction, dissociation, or incorporation
mechanisms often contribute to the rate-determining step in solid-state
electrochemical energy conversion processes. This project combines
transformative in situ scan probe microscopy methods with electrostatic analysis
to directly observe, and quantify, critical high temperature vacancy-mediated
ionic transport phenomena across electroactive oxide interfaces under extreme
environmental perturbation, at the nanoscale. The goal of this research is to
understand how vacancy distributions evolve across electroactive oxide
interfaces as a function of work function engineering, mismatch strain, and/or
compositional gradients. These activities train university student researchers
in high temperature in situ microscopy and sample preparation to push the
frontier of experimental methodology. By directly observing vacancy
redistribution across electroceramic interfaces in real time, this project is
establishing the structure-property principles necessary for the realization of
mechanically-stable, catalytically-active interfaces and advancement of next-
generation electrochemical energy conversion systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.