* 1844803
* BTT EAGER:   Cell type-specific profiling 2.0: Capturing subpopulations of cells undergoing a response
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Julia Bailey-Serres, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2023
* USD 296,919.00

Understanding how plants or animals function requires the ability to study
molecular processes within specific cell types or even in single cells of the
body. It is well known that cells within organisms respond to stimuli, such as
light, gravity, hormones or any number of environmental triggers; however, when
and how cells respond remains a mystery in part because it is technologically
challenging to identify which cells are responding. Often responsive cells are
not easily distinguished from non-responsive cells. In this high-risk, high
reward project, the research team solves this problem by developing a molecular
tool to identify and capture when and where cells respond to a stimulus, such as
a hormone signal, in plant roots. The method will be broadly useful to detect
other responses, and in many different plants and plant organs, due to its
universal and modular design. The new technology will allow scientists to test
new environments or treatments and identify how plant cells respond rapidly and
precisely. The outcomes will impact researchers' ability to understand growth
responses of diverse plants ranging from crops to model systems. Undergraduate
students will have in-depth research training by contributing to the project
during a summer research intensive. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent
advances in molecular profiling of specific plant cell types have generated
important breakthroughs in understanding cell differentiation and cell type-
specific stress responses. The research team has played a key role in this
through the development and application of our INTACT (Isolation of Nuclei
TAgged specific Cell Types) and TRAP (Translating Ribosome Affinity
Purification) and TRAP (Translating Ribosome Affinity Purification) methods in
crop plants. Despite the utility of INTACT and TRAP, there remains a pressing
need to be able to capture the subsets of cells of a given cell type as they
respond to a stimulus. Cells undergoing a response to such a stimulus are a
subset of a population and cannot be easily captured by available methods. This
limited resolution hinders the ability to address the molecular details of
plant-microbe interactions, responses to hormone signaling, and spatially non-
uniform abiotic stresses. The research team will address this problem by
developing a system for selective purification of nuclei and translating
ribosomes from cell subpopulations that are actively undergoing a specific
response, such as drought sensing or interaction with a microbe. This will be
achieved by producing two-component INTACT and TRAP systems in which one
component (the biotinylatable nuclear envelope- or ribosomal-tagging protein) is
expressed from a cell type-specific promoter, while Biotin ligase is driven from
a stimulus-inducible promoter. In this way, the entire population of a cell type
can be analyzed by purification of organelles using anti-GFP beads, while the
subset of responsive cells can be analyzed by Streptavidin bead
purification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.