* 1844149
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3 Enzyme cascades in synthetic membraneless organelles
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Henry Hess, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 296,162.00

Like factories, cells organize processes by placing them in distinct rooms
(organelles). The project will create a model system to understand how cells
utilize compartments without distinct walls. Design rules for the formation and
function of these compartments will be established. The rules will be tested by
constructing an membraneless organelle that houses enzymes that direct a series
of reactions. The project will also focus efforts to foster a diverse STEM
workforce through student recruiting, training, and teaching at all levels.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be recruited. Outreach activities on
enzymes will be developed for middle school students and summer research
experiences will be provided to local high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membraneless organelles (M-organelles) provide
spatial and temporal organization through selective phase separation. They are
important in cell signaling, transcriptional control, and stress response.
However, a robust model system that replicates their function does not yet
exist. This project will develop a model system based on electrostatically
driven liquid-liquid phase separation of enzymes. A model enzyme cascade of
glucose oxidase and horseradish peroxidase will be incorporated into these
synthetic M-organelles. Protein engineering of the enzymes will be used to
determine the design rules for multiple protein partitioning. A library of
fluorescent fusion proteins will be biosynthesized and their incorporation in
the synthetic M-organelles will be quantified by fluorescence microscopy. The
development of these design principles will enable control over the relative
ratio of the sequenced enzymes in the synthetic M-organelles. Importantly, the
impact of the synthetic M-organelle microenvironment on the efficiency of the
enzyme cascade will be evaluated. The spatial distribution of the enzymes,
substrates, and product will be monitored and used to determine detailed
reaction kinetics. These combined efforts will help to establish rules for the
formation and function of M-organelles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.