* 1844964
* CAREER: Modal Abstractions of Systems Concepts for OS Kernel Verification
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Colin Gordon, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 08/31/2024
* USD 579,853.00

Operating systems (OSes) are software systems that coordinate sharing of
hardware between other applications (such as sharing memory without conflict),
provide a high-level abstraction of hardware, and include reusable functionality
for common program tasks (such as storing and retrieving files from disk).
Because they have control over other programs and mediate use of hardware
resources, defects in operating system code can compromise the reliability or
security of any software running on the OS. Most computers run one of just a few
general-purpose operating systems, so a bug in any one of those systems will
likely affect very many computers, making their correctness critical to
countless computer-based systems used daily around the world. This project
explores new ways to mathematically prove correctness properties of operating
systems, and thereby to establish conclusively the impossibility of bugs in
them. The project's novelties are a focus on verifying realistic OS designs
similar to those used in industry, treating significant subtleties of OS control
over hardware, and new approaches to specifying correctness for common design
patterns in low-level code. The project's impacts are the introduction of new
verification techniques for low-level code that are expected to apply more
broadly than to operating systems, and integration with education. The project
develops new ways of teaching undergraduate automata and computability courses,
integrating modern applications from security and software verification to
better demonstrate the material's value and improve student
engagement.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project brings a range of techniques from
modal logic to bear on OS verification, and attempts to show that these
techniques support three kinds of reasoning that occur in operating system
kernels and systems code in general: location virtualization (as in virtual-
memory management and copy-on-write filesystems), caching (including hardware
store buffers, translation lookaside buffers, and OS-level caches), and
abstraction of a single protocol to be used in multiple different ways but in a
compatible manner (as relevant to device driver frameworks). The project
constructs a detailed model of the multicore x86-64 architecture, including
details of interactions between interrupt handling, virtual memory management,
and weak memory models. The project uses the model to implement a small OS
following standard OS designs (in particular, using the same standard
abstractions for address spaces, device drivers, the virtual filesystem layer,
and filesystem caching), and verifies the OS in a Hoare logic extended with new
reasoning principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.