* 1844976
* CAREER: Error-Free, Uniform and Composable Chemical Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* David Doty, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 471,468.00

Computation by electronic computers has revolutionized relatively mundane
aspects of life, such as shopping and commuting, by automating tasks that
previously required human intervention. Similarly, the programming of chemicals-
automating the processing of information embedded in molecules could remake the
world: smart molecules controlled by programmable chemical reactions could
achieve the same level of precise automated control over the configuration of
matter at the molecular level. This may one day revolutionize, for example,
therapeutic treatments applied within living cells or nanoscale materials
fabricated by self-assembly. This project aims to develop the mathematical
foundations of such chemical information processing, bringing the engineering of
chemistry-based "software" closer to the reliability of modern electronic
computing. Research will be directed toward key challenges that have faced
practitioners in the field: namely error-prevention, reusability, and the
ability to integrate separately designed chemical systems into a properly
functioning whole. Insights gleaned from research in classical computer science
will be applied to achieve these goals, but new insights, based on the laws of
physics and chemistry, will be required to reason about the uniquely molecular
interactions mediating chemical computation. The potential applications in
medicine or nano-engineering include identifying and curing diseases, as well as
self-assembling devices with nanoscale precision. Together with a tightly
integrated educational plan based on training female undergraduate mathematics
students in computer science research, and a data-driven approach to develop
autograding software for undergraduate CS courses, this project will help train
a new and diverse generation of interdisciplinary scientists and programmers,
who can innovate robust nanoscale information
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the theoretical
foundation for programming chemical algorithms-that is, algorithms executed by
artificially synthesized chemical reactions-ensuring they have three crucial
properties that are lacking, or at best poorly understood, in existing systems:
(1) error-free: implementable by real chemicals that faithfully execute the
intended algorithm, (2) uniform: correct for any "population size", i.e., the
total number of molecules, unlike many current algorithms where reactions must
be tailored specifically to the population size and (3) composable: can be
packaged into functional modules that are easily combined. As DNA nanotechnology
and molecular computing mature, so too must our insight into their fundamental
abilities and limitations. A rigorous theory of chemical computing will guide
the experimental breakthroughs of the future. Development of this theory will be
guided by a preference for substrate-independence, identifying the laws of
computation obeyed by all chemical systems, sifting out artifacts of particular
technologies from their shared unifying principles. The development of
techniques to make chemical algorithms error-free, uniform, and composable could
lead to a systematic path for programming chemistry, making it understandable
and usable by non-chemists thus allowing the molecular computing revolution to
take flight. Advances in programmable kinetic barriers in implementing an
autocatalytic reaction could eventually lead to a significant technological
breakthrough allowing error-resilient single-molecule
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.