* 1844018
* SBIR Phase I:  Virtual Reality Based Curriculum for Increased STEM Engagement
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Barbara DeHart, SAMA LEARNING, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 12/31/2019
* USD 224,938.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop Virtual Reality (VR) based curriculum for
first year university science courses. VR has the potential to create a step
change in the way STEM education is taught and ultimately the way students
learn. This project aims to build VR science curriculum to make science
education more accessible, engaging and effective, and turn traditional STEM
leavers into stayers which will positively impact STEM retention to meet the
U.S. workforce demand. The VR science curriculum will be used alongside the
existing curriculum at universities, with students participating in one
30-minute virtual lesson a week. The effect of these lessons on the students'
performance will be measured to validate the ability of VR to positively impact
learning outcomes. This project supports the NSF mission by progressing the
science of education, by developing education tools using the scientific method,
and measuring effectiveness. Moreover, the focus on improving university science
education will improve the workforce pipeline, creating more and better prepared
scientists. The products resulting from the proposed work will make science more
accessible preparing today's students to be tomorrow's inventors, problem
solvers and next great minds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is in the approach to developing VR curricula, and continually
validating each curriculum by using data science to correlate student
performance in the lesson to their performance in the classroom. Each lesson
combines exposition, active learning, problem-based inquiry and assessment into
self-contained modules which can be added to any existing curriculum. Student
actions, and concept mastery are tracked within each lesson; ultimately, to
correlate what the student is doing in a VR lesson to their learning outcome in
real time. This enables the project team to validate which components of each
lesson are working to improve student learning outcomes, and continually refine
the VR pedagogy. This approach to developing each lesson and the cycle of
refinement is the key innovation of the project team. The goal of the proposed
research is to evaluate the magnitude of learning outcome improvement achieved
when VR lessons are added to existing curricula, correlate the student actions
in the VR lesson to their learning outcome as measured through in-class
assessments, and evaluate perceived implementation hurdles for use of VR by
instructors. This will be accomplished by integrating VR lessons in university
curriculum and measuring the results against a control group. Instructor
feedback will be gathered through a mixed methods
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.