* 1844861
* CAREER:Exploring apoplastic sulfate restriction and stress response mis-regulation as major mechanisms of pattern-triggered immune action on bacteria
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2025
* Brian Kvitko, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 01/31/2025
* USD 1,000,035.00

Plants are constantly challenged by invading microbes. To counter these
invaders, plants deploy a robust and effective immune system capable of
detecting, appropriately responding to and restricting the proliferation of most
microbes. While the molecular mechanisms underlying the detection of microbes
and the signaling mechanisms associated with the induction of immunity are
understood in ever increasing detail, the molecular mechanism(s) by which
microbial proliferation is restricted by immune functions have been elusive. The
long-term goal of this project is to understand the bacterial mechanisms
targeted by plant immune action. Immune-activated plants appear to limit
available sulfur, an essential element for life, thus blocking bacterial
proliferation. Plant immunity also interferes with conserved bacterial responses
to stress, resulting in the increased sensitization of bacteria to immune
outputs. Characterizing these potential modes of immune action will have broad
implications for our understanding of plant immunity and provide new targets and
practical strategies to manage plant diseases. The project's broad educational
goals include increasing pre-graduate competency in plant pathology, teaching
plant and plant disease science to students from all backgrounds, including non-
science majors, and enhancing scientific understanding through inquiry-based
learning. The project's broader impacts expand public knowledge of plant
diseases and may suggest new crop protection solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Driven by host recognition of conserved
microbe-associated molecular patterns, Pattern Triggered Immunity (PTI) is the
first line of induced immune defenses used by plants against invading pathogens.
PTI plays a key role in restricting the unchecked growth of microbes. However,
the mechanisms by which PTI restricts the growth of broad classes of microbes
are unclear. The transcriptional response of bacterial pathogens to PTI is the
basis for this project's focus on mechanisms of PTI action that restrict
pathogen growth. Deploying plant genetics, forward and reverse bacterial
genetics, chemical and protein analysis, and bacterial transcriptomics, this
CAREER project will test the following hypotheses: 1) Apoplastic sulfate
sequestration restricts bacterial proliferation during PTI; 2) PTI outputs
interfere with activation of the AlgU bacterial stress response cascade,
resulting in increased bacterial sensitization to immune-associated stressors;
and 3) although PTI outputs are multifaceted and semi-redundant, bacterial
responses to PTI can be used to delineate and link specific outputs to sectors
of the plant defense network. This project incorporates educational activities
aimed at raising public knowledge about plant diseases and immunity and will
focus on the education of non-specialist students. These goals will be achieved
by the development of two undergraduate inquiry-based learning courses
incorporating plant disease agricultural biotechnology concepts and targeted
towards non-science majors, and by piloting peer-mentored, inquiry-based
learning lesson plans about plant-microbe interactions for teachers in Athens-
Clarke County, Georgia, middle schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.