* 1844524
* EAGER: Reconciling Model Discrepancies in Human-Robot Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Yu Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Erion Plaku
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,929.00

Robots greatly complement human capabilities in many domains, but having them
function as teammates has often proven to be challenging. This is due in part to
a lack of understanding of robots, which often leads humans to find that their
expectations of robotic teammates are not met in reality. The proposed research
addresses this by having robots reason about the models people have of them and
using those models to either behave in ways that meet the expectations more
closely or explain the perceived differences. The work can have a significant
impact on critical domains that involve human-in-the-loop AI systems, such as
decision support, automated manufacturing, eldercare, and medical robotics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To become reliable teammates, robots must understand the
expectations of their human partners regarding the robots' tasks and abilities,
and be able to seek reconciliation between the expected and actual models. In
this project, reconciliation will be achieved either by 1) biasing the robot's
behavior to implicitly accommodate model differences; or 2) communicating to
explicitly reduce the differences. The first approach, termed model
reconciliation planning, will be formulated as an optimization problem that
generates a plan for the robot to execute while minimizing its distance to the
expected plan that the human envisions. Heuristic search methods will be
developed to accommodate this approach. The second approach will generate
explanations to update the human's model of the robot in such a way that the
robot's plan more closely matches that of the human's expectation in the updated
model. In addition, machine learning will be used to approximate the model of
human expectation when not provided explicitly, and methods for model
reconciliation with these learned and incomplete models will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.