* 1844573
* CAREER: Comprehensive Techniques and Design for Flexible Graph Visualization of Software and Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Katherine Isaacs, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2023
* USD 527,898.00

Computationally-assisted drug discovery, predictions of hurricane trajectories,
and simulations of new energy sources are all made possible by underlying
software (programs). To construct these programs, software developers must
divide each problem into smaller operations and order those operations carefully
to compute the correct answer. This ordering can be viewed as a network graph,
where each operation points to its next possible operations in order.
Furthermore, to make these programs run fast enough to be useful, developers,
engineers, and researchers must find new ways to balance those operations with
system resources such as storage, processing units, and memory. These resource
constraints add more ordering requirements to the graph. Verifying this graph
can help avoid bugs. Information inferred from this graph can be used to
automatically decrease the time the program requires to run. Thus, people
working in computing frequently examine these graphs to generate or validate new
ideas about how to write their programs or use computational resources. For
example, a programmer may discover a long sequence of operations performed one
after another that could be parallelized, thus making the program faster.
General approaches for drawing networks have not met the demand of graphs in the
computing space, resulting in difficult to interpret, if not unusable, diagrams.
The purpose of this project is to develop new graph visualization approaches to
better support developers, engineers, and researchers in their work and learners
in their understanding of computing and their integration of tools such as graph
visualization into their skill sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphs arising from
computing contexts frequently take the form of directed acyclic or near-acyclic
graphs (DAG-like graphs). The aim of this project is to develop layout
algorithms and design guidelines specifically for this class of computing
graphs. Research tasks include surveying graphs generated across computing
disciplines to derive a characterization of their structure, their domain-
specific sub-structures, and their common drawing conventions. The
characterization will guide the development of constraints and objectives for
layout of node-link diagrams as well as design guidelines for interactivity and
visual encoding in support of domain-specific tasks. The results will be
implemented in an open-source library and evaluated for both expressivity of
computing structures and computational performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.