* 1844289
* RoL:EAGER:DESYN-C3: Engineering Microbial Differentiation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Corey Wilson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Human stem cells can become different cell types (muscle, blood, brain) through
a process called differentiation. Imagine differentiation as a series of
calculations that the cell performs to determine what type of cell will survive
best in a given environment in the body. The cell needs to remember the answer
to the previous calculations in order to make the next calculation, so it needs
a permanent memory of some type. Bacterial species do not change from one cell
type to another because they do not have the capability to remember. Creating
memories could allow a population of bacteria to calculate the best solution to
a problem. For example, the population would be able to decide the best strategy
to remove toxins from drinking water, or to produce a therapeutic vaccine. This
project will create bacterial memory structures and will evaluate the ability of
the bacteria to perform different calculations. The project will offer female
and under-represented minority students research opportunities. A workshop for
training undergraduates in the research techniques used will also be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to create
genetic memory. The approach taken is to develop genetic structures (e.g.,
promoters, reading frames and terminators) that can be rapidly rearranged in
response to stimuli. The response will therefore be inherited, persisting long
after the removal of the stimulus that created it. For this development to be
significant, two or more different switches must be created so that the cell is
capable of performing logical calculations, similar to computer programs, that
allow for more than two distinct solutions (e.g. on or off). This could
ultimately lead to the development of schemes and workflows for scalable genetic
MEMORY structures and dynamic cellular programming. Testing and optimization of
the appropriate subsystems will be conducted and will be used to construct a
full-scale MEMORY structure (i.e., a biological calculator) and the subsequent
differentiation architectures that will serve as the processing unit for nine
varieties of synthetic microbial stem cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.