* 1844731
* Midwestern Conference on Partial Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Samuel Walsh, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Victor Roytburd
* 12/31/2019
* USD 16,033.00

This award will provide support for participants, especially graduate students,
junior researchers, women and mathematicians from under-represented groups in
the sciences, to attend the second regional conference "KUMUNU Conference on
PDE, Dynamical Systems and Applications" to be held in Columbia, Missouri on
April 27-28th, 2019. The meeting is organized jointly by the Departments of
Mathematics at the University of Missouri-Columbia, the University of Kansas in
Lawrence, and the University of Nebraska-Lincoln. The conference will showcase
recent advances and facilitate exchange of ideas in partial differential
equations and dynamics of complex systems. Many basic first principles in nature
take the form of conservation (or balance) laws for quantities that vary in
space and time, and these laws lead naturally to partial differential equations
(PDE). PDE are therefore encountered in nearly all areas of science; they
describe wave motion, diffusion, deformation, mixing, pattern formation, and
many other phenomena. Specific applications of current interest include climate
modeling, water waves, electrodynamics phenomena in complex media, and
neuroscience. While participants are clustered in the Midwestern and Southern
states near Missouri, Kansas, and Nebraska, many researchers working at
institutions elsewhere in the US will be included. Early career mathematicians
will be given an opportunity to present their work to gain recognition and
invaluable feedback. For the first time this year, KUMUNU will also feature a
mini-course consisting of a series of three lectures to be given by Bjorn
Sandstede (Brown). The conference website is
http://faculty.missouri.edu/~walshsa/kumunu2019/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many of
the complex nonlinear problems governed by PDE can be reframed as dynamical
systems posed on infinite-dimensional spaces. This strategy has proved to be
effective, and it certainly shows tremendous promise as a means to attack a host
of open problems in nonlinear science. To realize this promise, a strong and
continuing collaboration between the PDE and dynamics communities is essential.
The goals of the KUMUNU Conference are to support and facilitate this
collaboration. The major themes of this year's meeting are as follows:
applications of dynamical system techniques to fluid mechanics and water waves;
dynamics of dispersive PDE; and spatio-temporal structures. Each of these topics
has generated a great deal of recent activity. The KUMUNU Conference will help
to advance these efforts, particularly at regional
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.