* 1844164
* Workshop: US-Germany Collaborative Research in Advanced Manufacturing II; Alexandria, Virginia; June 2019
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Barbara Linke, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2021
* USD 59,950.00

This award provides partial support for an NSF and German Research Foundation
workshop to foster collaborative research between the United States and Germany.
Both the United States and Germany have vibrant manufacturing sectors, pervasive
technology proliferation, and high wages. Both countries rank among the world
leaders for technological sophistication, high technology product development
and advanced manufacturing activity. Both countries have strong support for
scientific and engineering research, and there are significant overlap and
synergies between the funded research portfolios. While there are potential
areas for collaboration, there are few venues where research topics that are
mutually beneficial can be identified. Results of this workshop can also be
useful to fostering collaborations between the two countries in other fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will be held on the east coast of the United
States in June 2019. About 15-20 advanced manufacturing researchers from each
country will participate in the workshop. The objectives of the workshop are to:
1) Revise research needs in advanced manufacturing as identified at the NSF/DFG
Workshop held in February 2016. 2) Revise needs, gaps, and challenges facing
advanced manufacturing. 3) Identify best practices of collaboration, and
logistical challenges as observed by researchers in both countries engaged in
U.S.- German collaborative projects. 4) Formulate recommendations for expanding
and formalizing future joint research initiatives. 5) Provide a forum for
researchers from the US and Germany to network and develop future
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.