* 1844994
* CAREER:  Single Cell Signaling Dynamics During Cell Fate Decisions
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Sergi Regot, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 12/31/2023
* USD 843,636.00

Cells make critical decisions such as whether to proliferate or die by
constantly evaluating their internal and external environment. Understanding how
cells make these decisions is still an open question that can be addressed by
combining quantitative biology and mathematical modelling. This project tackles
long standing questions in cell fate determination by using a new technology
that allows measuring biochemical changes inside individual cells in real time
as they make decisions. The interdisciplinary nature of this project, combining
molecular and cell biology, protein engineering, advanced imaging, and
mathematical modeling, makes it particularly well-suited for educational
purposes. This will foster a unique training environment to introduce high
school, undergraduate and graduate students to the field of single-cell
quantitative biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MAPKs are key signaling molecules
that orchestrate cellular responses to a diverse array of stimuli through a
signaling network that ultimately controls gene expression, cell cycle or cell
migration. The current understanding of how this highly interconnected network
controls cellular decisions is incomplete because of: (i) a lack of methods to
quantify the activity multiple signaling proteins in real time and (ii) the use
of cell population assays that average unsynchronized single cell behaviors. To
address this need, this project will pioneer a new generation of biosensors that
allow simultaneous quantification of multiple protein activities in thousands of
live single cells. The central hypothesis is that the signaling equilibrium
between MAPKs is critical to regulate single cell outcomes (i.e. proliferation,
quiescence, senescence, apoptosis). Using endpoint cell fate analysis, the
researchers will be able to dissect the signaling patterns that underlie cell
fate choices. In combination with mathematical modelling, this project aims to
understand the fundamental principles of MAPK signaling dynamics that govern
cellular decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.