* 1844119
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C Spontaneously Synthesized RNA Protocells for Biological Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Richard Zare, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2021
* USD 299,998.00

The core activity of a cell involves the high-fidelity replication of RNA and
DNA. Protein synthesis is necessary to accomplish this objective. The variety of
protein activities present leads to complex cell behavior. This variety is due
in large part to external environmental forces. This project will attempt to
create a precursor to a synthetic cell; a protocell. Think of this as a stepping
stone between a vessel containing a mixture of chemicals and a fully-functional
cell. The protocells will be micron-sized water droplets containing simple
molecules. In such confined environments, spontaneous reactions have been
observed to occur. This project, if successful, might help explain how life
began, and facilitate the exploration of the catalytic functions of
ribozymes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an attempt to construct
protocells from water microdroplets. The approach utilizes in situ synthesis of
nucleotide, oligonucleotide, and phospholipids in aerosol microdroplets with
geometric confinement and a heterogeneous air-water interface. The intellectual
merits of the proposed research on synthesizing protocells and applications are:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) How to form cellular membranes from simple phospholipid precursor
molecules; &lt;br/&gt;(2) How to construct RNAs from ribose, nucleobase, metal
and phosphoric acid; &lt;br/&gt;(3) How to build complex RNA molecules such as
RNA oligomers, double-strand RNAs, ribozymes, and organometallic hybrid RNA
enzymes; &lt;br/&gt;(4) How to utilize the protocell containing RNA ribozymes
for catalysis, RNA editing, and switching biochemical reactions. &lt;br/&gt;The
formation of oligomer products from the fluorescently tagged reactant
nucleotides will be probed using fluorescence spectroscopy methods. Complete
characterization of metabolic reactions and catalytic reactions using mass
spectrometry will be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.