* 1844280
* CAREER: Wirelesss Sensing for In Vivo Medical Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Fadel Adib, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 01/31/2024
* USD 658,339.00

This project develops wireless networking systems for deep-tissue micro-
implants. The micro-implants may be swallowed or injected into the human body
and used for applications such as delivering drugs or monitoring internal human
vitals. The challenge in building these systems arises from the power, size, and
longevity constraints of micro-implants as well as the anatomical complexity of
the human body and its interaction with wireless signals. By overcoming these
challenges, this research will enable a new generation of networked micro-
implants that can actively contribute to human health and well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to design and build practical
wireless systems that are capable of communicating with and localizing micro-
implants at near-zero power. To this end, the researchers plan to augment micro-
implants with backscatter sensors and develop algorithms, protocols, and system
architectures for these sensors. The proposed research contributions encompass
developing (i) algorithms for reliable and adaptive deep-tissue communication,
(ii) techniques for accurate cross-medium backscatter localization, and (iii)
integrated sensing platforms that combine communication, localization, and
sensing on battery-free micro-implants. The proposed research will extend beyond
the conception of algorithms and systems to the implementation and evaluation of
real-world prototypes. The designs will be integrated on micro-implants with
sensing and actuation capabilities, and will be evaluated in a number of
applications such as wireless smart pills for targeted drug delivery and
internal vital sign sensors for continuous in-vivo
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.