* 1844983
* CAREER: Mining Career, Education and Job Data to Bridge the Talent Gap between Demand and Supply
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Yong Ge, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 03/31/2024
* USD 507,888.00

The talent gap, a mismatch between the workers that employers need and the
workforces that labor markets provide, exists across many sectors of labor
markets, and is even worse for STEM-related labor markets and minority groups.
There is a critical need to understand and study the talent gap and develop
helpful and actionable recommendations for different stakeholders including
employees, employers, and education institutes to bridge the gap. This project
collects and deeply analyzes the large wealth of career, education and job (CEJ)
data, and develops quantitative methods for measuring the micro and macro level
talent gap and a suite of recommendation techniques for filling the gap. This
study contributes significantly to the limited knowledge base in the area of CEJ
data analytics. The findings, tools and documents will help researchers in
fields such as education and economics better study the talent gap challenge of
U.S. labor markets. This project involves, through courses and thesis projects,
graduate and undergraduate students to enhance their knowledge and skills in
solving real problems. This project also involves K-12 students through summer
camps and encourages them to earlier prepare their education and career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three major tasks:
collecting and modeling heterogenous CEJ data with machine learning methods,
measuring and interpreting the talent gap, and developing recommendation
solutions to bridge the gap. To tackle the first task, this project collects a
variety of CEJ data from multiple sources such as online professional networks
and develops advanced embedding methods. To solve the second task, this project
develops novel quantitative measurements and customized visualization techniques
based on the embedding results. To handle the third task, the project develops
sophisticated recommendation methods for generating actionable suggestions for
employees, employers and education institutes. The results of this project will
be disseminated in the form of peer-reviewed publications, open-source software,
tutorials, seminars, and workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.