* 1844088
* SBIR Phase I:  Identification of disease resistance traits to improve the productivity and sustainability of soybean cultivation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Alex Schultink, Fortiphyte, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 10/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to improve the productivity and environmental
sustainability of soybean cultivation. Soybean is the most widely grown crop in
the United States with nearly 90 million acres under cultivation. Soybean is a
key part of the food system and generates $22 billion in export revenue each
year. One of the greatest threats to soybean production is the fungal pathogen
known as Asian Soybean Rust. Current commercial soybean varieties have no
resistance to this pathogen and over $2 billion is spent annually on fungicides
to control this disease. While soybean is highly susceptible to this disease,
many wild plant species have natural resistance to this pathogen. This project
seeks to identify the naturally occurring mechanisms of disease resistance in
wild plant species that can be used to develop disease-resistant soybean
varieties. Adoption of these varieties is expected to bring more than $4 billion
in value to the soybean industry while improving productivity and reducing
fungicide use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this SBIR Phase I
project is to identify plant immune receptor proteins that confer disease
resistance to Asian Soybean Rust, which is caused by the fungal pathogen
Phakopsora pachyrhizi. A key determinant of whether or not a plant is resistant
to a particular pathogen is whether the plant has an appropriate immune receptor
protein capable of recognizing the presence of the invading pathogen. Once
activated, plant immune receptors trigger plant defense responses that typically
result in immunity. This project will use reverse genetic and biochemical
approaches to identify plant immune receptor proteins that confer resistance to
Asian Soybean Rust. Preliminary work identified several molecules from
Phakopsora that elicit an immune response in non-host plant species. The goal is
to identify the cognate immune receptors and test them for sufficiency to enable
immune activation in response to Asian Soybean Rust elicitor molecules. This
research will enable future work to the development soybean varieties with
resistance to Asian Soybean Rust.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.