* 1844768
* CAREER:  Algebraic Curves and Their Moduli: Degenerations and Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Melody Chan, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2024
* USD 290,975.00

Algebraic geometry is a central subject in mathematics and has connections and
applications to many areas in mathematics, physics, and engineering. Algebraic
geometers study spaces called algebraic varieties that are defined by polynomial
equations. One powerful method of studying these spaces, as used in this
project, is the method of degenerations, where a parametrized family of
algebraic varieties breaks into pieces in the limit. Roughly speaking, the idea
is that one studies the combinatorics, i.e. the discrete data, of the pieces, in
order to deduce things about the more complicated original space. The
educational component of the project includes a Women in Algebraic Geometry
Workshop and a seminar series on diversity and inclusion in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award will
center on using modern degeneration techniques, especially those from the field
of tropical geometry, to study classical spaces from algebraic geometry. In one
direction, the PI will use these techniques to study the topology of classical
moduli spaces of curves and abelian varieties. In another direction, the PI will
also advance our understanding of Brill-Noether varieties using the
combinatorics of set-valued tableaux, and investigate questions in tableau
combinatorics that were motivated by the program in Brill-Noether theory. This
award will also support a Women in Algebraic Geometry workshop and a seminar
series on diversity and inclusion in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.