* 1844067
* SBIR Phase I:  Low Cost, High Precision Methane Sensor System
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Daniel McCormick, AdvancedMEMS
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 08/31/2020
* USD 223,890.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is the development of an improved methane sensor module
that can enables new drone sensing and sensor network applications in the
energy, agricultural, and waste management sectors. Methane, the third largest
energy source after petroleum and coal in the U.S., is relatively difficult and
expensive to measure compared to other gasses. It is a major atmospheric
pollutant, both as a component of smog and as a greenhouse gas. This technology
can provide societal environmental benefits by helping reduce methane release
into the environment through the ubiquitous sensing of small natural gas leaks,
allowing companies to rapidly respond. This sensor system has the sensitivity of
laser-based spectrometers but is smaller, lighter, and has lower power
requirements at a price three orders of magnitude less than existing high-end
spectrometers. Designed to reduce power, weight and cost to a minimum while not
compromising sensitivity, this technology is ideal for UAV-based measurements.
It can also give station mounted and handheld monitoring units high sensitivity
at a lower price point, enabling multiple monitor sampling strategies and a
multi-station networked array to track intermittent sources of methane leaks.
This technology can provide novel capabilities to cost-conscious customers in
the energy sector while opening up additional markets for agricultural, waste
management, and safety products. A first prototype of this methane sensor
successfully measured methane in nitrogen down to 10 ppm. The long-term
objective is the creation of a commercially available low-cost, high precision
methane sensor product line. SBIR project funding is enabling the transition of
this promising sensor technology from a small business research and development
project into the early commercialization stages of a valuable new product.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase 1 project proposes to create a
self-contained methane sensor system, smaller in size than a quarter, with the
sensitivity of advanced laser spectrometers. Current methods of detection do not
meet the needs of industry. They are either cheap, high power and low
sensitivity, such as catalyst-based systems, or they are large, expensive, high
power optical systems. There is a market need for methane sensors that improve
upon size, weight and power, while still maintaining useful sensitivity and
selectivity. The system consists of 3 primary modules: the replaceable or
consumable sensor package, the sense electronics, and the data storage and
communication system. Due to the extremely low power requirements of the sensor,
clever design of the data and communications system is critical if the low power
benefits of the sensor are to be realized in a product. Ultimately, the system
will include wireless connectivity (Bluetooth, WiFi, 5G, Zigbee) for cloud and
IoT data management. This design will be prototyped and will undergo performance
measurements. Materials for methane sensing will be identified The objective of
SBIR Phase 1 is to produce an initial prototype sensor for methane-sensing that
will be the focus of SBIR Phase II.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.