* 1844790
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining the linguistic cues that guide prediction in the processing of Mandarin relative clauses: An ERP study
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Utako Minai, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2022
* USD 17,077.00

Comprehending language is an incremental process in which the listener attempts
to integrate each incoming word into the structure and meaning of the sentence
as it unfolds. Increasingly, this process is also argued to involve the
prediction of upcoming parts of the sentence. However, open questions remain
regarding what type of linguistic information is used in order to generate
predictions, and to what extent individuals differ in their ability to engage in
prediction. This dissertation research project uses electroencephalography
(EEG), a brain-imaging technique with millisecond-level timing resolution, to
examine whether the brain utilizes predictive cues to anticipate a complex
syntactic structure in Mandarin. This study also examines to what extent the
ability to predict complex structures depends on verbal and non-verbal cognitive
abilities, providing new insights regarding the neurological basis of language
and the cognitive abilities that modulate success in language
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines what type of
linguistic information is used to predict upcoming structure during processing,
focusing on the prediction of relative clauses in Mandarin (e.g., the string
"Mary wrote" in "the book Mary wrote"). In Mandarin, it is only at the end of
the phrase that there is any marker indicating that the words form a relative
clause; therefore, predicting relative clauses in advance may be critical for
processing these sentences without disruption. This project examines whether
tense expressions that appear early in a sentence may provide a predictive cue
indicating an upcoming relative clause. Brain activity will be recorded via EEG
while participants read sentences in Mandarin, in order to track the dynamics of
predictive processing throughout the sentence. Participants will also complete a
battery of tests in order to examine whether engaging in structure prediction is
modulated by individual differences in linguistic and cognitive abilities,
shedding light on the individual properties which may affect language
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.