* 1844668
* CAREER:  Cracking the Cleavage Code of RNase Y and Its Associated Y-Complex in Firmicutes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Gene-Wei Li, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/29/2024
* USD 998,636.00

The objective of this research is to elucidate a cryptic code in bacterial
genomes that determines the rate of protein production. This new information
will help explain how bacteria utilize genetic information to interact with and
change the environment they live in, which in turn could have wide ranging
impacts, from fundamental biology to biotechnology. Graduate students
participating in the project will learn to develop novel high-throughput
measurements and statistical methods for analyzing large-scale data sets.
Synergistic with the interdisciplinary nature of the research, the education and
outreach components of this project will promote an integrated learning
experience in biology and statistics. Both hypothesis-driven research methods
and hypothesis-testing statistical concepts will be taught in an interactive
format that promotes curiosity-driven inquiry and broadens
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Messenger RNAs are templates for protein
synthesis, and their lifetimes determine the yield of proteins. This research
will identify the molecular determinants of the initial cleavage event that
leads to RNA degradation in Gram-positive bacteria. Novel genome-wide techniques
will be leveraged to reveal different classes of cleavage sites, and
commonalities among them will be identified through bioinformatics. This
latitudinal investigation will be complemented with two longitudinal studies
using deep mutational scanning and phylogenetic analysis of conservation.
Furthermore, genome-wide screens will be performed to provide the first
comprehensive view of trans-acting factors that regulate RNase activities. A
quantitative definition of cleavage codes and their effectors will greatly
enhance our understanding of gene expression programs employed by bacteria, and
potentially transform our ability to design predictable genetic circuits for
synthetic biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.