* 1844792
* CAREER: Implications of a neurobiological model of memory for education: how novelty exposure transforms poor learning into durable memories
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Joseph Dunsmoor, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,574,539.00

The goal of this project, led by a new investigator at the University of Texas,
is to understand the conditions by which poor learning can be transformed into a
durable memory, with the ultimate goal of improving educational outcomes. The
project leverages groundbreaking behavioral neuroscience research in rodents
showing that weak memories can be enhanced through exposure to novelty around
the time of learning. It is known that novelty exposure stimulates the molecular
and cellular processes involved in long-term memory formation. Remarkably, there
is now strong evidence in laboratory animals that novelty exposure can be used
as a tool to stabilize other, poorly formed, memories learned around the time of
novelty exposure. This idea that novelty exposure retroactively strengthens
memory for prior experiences has challenged common assumptions about how animals
learn and remember information. It also raises a host of intriguing and
important questions on how to harness novelty exposure in humans to improve
memory for information that is prone to forgetting. A series of behavioral,
psychophysiological, and neuroimaging experiments will attempt to address the
parameters by which novelty can be used as a tool to rescue weak learning. The
project will culminate in a study of conceptual learning in such fields as
biology and geoscience The ultimate goal of this research is to develop
innovative and inexpensive tools for promoting learning and memory in real-world
settings. Alongside the research project is a plan for public outreach to
students and the local community, mentorship, and a plan to develop
collaborations with educational researchers to ultimately translate research
findings to improve learning performance in authentic educational settings. The
project is supported by a CAREER award to the University of Texas by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental
research literature on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project attempts
to translate the concept of 'behavioral tagging,' which was discovered in rodent
behavioral neuroscience, to humans. Behavioral tagging is based on a
neurobiological model of long-term memory (known as 'synaptic tagging') which
details how weak synaptic potentiation creates the conditions for a long-term
memory, but only if weak potentiation is accompanied by stronger synaptic
potentiation within a critical time window. Behavioral tagging extends this
neurobiological model to the realm of behavior by showing that suboptimal
learning can be rescued by a separate and more salient experience after
learning. Novelty exposure is often utilized as this separate and more salient
experience, as it is well-known that novelty induces long-term potentiation in
the hippocampus, releases dopamine to the hippocampus via the midbrain, and
upregulates plasticity related genes. Thus, novelty exposure may be a valuable
tool to stimulate memory formation for other information learned around the same
time. Indeed, rodent studies show that poorly formed hippocampal-dependent
memories are transformed into durable long-term memories if learning is
accompanied by subsequent exposure to a novel open field. This project will test
the behavioral tagging hypothesis in humans. It will be discovered whether
novelty exposure can improve a host of hippocampal-dependent memories including
spatial memory, contextual fear conditioning, pattern separation, memory
integration, and learning and transfer of educationally-relevant material. The
goal is to gain insight on whether and how novelty enhances poorly formed
memories in humans, with the ultimate goal of discovering straightforward,
inexpensive, and innovative tools to improve STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.