* 1844327
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3 Membraneless organelles by design: a biomimetic approach
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Sara Vaiana, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The cell has to organize a large number of reactions. It accomplishes this by
isolating certain reactions and molecules inside of compartments known as
organelles. Sometimes these organelles exist within membranes. Sometimes they
exist simply as a distinct liquid phase. Controlling organelle formation and
composition is central to creating a synthetic cell. Synthetic cells could be
used in the biomanufacturing of chemicals, biofuels, and therapeutics, among
potential applications. This project will investigate whether synthetic
organelles without membranes can house complex reaction sequences. High school
students will be involved in this project directly, through hands-on training in
synthetic biology and participation in the international genetically engineered
machine (iGEM) competition. Their challenge will be to develop protein tags that
can trigger formation of the liquid phase organelles. They will also share their
experiences on a blog. This will hopefully increase their enthusiasm and
interest in pursuing careers in STEM-related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of proteins
is a fundamental process in living cells. It underpins the formation of
functional, non-membrane bound, liquid-like compartments involved in cell
function and development. Examples include the nucleolus, Cajal bodies, nuclear
speckles, germ granules, processing bodies, stress granules, and cell signaling
compartments. These membraneless organelles can separate and concentrate
specific sets of molecules in a highly dynamic manner. They also exchange
components with their microenvironments rapidly. Within the liquid droplet,
proteins maintain or acquire a folded structure, and conserve functions such as
specific protein recognition. Increasingly, these structures are being
implicated in diseases caused by protein aggregation. In this project, we will
test whether LLPS can be exploited to enhance catalysis. An organelle that
brings together elements of an enzyme cascade will be constructed and evaluated.
These membraneless organelles will be evaluated by expressing the modular
proteins in vivo and visualizing the formation of LLPS droplets by microscopy.
Further, we will extend this approach to enable enzymatic cascades that include
artificial metalloenzymes. If successful, this proposal will establish an
innovative, simple method to generate organelles for synthetic biology,
complementing existing methods such as encapsulation by protein shells or by
vesicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.