* 1844453
* CAREER: Cultivating Teachers' Epistemic Empathy to Promote Responsive Teaching
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Lama Jaber, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 708,034.00

When students sense that their cultural, linguistic, and resources they bring to
science and mathematics classrooms are not relevant, they come to perceive these
fields as inaccessible to them, which creates an obstacle to their engagement
and active participation, particularly consequential for underserved student
populations. This issue points at the pressing need to prepare science and
mathematics teachers to open up their instructional strategies to students'
diverse ideas and their sense-making approaches. This CAREER award aims to study
the construct of "epistemic empathy" and examine how it can be cultivated in
science and mathematics teacher education, how it functions to promote
responsive teaching, and how it shapes learners' engagement in the classroom. In
the context of this project, epistemic empathy is defined as the act of
understanding and appreciating another's cognitive and emotional experience
within an epistemic activity aimed at the construction, communication, and
critique of knowledge. Through epistemic empathy, teachers take learners'
perspectives and identify with their sense-making experiences in service of
fostering their inquiries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study's five research
questions will be: (1) Do the ways in which pre-service teachers display
epistemic empathy change throughout a course aimed at promoting attention to and
knowledge about learners' varied ways of knowing in science and mathematics? (2)
How do the teaching domain and teaching context influence how teachers express
epistemic empathy, and the concerns and tensions they report around empathizing
with learners' thinking and emotions? (3) How does epistemic empathy shape the
ways in which teachers understand and reflect on their roles, goals, and
priorities as science or mathematics teachers? (4) How does epistemic empathy
shape teachers' responsiveness to student thinking and emotions during
instruction? and (5) How does teachers' epistemic empathy influence how students
orient and respond to each other's thinking in science and mathematics
classrooms? To address these questions, the project will conduct a series of
design-based research studies working with science and mathematics pre-service
and in-service K-12 teachers (n=140) to design, implement, and analyze ways to
elicit and cultivate their epistemic empathy. Further, the project will explore
how epistemic empathy shapes teachers' views of their roles, goals, and
priorities as science or mathematics teachers and how it influences their
enactment of responsive teaching practices. The project will also examine the
influence of teachers' epistemic empathy on student engagement, and the ways
students attend and respond to each other's epistemic experiences in the
classroom. Data collection strategies will include video and audio recording of
teacher education and professional development sessions; teachers' work within
those sessions, such as their responses to a pre- and post-video assessment
tasks and their written analyses of different videos of student inquiry;
teachers' interviews; and videos from the teachers' own instruction, as well as
teachers' reflections on these videos in stimulated recall interviews. These
data will be analyzed using both qualitative methods, such as discourse
analysis, interaction analysis; and quantitative methods, such as blind coding
and descriptive statistics. The project's outcomes will be: (1) an instructional
model that targets epistemic empathy as a pedagogical resource for teachers,
with exemplars of activities and tasks aimed at developing their responsiveness
to and ways of leveraging learners' meaning-making processes; (2) local theory
of teachers' learning to epistemically empathize with learners in science and
mathematics; and (3) empirical descriptions of how epistemic empathy functions
to guide and shape teachers' responsiveness and students' engagement. An
advisory board will provide feedback on the project's progress, as well as
formative and summative evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a CAREER award
in the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. The DRK-12 program seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.