* 1844264
* BTT EAGER:  Investigating Genetic, Epigenetic and Environmental Control of Meiotic Recombination using Fluorescent Crossover Reporters in Tomato
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Ian Henderson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2022
* USD 299,999.00

Most crop foods, including seeds, grains, fruit and vegetables, are the result
of plant sexual reproduction. Successful reproduction requires the interaction
of parental chromosomes. The same kind of chromosomal interactions are used by
plant breeders to create new combinations of favorable traits. The Copenhaver
lab at The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill together with their
collaborators, the Henderson lab from the University of Cambridge previously
developed a powerful technique for detecting and quantifying these chromosome
interactions in a model plant species related to the mustard plant. In this
project the Copenhaver and Henderson labs will extend that technology into a
commercial crop species tomato. They will then use that technology to measure
the effects of genetic, epigenetic and environmental factors on influencing the
number and genomic distribution of these chromosome interactions in order to
understand the fundamental biological mechanism that drive plant reproduction,
as well as to identify fruitful avenues for accelerating crop breeding. The
Copenhaver and Henderson labs will publish their findings in open-access
formats, and make the genetic resources they develop available to researchers
and industrial colleagues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previously, the Copenhaver and
Henderson labs developed a visual assay for measuring meiotic recombination
frequencies directly in the gametes of Arabidopsis thaliana. They assay, called
the FTL system, employs a collection of lines harboring transgenes encoding
pollen-specific fluorescent proteins expressed in the quartet (qrt) mutant
background, which enable tetrad analysis in a higher plant. In this project they
will translate the FTL system into Solanum lycopersicum (tomato). Using the
tomato FTL system they will test whether CRISPR/Cas9 induced mutations in recq4
helicase homologs result in genome wide hyper-recombination. They will also test
whether CRISPR/Cas9 induced mutations in genes that mediate epigenetic
mechanisms such as DNA methylation and small RNA biogenesis can alter
recombination frequencies around specific chromosomal domains with distinct
chromatin environments such as centromeres. Prior work in Arabidopsis, suggests
that exposure to high and low temperatures can significantly modulate
recombination frequencies. The Copenhaver and Henderson lab will test whether
similar environmental manipulation can alter recombination frequencies in S.
lycopersicum. The project will provide training for two postdoctoral fellows as
well as independent research experiences for undergraduates in both the
Copenhaver and Henderson lab. The research findings will be published in open-
access formats, and all genetic resources will be made available to both
research and industrial colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.