* 1844766
* I-Corps: Light-Activated Anti-Infective Coatings: Photosensitizer-Embedded Nanofibrillated Cellulose
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,11/30/2021
* Reza Ghiladi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 11/30/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
improve our understanding of the market forces that drive the need/use of
antimicrobial materials. With ~1.7 million healthcare-associated infections
causing upwards of 99,000 deaths annually in the United States, and adding about
$30-45 billion to health care costs every year, the potential societal impact
stemming from this proposed activity include a better understanding of the
market forces that govern the need/use of antimicrobial materials. Understanding
such forces will be important for the creation of the next generation of
antimicrobial materials, and will impact the fields of materials and polymer
science, textile engineering, packaging, and infectious disease (microbiology,
virology) by providing performance guidelines in terms of material
characteristics, physical properties, and antimicrobial efficacy. Food
processing, packaging and service industries, waste water treatment, daycare
facilities, and personal households are other potential areas that will benefit
from this project. As such, given the potential commercial applications of
platform antimicrobial technologies, narrowing the number of possible products
and identifying a few key markets will be important for their commercialization,
and this effort will be to better define the most viable products from which to
commercialize platform antimicrobial technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project aims to help the research team arrive at a go/no-go decision on
whether to pursue commercialization of an anti-infective material: comprised of
nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) into which are embedded photosensitizers (PS,
chemical compounds that react with light and emit biocidal oxygen), this
photoactive material, termed NFC-PS, is capable of the rapid, efficient, and
low-cost sterilization of a wide range of infective agents, including drug-
resistant bacteria and viruses, making it a platform technology from which to
develop self-sterilizing materials. The intellectual merits of the proposed
voice-of-customer research will establish the market-driven need for
antimicrobial materials, including: i) to identify what customers and/or
potential licensees would need in terms of anti-infective material properties
(e.g. longevity, chemical resistance, integration into existing products,
maximum cost or price points, EPA and/or FDA regulatory approvals); ii) to help
identify potential products that could be improved by adding antimicrobial
characteristics to them; and iii) to complete a business model canvas for the
NFC-PS technology. Initial product ideation based upon the NFC-PS platform
technology will be narrowed to 1-2 main products from a much broader number of
market categories, and will be used to identify what prototype(s) should be
developed along the path to commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.