* 1844144
* Analysis of Causal Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Aaron Blaisdell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2023
* USD 575,502.00

The ability to imagine past events and simulate future ones is a profound human
ability, and highly useful to artists, philosophers, scientists, and engineers.
Are animals also able to use mental imagery to represent their world and
experiences? Previous NSF-funded research from the principal investigator has
found evidence that rats form mental images of expected absent events. The
proposed research builds on this by asking how can rats use mental imagery to
reason, and how do imagined events impact new learning? Many creatures face
situations in the real world in which the ability to make decisions under
conditions of uncertainty would be adaptive. This work can provide insights into
how brains think, and how the human mind is unique versus how it is similar to
the minds of other animals. This research could inform the design of artificial
intelligence systems to learn and make decisions under conditions of incomplete
information. Broader educational impacts include the involvement of high-school
and college students as research interns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans are
rational, causal agents. Blaisdell and his colleagues have recently discovered
that, like humans, rats engage in a variety of rational processes involving
causality. They make rational causal inferences from their interventions and
represent unobservable events, such as a hidden cause, as possibly being present
when presented with associated events. That is, they appear to have some form of
mental imagery. Rational decision making guided by mental imagery involves the
recruitment of the same neural circuits (i.e., the hippocampus and prefrontal
cortex) that are involved in human reasoning under ambiguous situations, and
that requires pattern completion from partial information. This proposal
investigates the theoretical and empirical foundations of rational decision
making that are integral to human reasoning and their evolutionary antecedents
and progenitors by seeking for commonalities in a phylogenetically-distant
mammalian relative. Behavioral experiments use operant and Pavlovian
conditioning procedures to establish associations between events. Tests of
decision making will be made by presenting one of the events and observing
behavior when the associated event is uncovered and therefore explicitly absent,
or covered by an opaque shield and therefore ambiguously absent. This research
will deepen our understanding of the mental capacities of mammalian animals
which may offer insights into the likely brain mechanisms involved in reasoning.
Mental imagery is a basic process in human learning and memory. Establishing
evidence for mental imagery in animal learning and memory can provide insights
into which aspects of human cognition are unique to humans, and which aspects of
human cognition are homologies shared with nonhuman animals, and could inform
the design of artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.