* 1844217
* SBIR Phase I:  Radio-Frequency-Identification Based Seal & Packaging Methods To Eliminate Counterfeiting And Tampering Of Physical Goods
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Emil Tremblay, SGNT LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rick Schwerdtfeger
* 07/31/2019
* USD 224,470.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be on any industry or product category that
suffers from product counterfeiting; that is to say on nearly every industry
imaginable. It is estimated that the global counterfeit market will grow from
$1.2 Trillion in 2017 to more than $1.8 Trillion by 2020. In an attempt to
combat this trend, spending on anticounterfeit packaging will grow from $122
Billion in 2017 to $264 Billion by 2023. Of most dire concern, the counterfeit
pharmaceutical industry is estimated at approximately $200 Billion, resulting in
about 1 million deaths annually. Existing anti-counterfeit packaging techniques
have proven largely ineffective in combating this counterfeiting problem. This
project will result, for the first time, in packaging or seals that, without
ambiguity, inform users of the authenticity, integrity, and provenance of any
product outfitted with the project?s resultant technology. All stakeholders in a
supply chain will be enabled to detect fake goods before they can be used or
consumed. This increased visibility into the supply chain will also broaden
enforcement opportunities for relevant entities and/or authorities and provide
special benefit to those industries most urgently impacted: pharmaceuticals,
military/defense products and high-priced goods.

The proposed innovation is a novel enhancement to Radio Frequency Identification
(RFID) that seals any package or container to which it is attached and, when
queried by a reader/interrogator (e.g. any modern smartphone), provides the
status (i.e. tampered/un-tampered) and identity to the user or system. The
project will produce the designs and manufacturing techniques required to create
RFID-based seals that provide assurance of authenticity, integrity, and
provenance for products to which these seals are applied. Research will be
conducted on several specific hardware components required by this innovation
and will produce the requisite software and cryptographic systems for the
testing, design, and commercialization of this proposed solution to product
counterfeiting. Developed software will provide the testing and development
framework for commercial applications of the proposed anti-counterfeiting
solution. Advances in hardware design, especially concerning the minimization of
power requirements for the RFID-based seals and the manufacturing techniques for
specific required hardware components (i.e. the components that detect tampering
events) will be accomplished during this research project. Research and
development activities will employ varied techniques including iterative design,
3D printing, and advanced electronics prototyping. This SBIR Phase I project
will ultimately result in the design and validation of production-ready seals.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.