* 1844219
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3: Moving information across synthetic membranes via engineered sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Joshua Leonard, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 11/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Pseudocell engineering is the design and synthesis of structures that mimic real
cell functions. These structures can be useful for biotechnological applications
or to advance our understanding of cellular processes. Cell membranes often
isolate intracellular reactions from the extracellular environment. To enable
pseudocells to control when and how reactions take place requires technologies
to sense the external environment without requiring a flow of materials. Living
cells accomplish this goal using sensor proteins installed within the cell's
outer membrane. This project will coordinately design proteins and membranes to
perform similar sensory and signaling roles. This project will also train
students and will enhance ongoing outreach activities. A diverse STEM workforce
will be developed by engaging undergraduates in research through Northwestern
University's iGEM team and its synthetic biology-focused REU,
SynBREU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop strategies for embedding
protein sensors in synthetic membranes. This will help uncover relationships
between membrane and protein design features. Achieving productive biosensor
performance will be integral to evaluating the design process. The approach
taken is based on preliminary data that demonstrates the feasibility of using
cell-free expression systems to insert a functional channel protein (MscL) into
vesicle membranes. This will be combined with the Modular Extracellular Sensing
Architecture (MESA) developed by the co-PI to generate novel biosensors that are
orthogonal to native systems. Ligand binding induces dimerization of MESA chains
triggering an internal response without transmembrane transport of material.
This approach will be evaluated using rapamycin as the external signal and split
green fluorescent protein as the internal reporter. If successful, the approach
will be extended to using vascular endothelial growth factor as the signal
molecule and split Nano-Luciferase as the reporter. If successful, this project
will benefit society by ultimately enabling the use of pseudocell technology for
improved environmental stewardship, and for improved patient care and treatment.
The technologies to be developed here will benefit the biotechnology and
pharmaceutical industries by enabling the development of new classes of
therapeutic and diagnostic products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.