* 1844793
* Characterization of Antarctic Firn by Multi-Frequency Passive Remote Sensing from Space
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2023
* Mustafa Aksoy, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 337,081.00

This project will test the hypothesis that physical and thermal properties of
Antarctic firn--partially compacted granular snow in an intermediate stage
between snow and glacier ice--can be remotely measured from space. Although
these properties, such as internal temperature, density, grain size, and layer
thickness, are highly relevant to studies of Antarctic climate, ice-sheet
dynamics, and mass balance, their measurement currently relies on sparse in-situ
surveys under challenging weather conditions. Sensors on polar-orbiting
satellites can observe the entire Antarctic every few days during their years-
long lifetime. Consequently, the approaches developed in this study, when
coupled with the advancing technologies of small and low-cost CubeSats, aim to
contribute to Antarctic science and lead to cost-effective, convenient, and
accurate long-term analyses of the Antarctic system while reducing the human
footprint on the continent. Moreover, the project will be solely based on
publicly-available datasets; thus, while contributing to interdisciplinary
undergraduate and graduate research and education at the grantee's institution,
the project will also encourage engagement of citizen scientists through its
website.

The overarching goal of this project is to characterize Antarctic firn layers in
terms of their thickness, physical temperature, density, and grain size through
multi-frequency microwave radiometer measurements from space. Electromagnetic
penetration depth changes with frequency in ice; thus, multi-frequency
radiometers are able to profile firn layer properties versus depth. To achieve
its objective, the project will utilize the Global Precipitation Measurement
(GPM) satellite constellation as a single multi-frequency microwave radiometer
system with 11 frequency channels observing the Antarctic Ice Sheet. Archived
in-situ measurements of Antarctic firn density, grain size, temperature, and
layer thickness will be collected and separated into training and test datasets.
Microwave emissions simulated using the training data will be compared to GPM
constellation measurements to evaluate and improve state-of-the-art forward
microwave emission models. Based on these models, the project will develop
numerical retrieval algorithms for the thermal and physical properties of
Antarctic firn. Results of retrievals will be validated using the test dataset,
and uncertainty and error analyses will be conducted. Lastly, changes in the
thermal and physical characteristics of Antarctic firn will be examined through
long-term retrieval studies exploiting GPM constellation measurements.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.