* 1844152
* RoL: RAISE: DESYN-C3: Membrane-based cell-free systems for scalable production of plant natural products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Vincent Noireaux, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,020,494.00

Making something that works signifies that one understands how it works at a
fundamental level and that one can add features to study their effects upon
performance. For example, to a working airplane model one can add a curve to the
wings, up-notched wingtips, and a whole host of modifications to see how they
affect the performance of the plane. The same design paradigm holds true in
biology. If one can make a cell from scratch that works, then one can start
adding pieces to it and engineering functions into the system. This research
project aims to create a synthetic cell system that mimics the membrane of a
plant cell. Once a functioning system is achieved, different proteins that
normally are found in plant cell membranes will be added to the synthetic cell
system to determine what functions they display. The researchers will primarily
focus on model set of proteins that produce an Alzheimer's drug. To further
enhance the impact of the research project, the researchers will also develop
new educational material about synthetic cells, train graduate and undergraduate
students, and perform outreach to the general public to generate and further
understanding about the idea of synthetic cells and their potential uses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, it has not been possible to create self-
assembling, membrane-based cell-free systems. The primary hypothesis of this
research project is that success can be achieved through regulated control over
the timing and expression levels of enzymes for phospholipid vesicle generation.
To achieve this goal, the researchers will integrate a CRISPR-based genetic
control system with phospholipid production pathways. Specifically, they will
construct a highly-efficient membrane-based gene expression system for plant
transmembrane proteins. The intended plant natural product to be synthesized is
the Alzheimer's drug, Galantamine. If successful in producing Galantamine, the
researchers will expand the system to a variety of other transmembrane proteins,
emulating plant cell environments. As a result, this research project will
expand cell-free bioengineering capabilities and will provide new methods to
prepare synthetic cell systems with complex membrane compositions. These systems
will enable scientists to better understand the relationship between membrane
biophysics and enzymatic activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.