* 1844855
* CAREER: Theory of Fast Graph Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Aaron Sidford, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Graphs are one of the most fundamental mathematical abstractions used to model
complex, highly-interconnected data. Whether scheduling airline flights, finding
communities in social networks, routing internet traffic, architecting a deep
network, or simply visualizing a large data set, graphs are essential tools used
to perform these operations. Consequently, efficient graph-optimization
algorithms are highly coveted, and graph-optimization problems are among the
most well-studied problems across the theory and practice of computer science,
operations research, numerical analysis, and scientific computing. Recent rapid
growth of data set sizes has further elevated the demand for graph algorithms
which can scale nearly optimally. However, despite decades of extensive
research, obtaining such algorithms is a wide-open and extremely challenging
problem. The goal of this project is to directly address these open problems and
provide a broad graph-optimization toolkit to fuel the development of faster
algorithms. This project will provide provably faster graph algorithms, better
structural results about graphs, new optimization methods, and diverse
educational material. This work will be made widely accessible to facilitate
savings in time, energy, and valued resources to society at large.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on providing provably faster
algorithms for solving a range of fundamental, canonical, and pervasive graph-
optimization problems, including the maximum-flow problem, Perron vector
computation, and solving Markov decision processes. These are very well-studied
problems that have historically served as a stepping stone towards broader
algorithmic advances. To overcome historical barriers to efficient graph
optimization, this project will leverage techniques from multiple communities,
including continuous optimization techniques from operations research,
randomized linear-algebra techniques from numerical analysis, and combinatorial
optimization techniques from theoretical computer science. Each of these three
disciplines and research communities brings a different perspective on graph
optimization, and this project will improve upon existing results from each area
and unify them to create faster algorithms and a more comprehensive and diverse
approach to algorithm and optimization education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.