* 1844451
* I-Corps, Humo Base: Ankle Complex Wearable for Kinematic and Kinetic Movement Data Capture and Assessment
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Reuben Burch, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
improve the health and performance of sports, industrial, or military athletes
on a court, in a warehouse, or serving our country, through a wearable liquid
metal sensor solution. One of the largest over-use injuries that is prevalent in
non-contact injuries, occurs at the foot and ankle, resulting in millions of
dollars lost each year through missed time off and rehabilitation costs.
Therefore, this wearable solution is designed to assess current movement
patterns and function as a pre-rehabilitation device, which provides an
assessment to warn wearers and practitioners of potential over-use movement
patterns. In addition, the wearable can be used as a training device to ensure
proper rehabilitation techniques and "back to work or play" range of motion
assessments, ensuring effective decision making about when the wearer can and
should return to activity. Based on wearable liquid metal technology, this
device can be applied to all other joints in the human body, creating a wide
range of uses which broaden our potential customer base beyond sports pre-
rehabilitation of the ankle.

This I-Corps project takes the precision of research equipment out of the
laboratory and into the environment where training actually occurs. The wearable
device designed for this project is comprised of soft liquid metal sensors and a
machine-learning computational platform that is both unrestrictive and non-
obtrusive around the wearer's feet and ankles. Through pilot testing utilizing
the gold standard of an optical motion capture system, specific sensor positions
have been identified that provide linear relationships to the angular changes in
single and tri-planar movement(s) of the ankle complex. Paired with wireless
communication capabilities, the wearable device will allow managers, coaches,
and other practitioners of human performance the opportunity to detect
asymmetrical leg movement patterns that cause muscular imbalances and often lead
to non-contact injuries. Through user experience (UX) testing protocols,
software development will enable customizable user interfaces and reports that
answers the "voice of the customer", looking for data from the ground up. Based
on the results from laboratory testing, the next step is to field test the
wearable device and synchronize data visualizations with appropriate mobile
devices in order to gain deeper insight on customer wants and needs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.