* 1844429
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Units of orthographic complexity and their influence in speech production
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Thomas Bever, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 14,741.00

How does literacy impact speech? There is evidence that the number of symbols in
the written form of a sound can influence how long that sound is produced, even
when a written form is not explicitly present. For example, the final /k/ sounds
in the English words "tic", "click", and "clique" are represented by 1, 2, and 3
letters, respectively. When people produce these words, the final /k/ of "click"
is produced longer than than the final /k/ of "tic". And the final /k/ of
"clique" is produced longer still. Therefore, it has been hypothesized that as
the complexity of a written form increases, so too does the speech duration of
the associated sound, all else being equal. This phenomenon is inconsistent with
some models of language production which argue that written information should
not influence speech, especially when written information is not explicitly
present. Additionally, it remains unclear exactly which types of written
information can influence speech duration as there is disagreement about the
mechanisms that drive this effect. Some argue the relationship between sounds
and written symbols underlie this effect. Others argue the amount of visual
information itself regardless of any connection to sounds is driving these
duration differences. This study examines the relationship between sounds,
symbols, and speech duration to develop our understanding of what types of
written information can alter speech patterns. Addressing this question will
inform theoretical models of human speech production. Additionally, data
collected through this research can be incorporated into computational speech
synthesis and speech recognition systems for more accurate, robust, and natural
models of human speech. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A challenge of previous research
in this area was that it relied upon natural speech data which includes many
external factors across individuals that can influence speech duration outside
of written forms (e.g. word frequency). To gain greater control of these
variables, the current study will employ a three-day novel-word-learning
experiment in which participants learn sets of novel non-word homophones along
with one of several novel writing systems. Novel homophones in a set are learned
as the same word phonologically but are written distinctly. Written complexity
for homophones may vary by: a) number of whole characters; b) number of pen
strokes; c) number of components with phonological associations; d) number of
components without phonological associations. Participants will produce learned
words in a picture-naming task without written forms explicitly present.
Participants' production will be recorded and speech duration will be measured.
Duration among homophones in a set and across writing systems will be compared
to determine: a) if increased written complexity influences duration even when
written forms are not explicitly present; b) which types of written information
may influence duration and whether written complexity must have a phonological
association to influence speech; and c) at which point in the training process
speech patterns change and whether these patterns persist through the end of the
experimental period. This data will comprise a portion of the doctoral
dissertation. An earlier portion of the dissertation investigated similar
durational phenomenon in Japanese speakers in regards to written character
complexity. To remain consistent with previous data set, retain the ability to
compare results from the current study with earlier data in the dissertation,
and provide the opportunity to replicate previous findings in the current study,
participants for the current study will be native Japanese
speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.