* 1844313
* RoL: RAISE: DESYN-C3: Engineering multi-compartmentalised synthetic minimal cells
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Christine Keating, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project aims to create tools for construction of functional artificial
cells by building on new insight into how organelles are generated and
maintained in natural cells. At a glance, eukaryotic organelles could be
described as small intracellular compartments delineated from the rest of the
cell content by a membrane made up of molecules called lipids. The organelles
are critical for the life of the cell and in turn their formation depends on the
self-assembly of the lipids into membranes and on the coexistence of different
liquid phases. Consequently the lipid self-assembly and the coexistence of
liquid-liquid phases are the object of on-going investigations. In contrast, the
interactions between these two processes are largely unexplored. With this
award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry and
the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems are funding Dr. Christine
Keating from Penn State University and Dr. Kate Adamala from the University of
Minnesota to investigate how the two main types of intracellular organizational
processes interact with each other. This interdisciplinary research generates a
stepping stone on the path to the construction of artificial organelles and in
the long term of artificial cells. The research also represents an opportunity
for the scientific training and professional development of graduate students,
undergraduates, and K-12 teachers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
explores cytoplasm-mimicking systems in which lipids and phase-separating
proteins are enzymatically produced by cell-free transcription/translation. In
vitro lipid biosynthesis pathways are developed for in situ lipid generation in
model cytoplasm. The self-assembly of these lipids in the presence of model
membraneless organelles is characterized by optical and electron microscopies as
well as by permeability measurements. This project seeks to engineer artificial
cells capable of producing functional synthetic lipid membranes and inducible
stress granules. The findings advance the understanding of physical mechanisms
for organellogenesis, and how local lipid production and media
compartmentalization impact these mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.