* 1844910
* CAREER: Mechanisms of bioturbation and ecosystem engineering by benthic infauna
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Kelly Dorgan, Marine Environmental Sciences Consortium
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 863,786.00

Marine sediments are important habitats for abundant and diverse communities of
organisms that are important as food sources for higher trophic levels,
including commercially important species. Through burrowing, constructing tubes,
and feeding on sediments, these animals modify their physical and chemical
environments to such an extent that they are considered ecosystem engineers.
Bioturbation, the mixing of sediments by animals, is important in regenerating
nutrients and transporting pollutants and carbon bound to mineral grains.
Despite its importance, our ability to predict bioturbation rates and patterns
from the community structure is poor, largely due to a lack of understanding of
the mechanisms by which animals mix sediments. This project builds on earlier
work showing that animals extend burrows through muddy sediments by fracture to
test the hypothesis that the mechanical properties of sediments that affect
burrowing mechanics also affect sediment mixing. More broadly, this project
examines the relative contributions of (i) the functional roles of the organisms
in the community, (ii) the mechanical properties of sediments, and (iii) factors
that might increase or decrease animal activity such as temperature and food
availability to bioturbation rates. Burrowing animals modify the physical
properties of sediments, and this project quantifies these changes and tests the
hypothesis that these changes are ecologically important and affect community
succession following a disturbance. In addition to this scientific broader
impact, this project involves development of instrumentation to measure sediment
properties and includes a substantial education plan to introduce graduate,
undergraduate, and middle school students to the important role that technology
plays in marine science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through burrowing and feeding
activities, benthic infauna mix sediments and modify their physical
environments. Bioturbation gates the burial of organic matter, enhances nutrient
regeneration, and smears the paleontological and stratigraphic record. However,
current understanding of the mechanisms by which infaunal activities mix
sediments is insufficient to predict the impacts of changes in infaunal
community structure on important sediment ecosystem functions driven by
bioturbation. This project tests specific hypotheses relating infaunal
communities, bioturbation, and geotechnical properties with the ultimate goal of
understanding the dynamic changes and potential feedbacks between infauna and
their physical environments. This project integrates field and lab experiments
to assess the relative importance of infaunal community structure and activities
to bioturbation rates. Additionally, this project builds on recent work showing
that muddy sediments are elastic gels through which worms extend burrows by
fracture to propose that geotechnical properties of sediments mediate
bioturbation by governing the release of particles from the sediment matrix
during burrow extension. Finite element modeling determines how the release of
particles by fracture during burrowing depends on the fracture toughness
(cohesion) and stiffness (compaction) of sediments and complements laboratory
experiments characterizing the impact of geotechnical properties on burrowing
behaviors. The proposed research also aims to determine whether impacts of
infauna on geotechnical properties are ecologically important. Changes in
infaunal communities and geotechnical properties following an experimental
physical disturbance address the hypothesis that ecosystem engineering of bulk
sediment properties facilitates succession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.