* 1844705
* BTT EAGER:   Mitotic Recombination between Homologous Chromosomes
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Anne Britt, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

All the individuals of a given species carry the same genes. What makes one
individual different from another is its unique combination of alleles
(versions) of those genes. By crossing plants carrying different sets of
alleles, crop breeders can create new crop varieties, with new combinations of
alleles. However, because genes are clustered together on chromosomes, a
desirable allele of one gene may be located very close to an undesirable allele
of another gene on the same chromosome. The close clustering, or linkage of
genes means that both the desirable and undesirable alleles are inherited
together. This research provides tools that allow the plant breeder to separate
or replace alleles of linked genes. This technology accelerates the rate at
which new and improved crop varieties can be produced. This is an important
goal, as the development of new crop varieties is an ongoing race with the
evolution of new varieties of pathogens, increasing demand from an expanding
world population, unpredictable climate, and the degradation of existing
farmland. Food security -worldwide, not just at home- is an essential aspect of
our national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CRISPR technologies provide a
remarkably specific and efficient means for the generation of targeted DNA
double strand breaks (DSBs) in plants. Error-prone end-to-end joining of CRISPR
induced breaks can generate targeted mutations and translocations; repair via
homologous recombination (HR) can create new alleles or new combinations of
alleles. CRISPR-induced HR events are relatively rare in plants. Tools developed
here proposal improve the efficiency of HR. While this technology applies to any
HR-dependent event, specifically interest is in the facilitation of
recombination between endogenous preexisting alleles. This technology greatly
enhances the speed and specificity of the development of new plant lines, both
for breeding and for research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.