* 1844445
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Statistical Learning of Predictive Dependencies of Tense-Aspect System in the Artificial Language by English and Thai L1 Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Lourdes Ortega, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 14,471.00

While many adults are keen to learn a second (L2) or additional (Ln) language
because of academic, economic, or cultural reasons, their success may not come
as easily as that when they acquired their first language (L1) as children. One
of the reasons for this variable success is prior linguistic experience from
different L1s. Moreover, the presence of multilingualism, that many adults will
learn several languages over their lifetime, makes it harder to assess prior
knowledge. Learning a language means becoming attuned to and developing
expectations for systematic linguistic patterns, from sound sequences to
grammatical relations. Successfully learning a novel language requires that
adults abstract new systematic patterns from the input while using existing ones
from their learned language(s). This research will help us understand language
prediction and multilingual learning processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
dissertation research project employs an artificial grammar learning paradigm to
investigate how a particular kind of probabilistic systematic pattern,
predictive dependencies, in adults' existing tense-aspect system(s) can promote
or prevent adaptation to novel tense-aspect regularities. Adult participants
from two L1 backgrounds, English and Thai, will learn a miniature language that
expresses temporal meaning involving both English- and Thai-analogous predictive
dependencies at different levels: between lexical and sub-lexical items (e.g.,
walk+ed) for English and between lexical items (e.g., a pair of aspect markers
such as sed leew ["already completed"]) for Thai. Because the same meaning in
the miniature language is equally likely to appear with both sets of
dependencies, this research will investigate (1) whether participants are better
able to learn predictive dependencies that are consistent with their
L1-analogous dependencies and (2) whether the findings will be true under
bilingual learning conditions for the English participants, who have perfect
knowledge of one set of dependencies and zero knowledge of the other, and under
trilingual learning conditions for the Thai-English participants, who have both
sets of dependencies available for use during learning but with varying degrees
of statistical precision in their L2, English.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.