* 1844448
* EAGER Germination: What we talk about when we talk about big ideas: Using case studies to train PhD students in ideation and questioning processes
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Nicole Becker, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 117,729.00

This project from the University of Iowa seeks to develop courses for training
graduate students in scientific ideation and questioning to address societal
challenges, using case studies of scientists who achieved major breakthroughs.
The project builds on successful pilot studies of teaching ideation and
questioning, and seeks ultimately to develop formalized teaching modules that
could be disseminated for use beyond the University of Iowa. This study has two
potential Broader Impacts. Firstly, the training programs under development may
inculcate in all participants a deepened ability to relate scientific research
to societal needs. Secondly, the training programs may make scientific idea-
framing and questioning processes more visible and accessible to
underrepresented groups, including first-generation students, facilitating their
engagement with STEM careers, and thereby diversifying and strengthening the
scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use case studies of
celebrated, high-achieving scientists for training graduate students in
ambitious scientific ideation and questioning tethered to societal needs. Two
different approaches will be compared in parallel to identify their affordances
and limitations. The first is a semester-length course that will step chemistry
and engineering graduate students through processes of ideation and question
development using a well scaffolded 16-week framework. The second approach
involves an informal drop-in weekly seminar/workshop (Reading-Writing Workshop;
RWW) that will run for a year. Both courses will share some elements, including
employing case studies to enable the students to tease out the processes of
ideation and questioning, leveraging social scientists to provide larger
perspectives on societal needs, and introducing a conceptual framework that
connects critical societal needs to the guiding questions of physical science
research communities. Case study work will include reviewing papers, memoirs,
letter, and oral histories of significant scientists to explore their processes
of idea generation, questioning of key assumptions, and integration of
disciplinary approaches. The underlying hypothesis is that through considering
ways in which important scientific ideas and questions are generated graduate
students will develop both increased desire and increased ability to formulate
and engage with important questions. Outcome evaluation will include Likert-
based and qualitative assessments based on existing instruments for measuring
student learning. The PIs expect that this research will lead to the development
of flexible-use, "inoculatory" teaching modules for seeding a vigorously
inquisitive, opportunity-seeking, broad-minded culture in groups or
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.