* 1844205
* Collaborative research: Climate controls on carbon accumulation in upland permafrost at millennial scales
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2020,12/31/2023
* Darrell Kaufman, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,143.00

Permafrost, or perennially frozen ground, holds a large reservoir of carbon. The
overarching goal of this study is to look to the recent geologic past to improve
understanding of how future changes in climate may impact carbon accumulation
and release. The investigators have combined expertise in paleoecology,
paleoclimatology, surficial geology, geochronology, and quantitiative
geomorphology. Together, they will quantify the relationship between climate and
the mass of carbon that accumulated under distinctly different climates of the
past 40,000 years in hilly upland regions of the Arctic, which will complment
previous work on the effects of climate change on permafrost carbon in lakes and
peatlands of low-lying terrain. Results will add paleo perspectives to the
Permafrost Carbon Network, part of the Study of Environmental Arctic Change. The
project will provide training for graduate and undergraduate students, and the
team of investigators includes an early career
scientist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, the investigators will combine
field-collections, analysis of sediment cores, and modeling to quantify the
millennial scale relationship between climate and permafrost carbon accumulation
at an upland study site in the Eight Mile Lake watershed in the northern
foothills of the Alaska Range. They will take multiple sediment cores along
hillslope transects to map the underlying stratigraphic framework; contrast the
surficial materials mantling both a short and a long slope to infer the relative
roles of slope-length- versus slope-angle-dependent transport processes; and use
these data in a numerical model to simulate hillslope evolution and assess
downslope geomorphic processes that transfer sediment and sequester carbon. The
investigators will also use radiocarbon dating of macrofossils to determine the
extent to which organic matter has been stratigraphically mixed and to
distninguish millennial-scale periods of accumulation; evaluate pollen and
macrofossiles for community characteristics and grain size distributions; and
analyze sediment sequences for a suite of bio-physical properties to quantify
carbon mass, accumulation, and decomposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.