* 1844484
* EAGER: MATDAT18 Type-1: Collaborative Research: Data Driven Discovery of Singlet Fission Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Noa Marom, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2020
* USD 237,841.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports continued collaboration of
materials researchers with data scientists kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon
event. The efficiency of organic solar cells may be enhanced significantly by
harnessing singlet fission (SF), a quantum mechanical process that can lead to
the generation of two conducting species, for example electrons, from one
quantum of light. Presently, few materials are known to exhibit intermolecular
SF in the solid state, and they belong to restricted chemical families. The vast
number of possible molecules and crystals that could be made has not been
explored for SF. The PIs will use computer simulations to search the many
possibilities for new SF materials. To this end, a new approach will be
developed, one that integrates cutting-edge advances in quantum mechanical
simulations and machine learning. This research will advance both fields of
materials science and data science. Graduate and undergraduate students will
train in a collaborative cross-disciplinary environment at the interface of
computational materials science and data science and acquire transferrable job
skills in high demand. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports continued collaboration of materials
researchers with data scientists kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon event. Singlet
fission (SF) is the conversion of one photogenerated singlet exciton into two
triplet excitons. Recently, there has been a surge of interest in SF thanks to
its potential to significantly increase the efficiency of organic solar cells by
harvesting two charge carriers from one photon. However, few materials are
presently known to exhibit intermolecular SF with high efficiency, hindering the
realization of solid-state SF-based solar cells. The chemical compound space of
possible chromophores is infinitely vast and largely unexplored. To enable
computational discovery of SF materials, a new multi-fidelity screening approach
will be developed, which integrates quantum mechanical simulations at different
levels of fidelity with machine learning (ML) and database mining. ML algorithms
will be used to analyze data generated by quantum mechanical simulations and to
steer simulations for further data acquisition. High-cost high-fidelity
evaluations of excited state properties of solid-state forms of candidate
chromophores will be performed with many-body perturbation theory methods within
the GW approximation and the Bethe-Salpeter equation. Lower-cost lower-fidelity
evaluations of ground state features will be performed with density functional
theory. Feature selection algorithms will then determine which descriptors are
most predictive of the thermodynamic driving force for SF. These descriptors
will be used to screen databases that contain crystal structures with no
information or only partial information on their electronic properties.
Optimization algorithms will be employed to decide which data points to sample
and at what level of fidelity to maximize information gain. This research will
advance the discovery of new intermolecular SF chromophores and will lead to
advances in data science in the area of experimental design.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is jointly funded through the Division of
Materials Research and the Division of Mathematical Sciences in the Mathematical
and Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.