* 1844434
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Tensor Network Methods for Quantum Simulations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Eduardo Mucciolo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Pinaki Mazumder
* 09/30/2020
* USD 109,222.00

Recent advances in quantum technologies have made small, high-quality quantum
computers with tens of qubits finally available. While these machines are still
too small to make an impact on areas such as cryptography, they are big enough
to study physical and chemical systems of relevance to materials science and
chemistry, thus helping us better understand the origins of certain materials
properties and how certain important chemical reactions take place. This project
aims at developing novel simulation techniques to help benchmark these quantum
machines. These simulations will run on ordinary computers, but will make use of
cloud computing services to scale up the system sizes as far as possible. The
simulation techniques will also be used to investigate other quantum systems of
relevance to physics and materials science that are not yet accessible to
quantum hardware. Advancing knowledge in those areas is essential for developing
better and stronger materials, as well as faster and smaller electronics. These
projects will have the additional societal benefit of training graduate students
in a very interdisciplinary area of research, at the interface between computer
science and physics, thus helping bring highly-sought skills into the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of developing and deploying
a novel method to simulate quantum many-body systems using tensor networks. The
method is based on the state history representation of the quantum dynamical
evolution, as expressed in the Keldysh-Schwinger formalism. Thus, rather than
using the tensor network to represent the evolution of the probability amplitude
of a state vector over time, the method uses the tensor network to represent the
evolution itself, such that the full contraction of the network directly
calculates quantities such as the expectation value of an observable or a two-
point correlation function. In this approach, entanglement is kept low,
resulting in low bond dimensions on the network links, making contractions more
amenable to exact computations. For the contraction, a two-step contraction-
decimation scheme is used to collapse the network. More specifically, the scheme
consists of the removal of local entanglement by compressing the information via
singular value decomposition, followed by the decimation of the network by
selectively removing rows or columns of the network. This contraction scheme
will be coded to optimally utilize the resources available on the largest
instances of commercial cloud computing services. The codes developed during the
project will be made available through public
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.