* 1844887
* CAREER: Information Theoretic Methods in Data Structures
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Omri Weinstein, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2022
* USD 306,138.00

Data structures constitute the backbone of algorithm design and information
retrieval, and underlie the performance of countless industrial-scale
applications, from internet routing and road navigation to cloud storage, search
and compression. As such, understanding what data structures can, and cannot,
compute efficiently is a fundamental question in both theory and practice.
Motivated by this question and the growing amounts of data to be processed in
modern databases, this project is focused on two primary themes: (1) developing
new mathematical tools for proving unconditional lower bounds on the operational
time and memory consumption of static and dynamic data structures, thereby
reducing the (huge) existing gaps from known upper bounds; (2) exploring the
interplay between information theory and data structures in large-scale storage
applications. In particular, the second part of the project will focus on
designing novel data structures for information retrieval (mainly compression
and search) over correlated datasets. The project reflects a scientific agenda
for conducting interdisciplinary research in the intersection of theoretical
computer science and information theory, bridging and impacting research and
education in both communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, information
theory and communication complexity have emerged as powerful mathematical tools
for proving unconditional lower bounds on the operational time of data
structures and for analyzing the power of pre-processing information. Proving
time-space lower bounds in the "cell-probe" model has long been recognized as
one of the major challenges of complexity theory, with many implications on
theory and practice. The first part of this project will develop new
information-theoretic tools for proving such trade-offs, and will explore
connections between data-structure lower bounds and other areas in computational
complexity and mathematics, such as locally-decodable codes, circuit complexity,
streaming, functional analysis, rigidity and algebraic geometry. Apart from its
role as an analytic tool for computation, the interplay between information
theory and data structures is particularly vital in large-scale storage
applications. The increasing size and complexity of data sets being uploaded and
processed on remote data centers, pose a real problem of scalability for
traditional data compression and database architectures. The second part of this
project establishes a new research program for storage and information-retrieval
problems that arise over massive correlated data sets, focusing on the
(unexplored) problem of locally decodable source coding for correlated files in
static and dynamic scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.