* 1844770
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: From the Distal Demonstrative to a Stance Marker: On na in Mandarin Chinese Conversation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* YING YANG, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 14,088.00

All languages have words to indicate entities that are being referred to. These
words (e.g. this and that), known in linguistics as demonstratives, are
typically used to focus the hearer's attention on entities in the speech
situation. Over time, some of these words evolve and may develop various kinds
of new functions such as connectives and hesitation signals. Despite the
universality of demonstratives across languages, demonstratives differ in how
they change and why they evolve in certain ways. Although demonstratives have
long been a key research topic in linguistics, we know surprisingly little about
how demonstratives and demonstrative-derived pragmatic markers are used in
spontaneous face-to-face conversation. This is due to the fact that the most
commonly used genres in linguistic analysis are written discourse and oral
narratives rather than spoken discourse. The results and transcriptions will
help applied linguists and L2 educators develop more effective materials for
teaching Mandarin Chinese, a critical language designated by the U.S.
government. The project database will enhance the infrastructure for language-
related research and education, and will contribute to the training of students.

This dissertation project recognizes the methodological limitations in previous
text-based analyses and investigates how the distal demonstrative na 'that' is
used in Mandarin Chinese everyday conversation from a discourse-pragmatic
perspective. Apart from its canonical usage as a distal demonstrative, na has
various kinds of extended and nuanced discourse functions. This project sets out
to identify and classify different uses of na, with a special focus on its
previously overlooked non-referential discourse pragmatic functions. More
specifically, it will uncover sequential contexts, functional accounts, and
positions of na using both a quantitative approach and qualitative analysis. The
primary goal is to offer a systematic analysis that accounts for all the
occurrences and functions of na by speakers in actual everyday conversation. The
secondary goal is to shed light on a better understanding of robust similarities
and subtle language specific variations in the grammaticalization and/or
pragmaticalization of demonstratives, particularly the non-deictic uses of
pragmatic markers derived from demonstratives. This dissertation project will
contribute to a deeper understanding of a common human language phenomenon with
fresh data and from an interactional perspective.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.