* 1844299
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3: Synthetic Biogenesis of Eukaryotic Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* William Bentley, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The nucleus is where a cell stores information. The endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
is where cells manufacture proteins. Mitochondria are where cells generate
energy. Designing cells to mimic human cells will likely involve replicating at
least those core functions. This project will attempt to do just that. The
project will involve artificial chromosomes being packaged into a compartment
surrounded by a membrane, representing the nucleus. The nucleus will be
surrounded by a folded membrane structure that mimics the ER. Inside the ER will
be machinery to produce proteins. A separate membrane compartment, unattached to
the other two, will house enzymes for generating energy. All of these will be
contained in another membrane compartment and together, represent a crude
synthetic cell. Creating the individual compartments will be challenging because
the membranes have to allow some molecules to pass through them selectively
while preventing others, and because some membranes will need to have intricate
shapes. If the project is successful, it will provide a platform for subsequent
efforts to use these types of synthetic cells to manufacture vaccines or to kill
tumors, just to name a couple of possibilities. The project will involve a team
of local high school students in all phases of the research through the
International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM)
competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the techniques
needed to engineer cell-like structures, enabling the development of complex
synthetic systems mimicking both structure and function of biological cells.
There are two major tasks. First, microfluidic techniques will be employed to
assemble a defined population of chromosomes within a discrete aqueous volume. A
nuclear envelope will be formed around the chromosomes and interconnected with a
folded ER-like membrane engineered using curvature-promoting proteins.
Biological components extracted from cells will be integrated into the membrane.
A nuclear lamina will be formed within the nucleus. Transcription of mRNA within
the synthetic nuclei will then be demonstrated. Second, mitochondria-like
structures will be developed to serve as ATP sources for mRNA transcription. A
vesicle-based approach will support external control over mRNA transcription
through mitochondria-nucleus ATP transport. This project will contribute to
understanding the requirements for synthesizing and linking other cell-like
organelles with increasing levels of complexity. That will create new
opportunities for exploring open questions such as membrane how and why cells
age. Synthetic cells could ultimately be exploited for closed loop control over
DNA processing and gene regulation, with significant potential for practical
biomedical applications including cancer
immunotherapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.