* 1844624
* CAREER: Structure, Mechanism, and Selectivity of Microbial Ferrous Iron Transport
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Aaron Smith, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 03/31/2024
* USD 548,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Aaron T. Smith of the University of Maryland, Baltimore
County to study the transport of iron (Fe) in bacteria. Iron is essential for
the survival of almost all organisms on the planet, including those organisms
made of only one cell and humans. While the biological acquisition of some iron
(Fe+3) is well studied, the acquisition of other iron species (Fe+2) is poorly
understood. This research seeks to understand how Fe+2 is transported across the
membrane of bacteria which are present in the human body and affect human
health. The results of this research could help scientists design novel
antibiotics that control bacterial infections. The graduate students who conduct
this research learn how to handle and study metalloproteins that are sensitive
to air in order to pinpoint atomic-level details of iron transport. This project
increases diversity and inclusion of underrepresented individuals within the
field through an introduction of freshman and sophomore undergraduates to
bioinorganic chemistry, the development of bioinorganic laboratory experiments
in the chemistry curriculum, and the design and implementation of a dedicated
upper-level bioinorganic chemistry course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this research is to elucidate the mechanism by which the three-protein
system Feo mediates the transport of Fe(II) across the membrane of bacteria. An
important aspect of this research is the focus on recombinant proteins,
including the intact FeoB, which is a complex membrane protein and the central
player of the Feo system. Moreover, this research uses recombinant, soluble FeoA
and FeoC, putative interaction partners of FeoB, to determine the regulation of
Fe(II) transport. This research makes use of spectroscopy (electron absorption,
circular dichroism, EPR, and X-ray absorption), biochemistry, and structural
biology (X-ray crystallography) methods to determine electronic structure,
three-dimensional structure, and the dynamics of this process. This research
provides targets for the design of small molecules to control iron transport, a
process essential for bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.