* 1844431
* Workshop on Engaging First-Generation Immigrant Students and Their Families in Learning About STEM and STEM Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2019
* Andres Henriquez, New York Hall of Science
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 07/31/2019
* USD 74,990.00

The New York Hall of Science (NYSCI) will host a community-based convening, and
a series of follow-up to advance the knowledge base and increase the capacity of
educators who support STEM pathways for STEM opportunities. The objective of the
NYSCI Neighbors STEM Collaborative will be to engage principals, parent
coordinators and parents, science cluster teachers, and English Language Learner
instructors from schools in Corona, Queens, to help guide NYSCI staff in
developing a framework for integrating museum activities aligned to the newly
implemented New York State Science Learning Standards. The convening will help
develop the foundation for building a national community of practice that will
serve to amplify work on STEM and first-generation immigrant
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are very few places where first-generation
immigrant families can go that provide opportunities for an intergenerational
approach to learning, where families and children learn together. The NYSCI STEM
Collaborative will lead to a community of practice where teachers, parents, ELL
instructors, and museum staff co-develop activities to strengthen teaching and
learning in STEM between the school and the museum. This work will also
contribute to a small, but growing body of research literature examining the
role that science centers can play in impacting local communities and extend
this work by anchoring it deeply in the lessons learned throughout the NYSCI
Neighbors initiative. The Institute will combine research projects, the
development of methodologies for the study of diverse families and youth,
training graduate students and disseminating research findings. The project will
disseminate the lessons learned in this initiative through two major
organizations. First, NYSCI is partnering with the Institute for Immigration,
Globalization and Education. Second, NYSCI has been invited by the Carnegie
Corporation of New York to engage a group of science museums across the country
all of whom are working to deeply engage first-generation
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.