* 1844536
* CAREER: Spectral imaging for sub-cellular nanometrology and nanotoxicology
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Daniel Roxbury, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 06/30/2024
* USD 483,228.00

Engineered nanomaterials have demonstrated biomedical applications in
diagnostics, imaging, and drug delivery. For widespread adoption of these
technologies, potential adverse health effects in both the short and long-term
should be thoroughly explored. Due to their novel nanoscale properties, the
manner in which these nanomaterials interact with biological systems is complex
and relatively unknown, and very few tools exist to accurately understand the
fate of these nanomaterials in cells, animals and humans. This CAREER award will
fund a research program that introduces a new imaging technique to more
precisely describe the locations and numbers of nanomaterials within the
confines of live cells. This research will generate new knowledge, where
quantitative imaging data will be correlated to established measures of cell
health, leading to a better understanding of nanomaterial-induced toxicity. The
work will be closely integrated into an educational and outreach program that
engages the local K-12 community with interactive seminars and hands-on
laboratory experience investigating interactions at the nano-bio interface.
Finally, the work will enable the formation of a highly interdisciplinary
bionanotechnology course, with particular emphasis on nanotoxicology, to further
stimulate and educate the STEM-focused workforce within Rhode Island. Together,
these activities support the broader impacts and dissemination of the work by
generating widespread interest in STEM and improved understanding of novel
nanomaterial technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering nanomaterials for
the purposes of creating novel diagnostic, imaging, and drug delivery devices
has garnered significant attention within the past two decades. A recently
discovered one-dimensional allotrope of carbon, the single-walled carbon
nanotube, with intrinsic near-infrared fluorescence that is indefinitely
photostable and environmentally sensitive, presents a unique opportunity to
create sensing and imaging constructs as research tools for live cell and animal
studies. As with all exogenously introduced materials, adverse effects to cell
health in both the short and long-term should be thoroughly explored. In the
case of carbon nanotubes, the nanomaterial is known to enter cells through
receptor-mediated endocytosis and remain within the endosomal pathway. For
widespread adoption of nanotube-based sensors and imaging probes in standard
biological applications, detrimental effects to the vesicles involved in this
pathway should be investigated. The research objective of this CAREER project,
using a novel spectral imaging approach for sub-cellular measurements within
live cells, is to quantify the number of nanotubes in diffraction-limited
regions within a cell and determine how naturally aggregated nanomaterials
influence toxicity in mammalian cells. The research project seeks to: 1) employ
hyperspectral fluorescence microscopy to investigate the nanostability that
engineered nanotubes of varying physical properties exhibit in biological media,
2) investigate how nanotube functionalization, concentration, and aggregation
state can affect the uptake and endosome loading ratio (nanotubes per endosome)
in mammalian cells, and 3) examine how endosome loading ratio influences natural
endosomal maturation processes (vesicle trafficking, endosome-to-lysosome
progression, etc.), and correlate this to various cell stress and toxicity
assays. The transformative nature of this work stems from the ability to pose
and answer outstanding questions of nanotoxicology at the single-cell and sub-
cellular level in a new manner that does not necessitate labeling or perturbing
the biological system at hand. By performing these assays, a framework of rules
will be created that governs the manner in which mammalian cells interact with
nanotubes of various physical natures. The work will be thoroughly incorporated
into a K-12 educational and outreach program with interactive seminars and
practical laboratory experience probing biophysical interactions at the nano-bio
interface. Finally, the work will enable the formation of a highly
interdisciplinary bionanotechnology course, highlighting topics in
nanotoxicology, to further stimulate and educate the STEM-focused workforce
within Rhode Island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.