* 1844194
* Syntactic processing across socioeconomic status: Linking input to comprehension
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jan Edwards, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 632,077.00

Across socioeconomic status (SES), parental input varies in quantity and
quality, and this impacts children's early language abilities and later academic
performance. While these relationships are firmly established, their mechanisms
are not well understood. Aggregated measures of input (e.g., total words) and
outcomes (e.g., vocabulary size) track the consequences of multiple years of
learning, but this ignores how children acquire language knowledge through
iterative encounters with sentences. To observe this process directly, the
present project combines high-density input recordings, eye-tracking methods,
and computational modeling to isolate the cues that children use to interpret
sentences and how strategies vary with input differences. At a scientific level,
this research provides a framework for comparing systematic variation across
social groups. While existing models of acquisition assume that the convenience
sample (i.e., higher-SES children) offers a suitable proxy of learning in all
children, this project tests an alternative hypothesis that SES-related
differences in input affect what information children attend to when listening
to sentences. Isolating between-child differences in comprehension will reveal
strategies that learners must acquire to interpret new sentences. At a societal
level, learning and communication depend on accurately interpreting sentences.
Describing children's comprehension strategies enables better predictions of
future outcomes and offers methods for targeting multiple pathways by which
early language can affect academic performance. This framework will benefit
other populations whose input differs from mainstream peers, e.g., dual language
learners, cochlear implant users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To understand the
sentence-level processes that mediate between parental input and language
outcomes, the present project examines how language experience influences
comprehension strategies in 5- and 6-year-olds from varying SES backgrounds.
This project tests the hypothesis that input properties regulate what cues are
informative for interpreting sentence meanings. For higher-SES groups, greater
input quantity supports learning of fine-grained word properties, and increased
word diversity enhances the need to access detailed patterns when interpreting
sentences. For lower-SES groups, however, decreased quantity and diversity make
coarse-grained patterns more useful, both because they require less input to
learn and imply similar meanings when words occur in canonical sentence frames.
This project measures word-specific and sentence-frame patterns in parental
input using high-density recordings of utterances, and distinguishes children's
sentence interpretations using eye-tracking experiments. Computational models
combine these data to derive child-specific estimates of reliance on fine-
grained word knowledge versus coarse-grained frame knowledge during
comprehension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.