* 1844215
* Scoping Workshops for Coastlines and People
* GEO,ICER
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2020
* USD 1,199,909.00

Coasts are paramount to our nation's economic prosperity, sustainability and
national security. Coastal areas have a population density that is six times
greater than inland counties and is rapidly growing. Environmental phenomena of
terrestrial, oceanic, and atmospheric origin are constantly changing coastal
landscapes and affect human habitats, infrastructure and ecological communities.
Interdisciplinary research on coastlines and people can lead to greater
predictive capabilities that will enable decision makers to develop sustainable
pathways to protect our coasts and the people that inhabit them from future
environmental change. This project will support 4 workshops (3 in-person, 1
virtual) that will bring together over 400 scientists, stakeholders, and
community leaders to develop priorities for the most pressing interdisciplinary
science needs on coastlines and people. These workshops will address not only
the pressing science issues, but also identify the infrastructure needed to
support research efforts in the identified areas. The workshops will be
facilitated by Know Innovation and include a diverse engagement of participants.
The workshops will be held simultaneously and will utilize technology to allow
for cross-pollination of ideas across the various workshops. The goals of the
workshops are to identify the gaps in fundamental research on coastlines and
people that will a) better address environmental challenges; b) better inform
decision makers (including federal agencies and local, state, and federal
authorities and governing bodies); c) involve the public in citizen science and
knowledge transfer; and d) create mechanisms to include underrepresented
communities and learners. Ideas generated at these workshops will be made
broadly available to the scientific community.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.