* 1844878
* CAREER: Characterizing Master's-Level Departure from the Engineering Doctorate through Multiple Stakeholders' Perspectives
* ENG,EEC
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Catherine Berdanier, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 11/30/2023
* USD 671,365.00

This project addresses the critical issue of doctoral student attrition in
engineering disciplines. While the ten-year completion rates for engineering
PhDs are only 65% for men and 56% for women, these numbers are significantly
lower for students from underrepresented groups. These statistics represent a
significant loss of talent for the field. This CAREER research characterizes and
models Master's-level departure from engineering PhD programs by analyzing the
perspectives of departers, graduate students who are considering departure, and
faculty who advise these students. This research supports national calls to
action such as the 2018 National Academies report on Graduate STEM Education for
the 21st Century, which posits that understanding retention in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics graduate programs is critical to
maintaining economic and national competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER research will develop a comprehensive understanding of Master's-level
departure with a systems-level perspective. In order to develop this model, the
research will 1) characterize common narratives of Master's-level departure and
model students' departure decisions over time, and 2) characterize faculty
perspective of departure. Modeling student departure will be accomplished
through interviews, a longitudinal survey, and a longitudinal text message
survey that utilize role identity theory, expectancy value theory, ideal worker
theory, and leader-member exchange theory. The faculty-centric research phase
will investigate potentially conflicting narratives about attrition and
departure between departed/questioning graduate students and faculty.
Understanding these potentially dissonant perspectives between faculty and
students are critical to developing interventions for either stakeholder
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.