* 1844939
* CAREER: New Algorithmic Foundations for Online Scheduling
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Sungjin Im, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

As massive low-cost computing resources become increasingly available,
harnessing their power is crucial in modern science and engineering. One
particular issue involves scheduling: what is the most effective way to assign
resources, say computing cycles, to tasks in order to ensure good performance?
The scheduling problem is especially acute when little to nothing is known in
advance about the tasks, including when they might arrive and how much compute
time they may need; in such cases, dynamic allocation of resources is required.
Over the past two decades, exciting advances in approaches for addressing these
so-called on-line scheduling problems have emerged, but the field is still
struggling to address the increasingly challenging scheduling environments found
in modern computing clusters. This project aims to develop new methods to design
and analyze online scheduling algorithms systematically with the aid of widely
used optimization techniques, and as a result to potentially resolve some key
open questions in online scheduling. The research findings will likely provide
an alternative method of educating students on scheduling in a broad context,
which will have a significant impact on the computer science curriculum. This
project will also involve mentoring students and disseminating the research
outcomes through workshops, writing tutorials, and developing new course
materials.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;At a more technical level, this project intends
to investigate the effectiveness of online scheduling techniques for a variety
of problems. The project's first objective is to develop new gradient-descent
methods to design and analyze online-scheduling. The second objective is to use
bin-packing to study fundamental admission-control problems, and to develop new
algorithmic tools when pre-emption is allowed. The third research problem to be
studied involves the development of fine-grained scheduling algorithms for low-
dimensional scheduling environments. Surprisingly, despite recent advances, many
existing algorithms are no match even for the simplest greedy algorithms in the
low-dimensional case, which is common in practice. The fourth research goal is
to refine the behavior of the online algorithms as the workload approaches the
system limit, which is related to fundamental questions regarding the underlying
analysis models. The last goal is to explore new models for scheduling jobs with
inter-dependencies by taking advantage of large-scale scheduling environments to
circumvent the intractability results that are commonly found in the traditional
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.