* 1844538
* CAREER: Automatic and general light transport algorithms for use by humans and machines
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Wojciech Jarosz, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 549,922.00

Computer graphics rendering uses light transport simulation to virtually
"capture" photographs. While its evolution has largely mirrored that of
photography, the state of graphics today is unfortunately like that of
photography in the mid-1900s when creating a good image required being a trained
professional with an intimate understanding of light and the peculiarities of
the available tools. Since then, photography has witnessed a revolution where
smartphone cameras produce technically superior images while hiding this
complexity; this democratization has enabled a vast array of new applications.
The goal of the current project is to enable the same revolution for the
"virtual photographs" created using computer graphics algorithms. This will
require developing new ways of expressing numerical light transport simulations
which relax current assumptions on the input and output of the rendering
process, leading to automatic "point and click" rendering algorithms which avoid
manual parameter tuning. Project outcomes will have far-reaching and broad
impact on all application areas that currently rely on accurate and efficient
light transport simulation, from diagnosing illnesses, to self-driving cars, to
video games and films, to designing and manufacturing products. More
importantly, they will democratize these tools beyond trained professionals,
much like "point and shoot" smartphone cameras have done for photography. An
integrated educational and outreach program will increase diversity and support
underrepresented groups by building on the host institution's existing strengths
in STEM and Digital Arts, and will leverage the appeal of animated films to
teach otherwise abstract mathematics and physics concepts to students from a
broad range of ages and socio-economic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
computer graphics rendering can produce the realistic and beautiful imagery we
see in movies today, the algorithms used to achieve these results are brittle
and require tuning by skilled practitioners. They focus almost entirely on
mimicking traditional camera/optical systems that were designed for use by
people, which limits their applicability to emerging imaging modalities. And
they still struggle to render common scenes due to unrealistic assumptions about
the physical world and the light transport within it. Broadening the reach of
computer graphics requires addressing these core challenges. Firstly, this
project will establish a new framework for expressing Monte Carlo light
transport strategies and a method to computationally determine which ones should
be used on which scenes. This will lead to more robust and automatic "point and
click" rendering algorithms which avoid manual parameter tuning with heuristics.
The research will also extend current rendering approaches beyond 2D RGB images
for broader impact on inverse problems using modern imaging systems. Lastly, the
work will lift long-held statistical assumptions about light transport and
scene/material representations, laying the theoretical and algorithmic
foundation for universal level of detail and increased artistic control. Project
outcomes will have far-reaching impact in all application domains relying on
computer graphics rendering, and will add valuable basic knowledge about non-
classical transport to related domains like nuclear engineering and atmospheric
science. More broadly, the work will shift the focus of future rendering
research towards robust and automatic rendering algorithms to democratize these
tools beyond computer graphics professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.