* 1844657
* CAREER:  Regulation of reproductive behaviors by mechanosensory feedback
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Kevin Collins, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/29/2024
* USD 751,598.00

Nearly all animals alternate between mating behaviors that allow egg
fertilization and reproductive behaviors that drive release of progeny into the
environment. As the same organ mediates these two, mutually exclusive behaviors,
understanding how females decide when and where to perform each behavior is
critical for animal fertility and survival. Work in numerous systems has shown
that mating and reproductive behaviors are controlled by diverse chemical
signals that shape activity in neural circuits, but the function of physical
contact and mechanosensory feedback is less explored. The goal of this research
and education program is to identify how such mechanosensory signals regulate
reproduction using the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, as a model organism.
The principal investigator and his student trainees have shown using cutting-
edge imaging techniques that defined cells of the C. elegans female reproductive
neural circuit are mechanically activated in sequence during specific steps of
mating and egg-laying behaviors. The goal of this project is to determine how
each of these cells is mechanically activated and how they signal to drive
subsequent behavior steps. The rationale for this work is that understanding the
regulation of key signaling events in simple neural circuits will reveal
conserved mechanisms in other animals and people. This work will be paired with
a new, innovative education program that teaches molecular genetic laboratory
techniques through the development of new tools to regulate gene expression and
through authentic research projects to study how animals respond to acute
changes in pressure and stretch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will identify
how mechanosensory feedback modulates cellular signaling events to regulate
animal reproductive behaviors. This project will use the roundworm, C. elegans,
to test a model that mating and reproductive behaviors proceed via an ordered
series of sequential motor steps regulated by three different types of
mechanosensory feedback. This feedback activates unique cells which signal
through distinct neurotransmitters and receptors to inhibit the prior motor step
while activating the next. Objective 1 will determine how the female uv1
neuroendocrine cells are mechanically activated in response to male mating
spicule insertion and during egg release. Objective 2 will determine whether the
female VC motor neurons are mechanically activated in response to male sperm
transfer through the vulva and by muscle contractile activity during vulval
opening. Objective 3 will uncover how mechanical stretch of the uterus in
response to sperm deposition or egg accumulation re-activates the vulval muscles
to terminate mating or to initiate egg release. In each case, the experiments
will identify the mechanosensory molecules that mediate cell activation and will
determine how the activated cells signal to report the completion of each
behavior step. The research is integrated with a new authentic research
Molecular Genetics laboratory course where undergraduate students will develop
and characterize new Gal4/UAS enhancer trap lines that will facilitate gene and
behavior discovery. Together, this work will provide the most detailed model yet
for how mechanosensory feedback shapes activity and neurotransmitter signaling
in a neural circuit as it executes two mutually exclusive behavior
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.