* 1844306
* Downward Gamma Ray Showers from Natural Lightning
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* William Rison, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 733,382.00

Lightning is known to produce Terrestrial Gamma Flashes (TGFs) which are bursts
of high-energy gamma rays that last up to a few milliseconds. How the gamma rays
are produced and whether they can tell us more about lightning has been an
active research area for a couple of decades. Recently, a research team from the
particle astrophysics community teamed with lightning researchers to obtain new
observations of gamma rays using the Telescope Array Surface Detector (TASD) in
Utah, which is a 700 square kilometer cosmic ray observatory. This award will
continue these investigations into the generation of TGFs. The main societal
impact from this award will be through the increased understanding of TGFs,
which may provide additional information on lightning, a well-known natural
hazard. The project will also help to provide public outreach opportunities to
enhance the scientific literacy of the population and provide training
opportunities for the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will follow up on
their prior award which demonstrated that downward gamma ray showers are
produced at the beginning of negative cloud-to-ground lightning. This
observation was made in southwestern Utah using a combination of the TASD and
Lightning Mapping Array (LMA) stations. Now that this phenomenon has been
discovered, the research team plans to address specific questions about the
mechanisms responsible for gamma ray production and characterization of the
types of lightning events in which TGFs occur. New observations will be
conducted with the addition of a high-speed broadband VHF interferometer and
fast electric field change sensor. Concurrently, the TASD is expanding in size,
leading to more events that can potentially be observed. The specific objectives
of the proposal include: 1) Simultaneous observation of downward gamma flash
events with TASD, LMA, Slow- and Fast Antennas and broadband interferometer to
significantly increase the sample size of downward TGFs, 2) Determine
conclusively via fast-E spheric measurements whether the observed gamma flashes
have the expected correlation with Initial Breakdown Pulses (IBP) and Energetic
Intracloud Pulses (EIP), and 3) Continue advances in modeling of gamma showers
and the TASD response, and use these models to further characterize shower
source size, altitude, and gamma ray angular
distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.