* 1844417
* I-Corps: Virtual Reality System to Plan Cardiovascular Interventions
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Mohammad Hussain, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to optimize
outcomes for patients with certain kinds of heart disease and thus reduce
healthcare costs. We have developed a virtual reality surgical planning tool
which allows us to better understand which patients are at high risk, and better
plan surgeries for them. If this tool becomes widely used, the benefits could
include improving overall outcomes for people with structural heart disease,
leading to fewer reinterventions, shorter hospital stays, lower healthcare
costs, and improved quality of life. In addition, these tools may also be useful
to neurosurgeons and orthopedic surgeons. Finally, if medical education is
improved through virtual reality, this would lead to better physicians with more
knowledge of anatomy. Regarding commercial impact, the project has multiple
potential commercialization pathways. First, end users such as pediatric
cardiologists and cardiothoracic surgeons can use the virtual reality surgical
planning tool for their own patients. Further, medical device companies that
make valves could use the software to teach physicians optimal ways to use their
products, and to differentiate from their competitors. Finally, imaging
companies could package this as the next stage of radiology interpretation
software. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on planning
structural heart disease interventions and surgeries using true 3D visualization
with modern virtual reality techniques. These interventions require a detailed
understanding of how different parts of the anatomy relate to each other in
space. The development of true 3D visualization has enabled new ways of
understanding these relationships. Already, it has been shown that the use of 3D
printing in planning complex cases of congenital heart disease can improve
surgical decision-making. This resulted in fewer cases where the surgeon had to
change her mind about which surgery to perform after opening the chest. One
would therefore expect better outcomes and greater patient satisfaction if the
expected procedure is done. In addition, early reports suggest that virtual
reality may be useful in improving surgical education. The virtual reality
system in this project has already been used to plan innovative heart
interventions that were previously not considered feasible. What is yet unknown
is the extent of the effect on longer-term patient outcomes, both within
congenital heart disease and in adult structural heart disease. Further
development of virtual reality surgical planning tools will allow the field to
advance as we investigate the contribution virtual reality can
make.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.