* 1844627
* CAREER:'Understand the Multiplexing and Communication in Multicellular Sensory Response
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,02/28/2025
* Bo Sun, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 02/28/2025
* USD 810,867.00

The goal of this research project is to advance our quantitative understanding
of information processing in mammalian cells. While much has been learned about
single cell, single pathway signaling dynamics, the collective sensory response
via highly multiplexed signaling pathways remains poorly understood. A focus of
the project is to understand the physics behind the integrated complexity of
noise, multiplexing, and communication through a synergy of multiscale
investigations. The PI will join will join his institutional and departmental
efforts with three personal initiatives. In order to enhance student experience
in interdisciplinary education, the PI will develop a hybrid class: BIOPHYSICS
Discovery. He will also organize an annual Workshop for Science Storytellers to
team up STEM students and liberal art students. The PI will also expand his
current outreach programs with more emphasis on first-generation college
students and students from low-income families. He will work with colleagues who
run a nationally known Physics Education Research group to implement, assess,
and disseminate results of education and outreach
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study the calcium dynamics of
endothelium shear-stress sensing and will use advanced microenvironment
engineering, statistical analysis, and theoretical modeling. The results will
advance the physics of cellular sensor dynamics and have far-reaching impacts in
engineering and medicine. In this project the PI will combine both bottom-up and
top-down approaches to address the following key questions: What is the
molecular mechanism of multiplexed endothelium shear-stress sensing (aim 1)?
What is the role of endothelium geometry in regulating the fidelity and
resolution of endothelial cell shear sensing (aim 2)? What is the mesoscale
endothelium response to altered hemodynamic microenvironment (aim 3)? Answering
these questions will significantly advance the knowledge of not only endothelium
biology, but also the physics of cell sensory
dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Systems and
Synthetic Biology clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.