* 1844426
* EAGER: Surface Skin Temperature Mapping by Ultralight Aircraft and Undergraduate Participation for Stable Atmospheric Variability ANd Transport (SAVANT)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Grant Petty, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2019
* USD 47,293.00

The Stable Atmospheric Variability and Transport field experiment will be
conducted in the Fall of 2018 in central Illinois. The goal of the campaign is
to measure very low-level air flow in gentle terrain. This kind of study
requires high-density temperature measurements of the field site. This award
will provide airborne measurements of surface temperature from an infrared
camera that will help to fill in the gaps between the ground-based measurements.
The camera will be mounted on an ultralight aircraft, which is able to fly very
low and very slow, while not running into the same restrictions as many unmanned
aircraft. The additional instruments will enhance the ability of the project to
answer questions about micro-meteorological conditions that are relevant to
agriculture and hazardous materials release. The project will also serve as an
initial demonstration for a new observing platform and provide valuable field
research opportunities for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is for the
collection of airborne radiometric observations of surface skin temperatures
during the Stable Atmospheric Variability and Transport (known as SAVANT) field
campaign. SAVANT is an NSF-funded field study investigating the dynamics of
radiatively-driven cold air drainage flows in shallow gullies. The campaign has
a variety of ground based sensors for temperature and this award will enhance
those measurements by providing 2D maps of surface skin temperature using a FLIR
Duo Pro R thermal camera. The novel aspect of the campaign is that the camera
would be flown on a manned ultralight aircraft, which is a platform that does
not have significant usage in the atmospheric science community. The researchers
will also deploy a UAS that is capable of carrying the camera as a risk
mitigation strategy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.