* 1844170
* CAREER: Enabling Efficient Separation of Rare-Earth Elements Using Liquid-Metal Bipolar Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Hojong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2024
* USD 509,945.00

Rare-earth materials are components of renewable energy technologies such as
permanent magnet motors for wind turbines and electric vehicles. Despite the
critical role of rare-earth materials in the transition to a low-carbon economy,
less than 1% of the rare earths are currently recycled. The projected increase
in demand for rare earths over the next decade will outpace supply from mined
ore. The development of efficient and environmentally-friendly rare-earth
recycling techniques is essential for future deployment of clean energy
technologies. The goal of this project is to develop an efficient rare-earth
element separation using liquid metals as a selective barrier (i.e., a bipolar
membrane) that allows rare-earth elements, but not other elements, to pass
through when a voltage is applied. This study will test the hypothesis that
strong chemical interactions between liquid metals and rare-earth elements will
enhance the passage of the rare-earth elements through the bipolar membrane. If
successful, the liquid-metal bipolar membrane will provide a way to recycle
rare-earth materials from end-of-life products through direct separation in a
single electrochemical cell. This will broadly benefit society by reducing the
environmental burden associated with rare-earth mining and reliance on energy-
intensive rare-earth separation technology. Research and education are
integrated by engaging students in fields essential to long-term U.S. economic
competitiveness, including electrochemical energy storage, materials synthesis,
separation of energy-critical materials, and corrosion-resistant coatings.
Graduate and undergraduate students' knowledge of electrochemistry will be
cultivated through a holistic curriculum that integrates hands-on research
experience with targeted coursework. High school students and STEM educators
will be engaged through the "Electrochemistry for Materials Sustainability"
outreach program. The program aims to introduce non-experts to the field of
electrochemistry, cultivating a curiosity about electrochemistry, its role in
solving real-world challenges, and motivating the pursuit of STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator's long-term career goal
is to enable materials sustainability through the development of energy-
efficient separation and recycling technologies. Toward this goal, this project
investigates a new electrochemical approach for efficient separation of rare-
earth elements, utilizing liquid metals as a bipolar membrane that allows for
unique electrochemical reactions and mass transport of rare-earth elements
across the liquid-metal bipolar membrane under an electric field. The research
objectives for this project are to establish the fundamental thermodynamic,
interfacial, and transport properties of a liquid-metal bipolar membrane that
govern electrochemical selectivity and permeability for rare earths. The
outcomes of the project will include highly accurate thermodynamic, interfacial,
and transport properties of rare earths, essential for developing liquid-metal
bipolar membranes, as well as development of reliable experimental techniques
for their measurement. The experimentally-verified properties will be integrated
into the development of computational tools (solution models and first-
principles calculations) for simulating atomic bonding, phase equilibria,
interfacial kinetics, and atomic diffusion. This approach will accelerate the
design of liquid-metal bipolar membranes that possess an exceptional selectivity
and permeability for rare earths, enhance the predictive capabilities of
computational materials modeling, and advance the current knowledge of rare
earths. The scientific approaches developed in this project will serve as a
general means for the discovery of superior materials with better control over
chemical selectivity for other energy-critical materials beyond rare
earths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.