* 1844818
* NSF Student Travel Grant for DNA24: The 24th International Conference on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Erik Winfree, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

With a vision to establish novel molecular programming rules for engineering for
developing synthetic systems inside or outside of living cells, the annual
International Conference on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming has been one
of the premier interdisciplinary forums where scientists with diverse
backgrounds (e.g., in computer science, physics, chemistry, biology and
mathematics) come together to present their highest quality research and discuss
new ideas. This proposal aims to provide student travel support for the 24th
International Conference on DNA Computing and Molecular Programming (DNA24), to
be held at Jinan, China during October 8-12, 2018. By funding travel for
U.S.-based students, the organizers are actively encouraging and incentivizing a
new generation of researchers to benefit from participating in the conference,
fostering the development of the next generation of molecular programmers, by
encouraging students to attend, present their work, and interact with other
important players in the field. Up to 15 successful student applicants will be
supported, by providing assistance to women and underrepresented minorities who
are delivering oral or poster presentations at the conference, and to graduate
students who are otherwise unable to afford attending this conference. The
availability of the awards to US citizens and students at US institutions will
be included in conference announcements, soliciting applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This highly interdisciplinary conference emphasizes topics
that bridge computation, biology, and nanotechnology and attracts researchers in
the fields of computer science, mathematics, chemistry, molecular biology, and
nanotechnology. The scope includes control of molecular folding and self-
assembly to construct nanostructures; demonstration of switches, gates, devices,
and circuits with biomolecules; molecular motors and molecular robotics;
computational processes in vitro and in vivo; studies of fault-tolerance and
error correction; synthetic biology and in vitro evolution; software tools for
analysis, simulation, and design; a range of applications in engineering,
physics, chemistry, biology, and medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.