* 1844254
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3: Mimicking Mitochondria: Developing Synthetic Pathways to Power Pseudo-Cell Functions using Diverse Fuel Resources
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Scott Banta, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

A few key molecules act as central electron and energy carriers inside cells.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) transfers electrons and adenosine
triphosphate (ATP) supplies energy. The most common method to produce ATP
requires a pH gradient to be established across a membrane. The resulting flow
of protons through an embedded protein regenerates ATP. This project will test
the hypothesis that alternative pathways could be developed that can regenerate
ATP from NADH oxidation without the need for a membrane, proton gradient, or
embedded enzyme. This will require combining native and engineered enzymes to
create novel cyclic pathways. These pathways will help uncover design rules
required to replicate a central biological process. This technology will be
critical to the development of synthetic cells. In addition, the project will
involve mentoring of students and expanding existing outreach activities in the
local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will design, build and test
novel synthetic metabolic pathways that could regenerate ATP using energy
obtained from fuel oxidation. Fuel oxidation pathways can generate reducing
equivalents in the form of NADH. However other critical operations, especially
those involving motion, are powered by the hydrolysis of ATP. Oxidative
phosphorylation in mitochondria supplies the majority of cellular ATP from NADH
oxidation and this requires the establishment of a proton gradient. Although
this supplies flexibility for cellular energy processing, replicating this
system presents a difficult engineering challenge. We hypothesize that oxidative
phosphorylation could be replaced with novel pathways composed of kinase
enzymes. These pathways will use fuel oxidation reactions to drive NADH
regeneration and NAD(H) phosphorylation will drive ATP regeneration. As a proof-
of-concept, an ATP-dependent reaction (firefly luciferase) powered by methanol
oxidation in simple liposomes will be demonstrated. This will represent a novel
energy transduction alternative to mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation. This
pathway could be easily adopted to use a wide range of potential fuels,
supporting many potential future synthetic cell and biology
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.