* 1844960
* CAREER: Learning Symbolic Representations for Robot Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* George Konidaris, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 03/31/2024
* USD 565,988.00

Recent years have seen a dramatic improvement in the quality and cost of
general-purpose robot hardware. However, programming that hardware to solve any
non-trivial task is extremely hard. It would be far preferable if robots could
plan to reach user-specified goals on their own, without requiring highly
detailed programming. A key challenge here is dealing with the low-level details
of sensing and perception, while also reasoning at a high-level about the task
to be completed. This project aims to develop a framework that allows robots to
learn how to manipulate objects, how to usefully represent those objects
abstractly, and how to generalize across objects that appear different but have
the same functionality (e.g., different microwaves). This project will develop
new algorithms that will enable robots to reason and plan in complex scenarios
in the real world; it could therefore substantially accelerate the deployment of
complex robots in semi-structured environments like the home, hospitals, light
manufacturing facilities, and space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
enable robots to autonomously learn reusable object-centric motor skills and the
portable symbolic representations that support planning with those skills.
Learning motor skills to manipulate, and abstract representations to reason
about, objects in the world---while generalizing across objects of similar
functionality---will enable robots to generate intelligent, goal-directed mobile
manipulation behavior. The project will 1) design practical algorithms that
discover motor skills for manipulating objects by interacting with them, 2)
design algorithms for generalizing those skills across objects with different
appearances but similar functionality, and 3) develop a theoretically sound
framework for learning object-centric abstract representations that support
goal-directed planning using those skills, and demonstrate its use on a mobile
manipulation robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.