* 1844695
* CAREER: Unbiased Estimation with Faithful Markov Chains for Scalable Statistical Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Pierre Jacob, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 07/31/2024
* USD 257,826.00

Numerical integration is a common goal in all scientific fields where complex
probabilistic models need to be simulated and calibrated. In statistics,
numerical integration is used in virtually all tasks, from parameter inference
to model averaging and hypothesis testing. Among state-of-the-art numerical
integration techniques, most methods are randomized algorithms that operate
iteratively, generating a sequence of random states, one after the other.
Unfortunately, their iterative nature stands at odds with current directions in
computing hardware: increasingly parallel architectures and stagnating clock
rates. This research develops new algorithms that provide accurate estimates of
integrals as a number of random quantities, that can be generated independently
and in parallel, goes to infinity. The proposed techniques are employed to
address long-standing challenges in statistical inference for large models and
complex data. The proposed innovations combine applied probability, computer
science and statistical computing, and apply to many fields including machine
learning, statistical mechanics, computational neuroscience and epidemiology,
where high-dimensional integrals abound. The project involves the development of
software and features an educational program with courses and research
opportunities for students, and a broader dissemination
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To numerically approximate high-
dimensional integrals, Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods iteratively generate
sequences that explore the landscape described by the integrand. These methods
yield estimators that converge to the integrals of interest in the limit of the
number of iterations. However, algorithms that rely on iterative asymptotic
regimes risk becoming obsolete in the era of parallel computing hardware. The
proposed research develops new Monte Carlo estimators that are unbiased for the
expectations of interest, while having a finite computing cost and a finite
variance. They can thus be generated independently in parallel and averaged
over, paving the way for scalable numerical integration on large-scale parallel
computers. The proposed estimators rely on faithful couplings of Markov chains,
whereby pairs of chains coalesce after a random number of iterations. This
project includes theoretical investigations on the efficiency of the proposed
estimators, and the design of practical coupling strategies for various
applications. The research connects with topics in numerical methods, stochastic
processes and optimal transport. Beyond parallel computing, the proposed
estimators are used to tackle statistical challenges such as normalizing
constant estimation and modular inference for large models made of multiple
components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.