* 1844085
* SBIR Phase I: An innovative virtual reality platform that accurately and rapidly assesses meaningful brain function outside the lab
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2019
* Jeff Nyquist, NEUROTRAINER, INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 07/31/2019
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project lies not only with athletes, but with the 3
million Americans who suffer a traumatic brain injury each year, and the 40+
million more who are concerned about dementia and seek a way to measure their
brain health. Current solutions (typically available only at facilities with
trained professionals) assess only significant health changes to cognition. In
contrast, our solution provides an affordable, reliable way to measure brain
health and to monitor changes after treatment, training, and rehabilitation.
Thus, it will be an excellent tool other companies can use to assess various
interventions aimed at affecting brain function. The "quantified self" market
sells technologies (wearables, DNA tests, software) that collect data to inform
and guide health and self-improvement. The total addressable global market is
estimated at ~$19B for 2019. The initial target market of customers are those
seeking a competitive athletic edge by measuring, tracking, and training
cognitive abilities such as reaction time, decision-making, and multitasking.
These customers are coaches in high schools, colleges, and high-performance gyms
across the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will address the need to combine and harness the power of
eye-, hand-, and head-tracking instruments, virtual reality, and cognitive
neuroscience to accurately measure and monitor brain function. This Phase I SBIR
project will complete four technical objectives: (1) to develop a highly
controlled testing environment that can accurately measure the time users
(athletes) spend on detecting, processing, and acting on different cognitive
tasks; (2) to develop software that can collect reliable data from naturalistic
inputs; (3) to develop a set of tasks that users can complete within 30 minutes
and that will generate sufficient data for analysis; and (4) quickly process,
summarize, and contextualize the collected data and report meaningful results to
the athletes and their trainers. Successful completion of these objectives will
realize a first-of-its-kind product that provides meaningful insight into the
brain with laboratory-quality cognitive assessment in a real-world
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.