* 1844930
* CAREER:   Resolving a paradox of global botanical biodiversity:   why is Africa the "odd man out?"
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Emily Sessa, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,045,479.00

Understanding how plant diversity has arisen over time, and how and why plants
are distributed across the planet as they are, has been a major goal of
biodiversity science since Darwin's time. A particularly striking feature of
global plant distributions is that sub-Saharan Africa has many fewer plant
species than comparable tropical regions in Asia and the Americas, which is
known as the "odd man out" biogeographic pattern. This research will investigate
the possible causes of the odd man out pattern by investigating the evolutionary
history of ferns. Ferns are an ancient plant group that occupy diverse
ecosystems globally. Consequently, they are ideal models for understanding the
roles of extinction, speciation and migration in generating the modern-day flora
of sub-Saharan Africa. Broader impacts of the project will build research
capacity among early career scientists, including post-doctoral fellows,
graduate and undergraduate students at the University of Florida and strengthen
biodiversity science education within diverse K-12 and college classrooms.
Project personnel will develop a study-abroad undergraduate course in southern
Africa, engage middle school teachers in developing K-12 lesson plans, and build
both web-based and hands-on modules for public outreach about plants and
biodiversity science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will uncover the
evolutionary and biogeographic history of three fern genera (Dryopteris,
Cheilanthes, Polystichum) that are widespread in African, Asian and the American
continents to investigate the genesis of the odd man out biogeographic pattern.
Species will be sampled in the field and from herbaria; DNA sequence data from
approximately 450 nuclear markers will be used to generate their phylogenies.
The resulting phylogenies will be used to reconstruct historical biogeographic
movements of over 1000 species, calculate diversification rates, and determine
whether shifts in ancestral ecological niche envelopes correlate with migration
events or changes in diversification rate. Ancestral climate reconstructions and
trait data from common garden experiments will be co-analyzed to understand how
climate may have shaped traits and diversification patterns over time. The
project will generate new data resources and specimens for broad dissemination
and build cross-institutional collaborations. These outcomes will advance the
research as well as fuel future discoveries at the intersection of fern
systematics, historical biogeography and biodiversity
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.