* 1844901
* CAREER: Participatory Design Methods for Algorithmic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Eric Baumer, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2024
* USD 576,661.00

This research will develop methods for applying participatory design to the
underlying components of algorithmic systems. Such systems incorporate
increasingly complex algorithms from machine learning (ML), natural language
processing (NLP), and related areas into user interactions, intending to achieve
great benefits. However, cases of egregious errors, algorithmic bias, and other
issues have revealed the shortcomings of relying primarily on quantitative
performance metrics to inform design. A potential solution is to incorporate
users into the design process. Although human-computer interaction research has
developed numerous methods for user-centered design, many such approaches focus
primarily at the interface level. This focus becomes problematic when a system's
functionality is increasingly determined by ML models and algorithms.
Furthermore, designing only for users of algorithmic systems can overlook other
important relationships, such as the people whose data are being analyzed or
those who may interpret the results. To address these issues, this research will
develop participatory methods for human-centered design of algorithmic systems.
These methods will be developed and tested by working closely with two non-
profit organizations that already engage in data-intensive work but currently
make limited use of algorithmic systems: AEquitas, which conducts legal
analysis, and ProPublica, an investigative journalism newsroom.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Unique challenges emerge when attempting to incorporate different
people's relationships with a system into the design process. Existing
participatory methods often use visual elements or manipulatives to represent
interface components. The abstract mathematical formalisms of algorithmic
systems, though, do not always lend themselves to such visual representations.
This research will develop novel participatory design techniques to establish
common ground between domain experts, who are less familiar with ML or NLP, and
researchers, who are unfamiliar with the application domain. Doing so can
leverage diverse participants' expertise and interpretations, thereby improving
the fit between computational systems and existing practices. The participatory
methods directly address underlying technical components, from feature
selection, to model construction, to performance evaluation, to result
interpretation. Furthermore, these methods will align those underlying technical
aspects with current practices and lay understandings, increase the chance of
catching and rectifying unanticipated egregious errors before they become
problematic, and ensure the results are presented in a transparent and
accountable manner. Finally, this process will inform the development of modules
for classroom instruction, paired across STEM and social science courses, on how
to incorporate human-centered concerns into designing algorithmic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.