* 1844090
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of printing process of effectively transparent contacts (ETCs) for III-V, thin-film and silicon solar cells.
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Vivek Shah, ETC Solar, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 01/31/2020
* USD 218,237.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to boost the power output of solar cells by
5-6% and reduce manufacturing costs by ~5%. By commercializing the proposed
effectively transparent contact (ETC) technology the levelized costs of
electricity (LCOE) of solar energy systems could be dramatically reduced,
resulting in accelerated adoption of solar energy to address greenhouse gas
emission and to become independent of fossil fuels. Improving power output of
solar cells is one of the most effective means to drive down LCOE, and the ETC
technology is broadly applicable to improve the power output of nearly all types
of solar cells. Lower-cost solar cells can also be expected to benefit the
developing world as well as disadvantaged communities that lack access to the
power grid. In the near term, the proposed ETC technology will unlock higher
power output and new applications for III-V photovoltaics, which are used
predominantly in aerospace, defense, high performance consumer electronics and
automotive. These rapidly growing markets require higher power output solar
cells to add functionality (RADAR, LIDAR and surveillance) by increasing the
payload capacity that is currently limited by the available space to mount the
solar cells.

The proposed project will demonstrate the commercial viability of the ETC
technology by demonstrating a new world record solar cell and scalable
fabrication on commercial III-V solar cells. Metal contacts are required for
charge extraction from solar cells, typically covering 5-6% of the front surface
and blocking sunlight from reaching the photovoltaic material below. These
losses due to blocking of incoming sunlight by the metal contacts are the
largest single contribution to the performance loss in most solar cells. The
proposed ETC technology eliminates these losses and thereby boost the solar cell
power output by 5-6%. The ETC technology has been demonstrated at lab scale and
is world's highest performing front contact technology. During the research
project, ETCs will be integrated with commercial III-V solar cells supplied by
prospective initial customers and world-leading research partners. The technical
viability of ETCs will be established by achieving dramatic improvements in cell
efficiency for each cell type, whereas the commercial viability will be
established by successfully integrating the ETCs using techniques, materials,
and tools suitable for commercial scale-up. Completion of these objectives will
accelerate the efforts to commercialize the ETC technology, which will broadly
increase power output and reduce cost of solar energy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.