* 1844087
* STTR Phase I:  Superconducting Nanowire Single-Photon Cameras for Time-Resolved Quantum Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Matthew Shaw, PHOTON SPOT, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2021
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to have a transformative impact on time-
correlated imaging applications in a variety of fields, including quantum
information science, biomedical imaging, and remote sensing, by offering order-
of-magnitude improvements in dark count rates and time resolution over
comparably sized photon counting cameras, while opening the prospect for
efficient time-correlated imaging in previously inaccessible wavelength regimes,
such as the UV from 200-400 nm, and the mid-infrared from 1.8-10 um. With the
introduction of these performance advantages to the field of time-correlated
imaging, new classes of experiments will become possible, enabling further
penetration into the quantum information market and the introduction of
superconducting nanowire single-photon detectors to previously inaccessible
markets including biomedical imaging and remote sensing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project will demonstrate the viability of a new multiplexing technique enabling
large-format kilopixel superconducting nanowire single photon detector focal
plane arrays and evaluate its viability for commercial production. This will
require the development of new device fabrication processes, detector designs,
test procedures, and device models while leveraging previous successful
technology development efforts. The primary technical challenges that will be
addressed include demonstrating high-yield device fabrication, investigating and
mitigating the role of crosstalk between pixels, and validating the scalability
and practicality of the readout scheme.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.