* 1844336
* RoL: RAISE: DESYN-C3: A platform for Modular Pseudo-Organelles for Compartmentalization and Control of Pseudo-Cell Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Danielle Tullman Ercek, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2024
* USD 799,999.00

Manufacturers culture cells to produce vaccines and protein-based drugs. These
products are complex and difficult to synthesize because they are composed of
proteins. Growing cells is not very efficient for production because a cell uses
a lot of energy and raw material to grow and maintain itself in addition to
making a particular product. This limitation spurs an interest in creating
synthetic cells to mimic the cellular processes that support product formation
rather than cell growth. Some cellular processes occur in separate compartments
to avoid interference with each other. This project will attempt to create
synthetic compartments where biological reactions can take place. Success would
make creating complex molecules and proteins easier. It would also increase our
understanding of how cells perform and coordinate critical functions. The
project results will be shared with the general public through videos. Lab tours
will be provided to girls through the Career Day for Girls program at
Northwestern. Underrepresented minority students from Chicago Public Schools
will also be mentored. These efforts should encourage more students to pursue
careers in STEM-related fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling when and where
biomolecular reactions take place remains a significant challenge in the design
of cell-free systems. In this project, the role of compartmentalization on a
model biosynthetic reaction will be explored systematically. Compartments will
be examined to uncover how spatial segregation and the nature of the segregating
compartment can enhance cell-free synthesis. The approach will couple
compartmentalization with techniques in cell-free metabolism and regulation.
Computational modeling will be employed to modularly implement production of a
model biomolecule. The contribution of the project results will be to markedly
improve biological synthesis in cell-free environments by integrating
compartmentalization, controlled transport, and cell-free expression systems to
achieve greater temporal control and expand the environments in which such
systems can be employed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.