* 1844808
* I-Corps:  Deep Ultra Violet (DUV) - Light Emitting Diodes (LED) Disinfection: Commercialization of novel deep-UV light emitting diode module for disinfection applications
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Vladimir Protasenko, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be to
investigate the severity of the healthcare-acquired-infection (HAI) and related
problems in US hospitals and to lay a foundation to solve the issues by
employing panels of deep ultra-violet (DUV) light emitting diodes (LEDs)
integrated with robotic platforms. Human beings are continuously attacked by
viruses, bacteria, and microbes populating the air, water, and soil. It makes
people sick and, in some cases, the illness becomes lethal. Special care needs
to be taken for immunity deficient people in hospitals who are recovering from
sickness or surgery. The 2011 report from Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention states that approximately 722,000 patients in hospitals acquired
additional infection and had to stay extra ~18 days for treatment. It resulted
in additional $30 billion cost to US taxpayers. While it is relatively easy to
disinfect floors, ceilings, desks, and other flat and even surfaces in hospital
rooms by DUV light, there are hard-to-reach and shadowed areas that require
special attention. Our team believes that advent of DUV LED integrated with
remotely controlled robotic platforms can provide efficient disinfection of
shadowed areas and thus reduce the number of HAI cases. We are in the midst of
discussion of testing our robotic prototypes with the administration of the
Health Division of Sault Tribe of Chippewa Indians tribe. It is a great
opportunity for publicizing modern health care technologies among Native
Americans. HAI is a global problem. In the past the United States was a leader
in developing cutting edge technologies in medicine, telecommunication, defense,
and aero-space industries. It is therefore vitally important for the US industry
to keep producing new high-tech products. If an US team can show the path of
controlling HAI it will definitely have a global impact.

This I-Corps project is based on the discoveries from an ongoing NSF-DMREF
project. Our findings have shed light on how to overcome the major factors that
limit the performance of DUV LEDs. In the research space a few unique properties
of the PIs invented LEDs have been demonstrated: a) improved efficiency of light
generation in ultra-thin GaN quantum wells, b) better light extraction
efficiency, c) enhanced efficiency of carrier injection into quantum wells, and
d) capability of LEDs to operate at cryogenic temperatures. Two provisional
patent applications have been filed so far to protect the research outcome.
Moving forward, our team has built a prototype by integrating commercial DUV
LEDs with an autonomous robot to ensure human free disinfection of hospital
rooms. It should be able to reach hard-to-access areas like space under beds and
tables. We foresee that unique properties of our LEDs will reduce energy
consumption by 5 times and enhance lifetime of LEDs. It will also lower the
operating cost, improve disinfection of shadowed areas, and guarantee the
absence of mercury, commonly found in mercury lamps, to ensure the absence of
disposal problems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.