* 1844885
* CAREER: Towards a Biologically Informed Intervention for Emotionally Dysregulated Adolescents and Adults with Autism Spectrum Disorder
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2025
* Murat Akcakaya, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

The investigator plans to improve systems that rely on brain-computer interfaces
that are used in virtual and augmented reality environments. These improvements
will enhance comfort and reliability when used by individuals with disorders
within the autism spectrum. The benefits of these improvements will advance the
effectiveness of treatments for emotion regulation and behavioral interventions.
There is a growing interest in complementing such behavioral clinical treatments
with various low-cost and easy-to-access technology-based tools to improve
therapy efficacy. However, it was shown that training through existing
technology-based Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) intervention tools does not
usually generalize to real-life activities for many reasons. The investigator
will develop an intervention for ASD to reinforce emotion regulation strategies
based on real-time monitoring and analysis. Specifically, the planned
electroencephalography (EEG)-guided brain-computer interface (BCI) technology
could be used to complement all clinical treatments that focus on emotion
regulation to decrease clinician time spent with each patient. The novel
scientific discoveries and engineering enhancements will have overreaching
contributions to develop ASD intervention techniques for (i) decreased
depression and anxiety; (ii) decreased problematic behaviors including
aggression in social interactions; and (iii) decreased functional impairment
across different settings including school, work, home and community. Research
and education goals will include: (i) course development; (ii) inclusion of
researchers from K-12 to graduate level in cutting-edge interdisciplinary
research environment to promote STEM careers; and (iii) establishing new
outreach activities to inform the broader public about the proposed research
outcomes and the latest technological advancements in research for technology-
based ASD intervention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
specific project is to introduce a framework that will enable EEG-guided closed-
loop: (i) monitoring of the brain responses of individuals during technology-
based ASD intervention, and (ii) control of the presentation of clinical
treatment strategy cues for emotion regulation in individuals with ASD. In
particular, for such human-computer interfaces: (1) the proposition of
monitoring brain responses through EEG during ASD intervention is novel, and (2)
formulating design principles for model-based optimal EEG-guided closed-loop
clinical treatment strategy cue presentation is transformative. These
propositions of real-time probabilistic analysis of EEG are unique, and present
a potentially game-changing opportunity to advance the generalization effect of
existing technology-based ASD intervention for emotion regulation. This project
will also contribute to developing new machine learning algorithms and
neuroscience methods to identify EEG features associated with emotion regulation
to classify between distress and non-distress conditions, and to distinguish
among different distress levels. The developed models will be based on a solid
mathematical framework based on variational autoencoders and Bayesian optimal
statistical inference, information theoretic measures of feature selection for
efficient learning, and computationally efficient optimization of modular and
submodular monotonic or non-monotonic functions. Optimization algorithms will
provide computationally efficient solutions that generate(sub)optimal feature
selection strategies with performance guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.