* 1844753
* CAREER: Cryptocurrency Forensics Tools
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Damon McCoy, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 01/31/2024
* USD 526,566.00

Cryptocurrencies, such as Bitcoin, are growing in popularity. These
cryptocurrencies offer the promise of increased efficiency and decreasing
frictions in the financial system, such as international money transfer fees and
costs associated with raising investment capital. Unfortunately, they are also
misused as a payment mechanism for illicit activities such as extortion, drugs,
human trafficking, and cybercrime. These illicit activities have likely
diminished the reputation of these cryptocurrencies and facilitated large
amounts of harm for entities and individual people. Improved forensic tools that
can potentially de-anonymize illicit transactions or capture valuable semantic
information about a transaction (for example, what was purchased in a particular
transaction), could reduce both of these negative effects. This project will
conduct open research that will improve our understanding of how to devise
improved cryptocurrency forensic techniques that can be adopted by researchers,
companies, and investigators. Much of the research into advanced cryptocurrency
forensic techniques is currently being performed by companies and integrated
into their closed platforms. This has resulted in a lack of public,
generalizable understanding of how to detect and understand the illicit
activities occurring within these cryptocurrency ecosystems. The advanced
cryptocurrency forensics tools developed in this project will be open and enable
improved detection of illicit cryptocurrency transactions. This project will
also provide students with expertise in financial technology, security, and
machine learning which are all areas of broad national
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving the goal of improving the efficacy of
cryptocurrency forensics tools requires progress on several key challenges.
These include: (1) Designing and implementing improved and open cryptocurrency
forensic data collection and archiving systems. (2) Investigating cryptocurrency
address labeling techniques. (3) Designing algorithms for improved clustering of
addresses and flow tracing. The approach proposed in this project is unique in
that it blends improvements to data collection and archiving with advanced
machine learning-based algorithms. The project will deepen the understanding of
how to effectively perform forensics of a broad range of cryptocurrencies. The
ability to effectively forensically analyze cryptocurrencies fundamentally
affects our ability to understand and mitigate illicit activities that impact
many United States citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.