* 1844739
* CAREER: Understanding Nanoparticle Adhesion to Guide the Surface Engineering of Supporting Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Tevis Jacobs, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports
fundamental research on metal nanoparticles, a class of materials that can be as
small as 10 atoms in diameter and are widely used in advanced technologies such
as catalysis. A critical challenge in the use of these nanoparticles is their
loss of functionality via particle coarsening; a phenomenon in which the average
particle size increases over time, thus degrading their performance. This grant
seeks to mitigate such coarsening allowing for improved performance, thus
advance knowledge to sustain global leadership in these critical materials
technologies and aid in the development of national prosperity. Coarsening is
countered through the use of stabilizing support materials, but at present these
materials are mostly found through time-consuming and costly trial-and-error
testing. The present research seeks to enable the rational design of new and
better stabilizing support materials by elucidating the dependence of particle
coarsening on the supporting surface structure. The grant develops new
approaches to measure the attachment and stability of nanoparticles on well-
defined surfaces under various conditions, enabling the rational engineering of
surfaces to optimize the performance and lifetime of the nanoparticles.
Ultimately, more stable nanoparticles will lead to significant advances in human
and environmental health, clean energy, and more efficient manufacturing.
Educational activities include collaborates with the University of Pittsburgh's
School of Education and a local elementary school to create and nationally
disseminate surface engineering focused curricular units for 6th-to-8th-grade
students and professional development training modules for teachers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle coarsening occurs by two mechanisms, atomic
diffusion (Ostwald ripening) and particle migration and coalescence; both are
hypothesized to depend exponentially on the strength of adhesion between the
nanoparticle and its substrate. The research will investigate this link using in
situ adhesion tests in a transmission electron microscope, thus enabling direct
measurements of adhesion energy with simultaneous sub-nm-scale materials
characterization for individual nanoparticles. The research objective is to
establish structure-function relationships that link surface chemistry,
crystallinity, and morphology to nanoparticle adhesion and the rate of particle
coarsening. The central hypothesis is that the substrate surface can be
rationally modified to tune adhesion, and thus control the rate of particle
coarsening. The knowledge developed will improve performance in applications of
metal nanoparticles on oxide supports, specifically: plasmonic sensors for
detection of pollutants and as biosensors for disease; nanophotonics for
improved conversion of solar energy; and heterogeneous catalysis, which
contributes to the production chain of one-third of the US gross national
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.