* 1844762
* CAREER: Understanding Peripheral Neuromodulation to Enhance Non-drug Management of Chronic Pain
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Bin Feng, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2024
* USD 549,656.00

Chronic pain afflicts one in three adults in the US and poses an enormous
economic burden ($560-$635 billion annually). In addition, prescribed opioids
for treating pain have led to the current epidemic of prescription opioid abuse,
costing $500 billion annually in medical, economic, social and criminal
ramifications. The most serious side effects of opioids, including physical
dependence and addiction, arise from un-intended effects on the central nervous
system (CNS). Pain is generally evoked from the periphery and thus targeting the
peripheral nervous system (PNS) could alleviate pain without un-intended CNS
effects. However, drug-based treatments to selectively target the PNS remain
largely unsuccessful. Peripheral neuromodulation treats chronic pain by focused
delivery of physical energy (usually electrical current) to PNS tissues.
However, current peripheral neuromodulation methods are unpredictable and only
benefit a fraction of chronic pain patients. This project aims to develop novel
experimental and computational tools to advance our mechanistic understanding of
peripheral neuromodulation, and thus will provide new experimental and
theoretical data to improve neuromodulation for benefiting a broader patient
population with chronic pain. This project will also educate the public on
neuromodulation as an alternative to opioids and engage K-12, undergraduate and
graduate students with pain-related STEM education and research. Activities
include: educating K-8 students about the importance of getting proper medical
care and physical therapy after injury to reduce chances of developing chronic
pain later in life; educating athletic coaches in partner schools to increase
awareness of overt pain in children as a risk factor not only for chronic pain,
but also for opioid abuse later in life; creating a website to amplify this
message to coaches and parents of K-8 students nationwide and hosting an annual
one week workshop for high school teachers on the science of pain and non-drug
treatment of pain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's long-term
career research goal is to significantly advance understanding of the biophysics
of peripheral nerves/neurons in physiological and pathophysiological conditions
in the context of engineering interventions like multi-modal neuromodulation and
electrode-nerve interfaces. Toward this goal, this project is to experimentally
determine selective activation/inhibition of peripheral neuromodulation via
bioelectrical recording from individual nerve axons (single-unit recordings) in
harvested mouse peripheral nerves and develop computational simulations to
predict selective activation/inhibition. The central hypothesis is that the
selectivity of peripheral neuromodulation on subgroups of peripheral
neurons/axons is determined by their different neural functions and anatomical
environments surrounding each neuron/axon. The Research Plan is organized under
two objectives. The FIRST OBJECTIVE is to quantify selective
activation/inhibition of peripheral neuromodulation ex vivo. Novel methods will
be established for simultaneous single-unit recordings from both afferent
(sensory) and efferent (motor) axons at the dorsal and the ventral nerve root,
and for single unit optical recordings at cell bodies of sensory neurons. Nerve
axons will be functionally classified into low-threshold afferents, nociceptors
(injury sensing afferents) and efferents, and their conduction velocities will
be established. The effect of neuromodulation on identified classes of axons
will be tested to map previously unknown mechanistic relationships between
neuromodulation and altered peripheral neural functions. The SECOND OBJECTIVE is
to predict selective activation/inhibition of peripheral neuromodulation in vivo
and validate with measured behavioral outcomes. A multi-scale computational
model will be established by coupling finite element (FE) analysis with neural
simulation to predict the effect of neuromodulation on action potential (AP)
propagation along peripheral neurons/axons. The model will incorporate
macroscopic (e.g., bones) and microscopic (e.g., connective tissues)
environments of individual axons as determined by X-ray tomography and
histology. The model will be used to predict the effectiveness of various
neuromodulation schemes to selectively activate/inhibit afferent subgroups.
Model predictions will be validated with behavioral assays in mice undergoing
noxious colorectal distension and peripheral neuromodulation. Outcomes of this
research will establish a novel theoretical understanding of peripheral
neuromodulation, which will likely accelerate development of new neuromodulation
schemes, techniques and modalities that target the PNS to manage diseases like
chronic pain while limiting off-target side effects. Through improved
selectivity, neuromodulation devices can maximize their advantage over drugs
(e.g., minimal off-target side effects) and become a widespread treatment option
for patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.