* 1844241
* CAREER: How Memory Contributes to Goal-Directed Attention
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2025
* Mariam Aly, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 889,840.00

Memory is a critical aspect of many of our behaviors. We use memory to find our
way around, to detect a familiar face in a crowd, and to keep track of our ideas
as we speak and write. One powerful way that memory can affect so many of our
behaviors is by helping to guide what we pay attention to. For example, in a
messy kitchen, you can use your memory for where mugs are typically stored in
order to find one. Therefore, although memory is often studied for its own sake
- for example, to understand how we are able to reminisce about the past, or how
that process can go wrong - it is also critically important to understand how we
can use memory in the service of guiding our attention and actions. The goal of
this project is to understand how the functioning of the human brain enables us
to use memories of the past to direct our attention, and the consequences that
has for how quickly and accurately we can accomplish tasks. In doing so, this
work will highlight the critical importance of memory for moment-to-moment
attention. This will fill an important gap in scientific research, which often
studies attention and memory in isolation. It will highlight the fundamentally
interactive nature of our past and current experiences, with implications for
how learning and remembering in educational settings can affect attention and
future learning in a feedback loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project therefore
seeks to determine the neural mechanisms by which memories guide attention,
focusing on the memories stored in a key brain region that is critical for
building new memories and retrieving old ones: the hippocampus. This will be
accomplished in two Aims, which use multiple methods: functional magnetic
resonance imaging, studies of patients with brain lesions, eye tracking, and
measures of behavioral accuracy and response times. In Aim 1, the project will
determine the neural circuits for memory-guided attention and their relationship
to behavior. The main hypothesis is that a brain network including the
hippocampus and prefrontal and visual cortices allows us to use memory to update
attentional goals and anticipate task-relevant information before it appears.
This hypothesis will be tested using a novel approach of characterizing
interactions between brain regions (representational connectivity),
which&lt;br/&gt;enables investigation of synchrony in information content
between regions. In Aim 2, this project will establish how memory and attention
jointly guide visual exploration. The main hypothesis is that hippocampal memory
retrieval of prior attentional goals will influence visual exploration,
attention, and memory in novel situations. This work will have innovative
implications for education, e.g., the use of eye tracking to identify if
students are remembering and attending to relevant information, even if they
cannot&lt;br/&gt;verbally describe it. Together, these two Aims will start to
uncover the powerful way that memories can influence our in-the-moment
attentional behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.