* 1844591
* EAGER: Protecting Data Access Pattern Privacy in Hybrid Cloud Storage Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Wensheng Zhang, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2021
* USD 249,807.00

Cloud-based storage services are gaining increasing popularity for their
attractive pay-as-you-go model and high availability, reliability and economic
efficiency. Meanwhile, there is an increasing privacy consciousness among users
regarding this storage paradigm. While encryption provides some protection for
data privacy, it cannot protect data access patterns, which can reveal private
information about cloud storage clients. In particular, a curious owner or
employee of a cloud storage service or an attacker invading the system can
observe a client's access patterns, develop a model relating the patterns to the
client's activities and later on use the model and observed access patterns to
infer or predict the client's activities. Although several schemes have been
proposed to protect the access patterns, in particular Oblivious Random Access
Memory (RAM), it is hard to put these into practice owing to the high
communication, storage, or computational overheads they incur. Towards
addressing this problem, the project aims to offer an efficient, scalable and
practical solution using Oblivious RAM that can protect the privacy of access
pattern and can seamlessly integrate with existing cloud storage
infrastructures. Specifically, the project leverages the emerging hybrid cloud
storage architecture that has a cloud storage gateway with a moderate level of
resource at the client side, the well-known reference locality principle for
data access, and the availability of multiple independent cloud storage servers
in the market. The project would benefit the community by enhancing the users'
awareness of security and privacy risks in using cloud services and providing
them with user-friendly protection tools so that they benefit from using such
services with confidence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project designs a new
hierarchical, Oblivious RAM storage system to include multiple layers of
Oblivious RAM modules, each of which is optimized for different performance
metrics depending on its niche on the hierarchy; hence, the hierarchy as whole
can attain high efficiency in communication, storage and computation
simultaneously. The project formalizes the problem of protecting the data access
pattern for the whole hierarchy of Oblivious RAM modules, and develops novel
algorithms to solve the problem. The project also aims to deliver a set of
provably-secure Oblivious RAM algorithms optimized for short data access delay
or low server-side storage overhead, and a set of provably-secure algorithms for
planning an optimal architecture for a hierarchy of Oblivious RAM modules,
configuring the hierarchy and coordinating the operations of all Oblivious RAM
modules in the hierarchy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.