* 1844345
* Workshop on advancing integrative volcanology with community experiments: Albuquerque, NM, November 28-30, 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Brandon Schmandt, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 04/30/2019
* USD 49,300.00

This award supports a community workshop in November 2018 to synthesize
multidisciplinary perspectives on how community projects can advance integrative
volcanology. One of the key challenges identified by recent community reports on
research in volcanic systems is enhancing community organization to overcome
observational and disciplinary limitations. The proposed workshop would help
foster community organization, encourage early career scientists to take an
active role in guiding the field, and set the stage for ambitious and innovative
near-future projects.Community projects with open data and a framework for
coordinating interdisciplinary research on volcanic systems would benefit
training and opportunities for the next generation of volcano scientists and
maximize outcomes from investment in volcanology beyond what is possible with
individual investigator or small group projects. The overarching goal is to
advance process-based understanding of the life cycles of volcanic systems that
are important hazards to life and infrastructure as well as longterm drivers of
geological processes central geothermal energy and concentration of economically
valuable elements and minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex geophysical and
geochemical processes and geological history underlying volcanic systems demands
extensive observational resources and interdisciplinary engagement to develop
models of volcanic processes. Much progress has been made to date primarily
using research projects driven by individual investigators or small groups who
perform all parts of the project (collection of observation, analysis,
interpretation) and may eventually make their data openly available after
project completion. There is growing recognition that continued advances could
benefit greatly from pooling resources to collect diverse cutting-edge
observations, expansion of open-access data and data products, and increasing
coordination among observational and theoretical approaches. The proposed
workshop will provide an opportunity for well-motivated and focused discussions
leading to recommendations for how community volcano experiments could be an
increasingly useful mode of operation in the near future. Workshop goals include
identifying the key problems suited to community experiments, elements of
potential experiment designs and locations, and key aspects of integrative
research frameworks to maximize the benefit of community
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.