* 1844443
* CAREER: Developing a modular synthesis of 6-7-5 terpenoid natural products and analogs
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Alexander Grenning, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 04/30/2024
* USD 675,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry is supporting the research of Professor Alexander J. Grenning at the
University of Florida. His group is streamlining how bioactive terpenoid natural
products, organic molecules commonly derived from plants with important
biological activity, are prepared in the laboratory. There are several reasons
why this modern challenge needs to be addressed: first, nature often only
produces minute quantities of natural products and significant amounts of the
chemical are needed for study and use in society. From a given natural product,
a limited set of similar compounds can be prepared via what chemists call "semi-
synthesis". Semi-synthesis refers to specific limited changes to a natural
product. When performing studies designed to understand the way these molecules
interact with biological systems, access to a variety of similar compounds is
crucial for understanding and improving the reactivity of the parent molecule.
Second, the laboratory synthesis of highly complex molecules ("total synthesis")
forming large quantities in efficient ways is inherently challenging. Although
targeted for decades, there are few general strategies to make the complex
terpene molecules. The Grenning lab is studying the laboratory terpene synthesis
to better understand the function of this molecule in the body and to enable the
advanced manufacturing of the best molecules in large quantities. Educational
aspects of this project are aimed at informing the public about the natural
products. The Grenning lab is designing freely available "infographics" on
terpenes for distribution to the general public. The Grenning lab is also
organizing events and conferences ranging from the "Chemathon," a day-long
celebration of chemistry for high-school students, to the "Florida Heterocyclic
and Synthetic Conference (FloHet)," a specialized international meeting that
gathers synthetic organic chemistry leaders to disseminate their research
findings. Additional benefits include the recruitment of underrepresented
groups, both at the undergraduate and graduate student level, for participation
in the projects outlined in this CAREER Award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Grenning
lab is focusing on the synthesis of polycycloalkane natural products bearing
tricyclic motifs. This is a common terpenoid architecture that is difficult to
access due to its inherent structural complexity. Ketones, malonic acids, and
allylic electrophiles serve as starting materials and through an operationally
simple and generalized reaction sequences consisting of deconjugative
allylations, sigmatropic rearrangements, and ring-closing metathesis, a variety
of "terpene scaffolds" are accessible. These terpene scaffolds then serve as
platforms for reaction development aimed at preparing terpenoid targets and
target-analogs. Select molecules are subject to biological evaluation to
validate our chemical advancements. The molecules targeted include the tigliane,
daphnane and rhamnofolane families of natural products and their analogs.
Broader Impacts include the increased interaction with Santa Fe Community
College. By educating the local community on organic chemistry and natural
products, Professor Grenning and his group create a dialogue and inspire
students to consider careers in chemistry. The team also designs terpenoid
infographics and organizes events and conferences for educating students and
disseminating results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.