* 1844941
* CAREER:   An integrated approach to understanding evolution in heterogeneous environments
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2025
* Zachariah Gompert, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,130,490.00

In the struggle for existence, organisms interact with each other and with their
environment. Variation in climate, weather, and species interactions can cause
variation in the direction and strength of natural selection. Differences in
selection across space cause local adaptation. However, whether seasonal, yearly
or longer-term fluctuations in selection are equally important for evolution is
unknown. Selection that varies over time can cause rapid evolution. It can also
erode or maintain variation for individual traits or genes, but may or may not
be an important factor in evolutionary dynamics more broadly. Studies of genome-
wide variation in natural populations are needed to fill this knowledge gap. In
this project, scientists will use computer simulations, experiments, and genome
sequencing of butterflies to understand fluctuating selection. The research will
focus on how variation in precipitation, temperature, and other factors causes
selection on caterpillars to change across space and time. Importantly, new
methods will also be developed. These methods will help other scientists
investigate the consequences of natural selection on ecological time scales. The
project will include undergraduate research opportunities and a citizen science
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses samples of butterflies
(&gt;7500 specimens) collected over many decades and a combination of scientific
approaches to advance understanding of fluctuating selection. Furthermore, the
combination of approaches will include newly developed analytical tools. This
integrative framework will allow the researcher to test neutral vs. selectionist
theories of molecular evolution. One key outcome will be more refined
predictions for the genomic consequences of fluctuating selection. This includes
new methods and software for detecting fluctuating selection. A second outcome
will be a series of empirical tests of fluctuating selection using populations
of butterflies sampled multiple times since the late 1800s. These tests will
focus on understanding the prevalence and causes of fluctuating selection. They
will also explore the targets and consequences of fluctuating selection.
Importantly, this work will combine lab experiments and trait mapping studies
with population genomic analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.