* 1844132
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3: Emergent mechanics of synthetic cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Allen Po-Chih Liu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2020
* USD 299,999.00

Each cell in the human body contains a structural framework that is composed of
a network of actin (a protein) filaments. This framework acts like a skeleton.
It is the basis of the cell's ability to resist deformation, to change shape,
and to move. Our understanding of this actin cytoskeleton is based on studies of
the behavior of whole cells. However, we do not fully understand how these
filamentous networks assemble. This project will reconstitute actin networks and
observe how they reorganize themselves under stress. Actin will also be
synthesized and its self-organization into structures will be observed under
many environmental conditions. The project will provide insight into the
mechanics of actin cytoskeleton network construction for production of robust
synthetic cells. The project will also provide research opportunities for
students from high school through graduate school. Of specific emphasis will be
outreach activities for girls at the K-12 level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Very
little is known about how the ability of cells to sense and respond to force and
acquire mechanical stiffness arises from cytoskeletal building blocks.
Understanding this would enable the design of mechanical functionality in
synthetic cells. A reconstitution platform could elucidate how actin
architectures affect the mechanical properties of a cell. Two model systems will
be used in this project. One involves synthetic cells that encapsulate
reconstituted cytoskeletal components. The second is a lipid bilayer vesicle
that encapsulates a cell-free protein synthesis (CFPS) system that produces
actin. These will be processed through a novel microfluidic device capable of
exerting mechanical compression, and the responses of the cell/vesicle and of
the actin network will be evaluated. The mechanical properties of synthetic
cells with different actin network will be quantified. Based on those results,
the engineering of a synthetic cell with reconfigurable actin networks will be
undertaken and evaluated. This demonstration of a reconfigurable internal
cytoskeleton will pave the way for engineering stimulus-responsive changes to
synthetic cells. This work may reveal new rules about synthetic cell design by
highlighting the mechanical requirement of a robust synthetic cell. If
successful, the results will lead to the design of synthetic cells with a more
robust response to external mechanical perturbations. This is currently a major
hurdle in the bottom-up construction of synthetic
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.