* 1844858
* 11th North American Paleontological Convention: Conference Support: Riverside, CA - June 23 to June 27, 2019
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Mary Droser, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 25,000.00

The eleventh North American Paleontological Convention (NAPC) is being held at
the University of California, Riverside (UCR) from June 23 to June 27, 2019.
NAPC is a large, international meeting attended every five years by scientists,
students, and amateurs who study the history of life in the universe. During
NAPC, attendees are presenting and discussing scientific findings, defining
directions for future research and outreach, and are mentoring/being mentored by
professionals and peers. Symposia, workshops, and field trips are being held
throughout the conference. Funds are going towards the travel and housing costs
for 100 students to attend NAPC. NAPC activities are advancing discovery and
understanding, broadening participation of under-represented groups, and
broadening dissemination to enhance scientific and technological
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NAPC is a forum where hundreds of
scientists from around the world can formally and informally exchange
information, mentor, and create contacts. Topical sessions, workshops, and field
trips on a wide range of research areas, including astrobiology, paleogenomics,
paleoclimatology, and conservation paleobiology, are being convened. A plenary
session emphasizes the importance of deep time studies among the public. UCR is
a Hispanic Serving Institution, and several activities were designed to promote
diversity and inclusion within the paleontological
subdisciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.