* 1844188
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Processing of L2-specific multi-word units and the impact on representation and generalization: an ERP study
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Paola Dussias, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2021
* USD 13,609.00

In their 2017 report on America's languages, the American Academy of Arts and
Sciences' Commission on Language Learning recommends "a national strategy to
improve access to as many languages as possible for people of every region,
ethnicity, and socioeconomic background...to value language education as a
persistent national need similar to education in math or English, and to ensure
that a useful level of proficiency is within every student's reach"
https://www.amacad.org/content/publications/pubContent.aspx?d=22478). This
dissertation is a step towards beginning to answer this call. Adult second
language learners are often able to function at some level in a foreign
language, but the influence of the native language during second language
learning and use is known to negatively affect proficiency levels. Second
language learners often experience the frustration of trying to remember a
recently learned word in a second language, but only being able to retrieve the
word in the native language. An important goal, then, is to learn to regulate
interference from the native language to achieve higher proficiency in a second
language. This project proposes to investigate how this might be possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The electrophysiological brain activity of English
speakers who are learning Spanish will be measured during the learning of new
word combinations, for example, "despertar dudas." This collocation literally
translates as "awaken doubts" but is expressed in English with the phrase "raise
doubts". Using a word combination like "despertar dudas" requires the
suppression of the English translation equivalent "raise doubts". This research
project will examine the brain activity associated with learning in conditions
that require ignoring interference from the native language to examine whether
they lead to better learning and generalization when learners are exposed to new
input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.