* 1844238
* EAGER: Connected and Automated Vehicle Assessment Platform Using a Crowdsourced Cyber-Physical Reality
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Guiling Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,972.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Experimental Research (EAGER) project will produce
an innovative assessment platform for the evaluation of the impacts of Connected
and Automated Vehicles (CAVs) on individuals including drivers, passengers and
pedestrians. Since its inception in the early 2000s, CAV technology has been
expected to revolutionize the way a vehicle is controlled, potentially having
significant implications on safety and efficiency of transportation systems.
Existing evaluation approaches for CAVs heavily rely on computer simulations,
which are insufficient for capturing the impact on human beings who will have
various cognitive and behavioral reactions in response to CAVs. Missing this
link, CAVs cannot be deployed on the road. By integrating robotics, 3-D
printing, wireless network, traffic sensing and crowdsourcing technologies, the
assessment platform that will be built through this EAGER project will reform
the existing evaluation paradigm relying on simulations. Combining this platform
with CAVs can create a positive feedback loop between design, development, and
assessment of CAVs and thus enable its on-road deployment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research primarily focuses on the assessment of CAV
impacts on the individuals who are 1) passengers of CAVs, 2) drivers in the
vicinity of CAVs, or 3) pedestrians around CAVs. To seamlessly capture their
cognitive (e.g., safety awareness, degree of comfort) and behavioral reactions
(e.g., steering maneuvers, accelerating or decelerating activities), this
project develops a novel assessment platform utilizing a crowdsourced cyber-
physical reality to realize the high-fidelity evaluations of CAVs. Using visual
and force feedback, human involvement as drivers, passengers, and pedestrians
could be assessed through cyber-physical reality. This EAGER project will
address a number of technical challenges including: 1) how to assure that the
platform's traffic dynamics would well represent the real-world situations; 2)
how to seamlessly connect the human testers with miniature environment through
virtual reality; and 3) how to design experimental scenarios to investigate a
wide variety of potential problems in CAV technologies. The project will tackle
the challenges by integrating robotics, 3D-printing, traffic engineering, and
crowdsource technologies. The platform will be validated by comparing the
quantitative measures collected from the proposed platform with those predicted
by theories and sampled from real world traffic. It is also expected that
demonstrations of the built platform will be widely conducted and disseminated
at the end of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.