* 1844111
* SBIR Phase I:  Manufacturable Growth And Purification Of Aligned, Semiconducting Carbon Nanotubes
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,08/31/2020
* John Provine, ALIGNED CARBON INC.
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to enable the development of monolithic 3D
integration of carbon nanotube (CNT) computing in conjunction with silicon
nanoelectronics. The value of nanoelectronics utilizing silicon integrated with
CNT has been shown to have immense potential through various academic studies.
However, the transition of this technology from academia to industry has been
stymied by lack of CNT material that meets the manufacturing requirements
particularly in terms of alignment, purity, and compatibility to be properly
explored. Monolithic 3D integration will enable game-changing levels of
improvement to computing speed and power efficiency, creating better computing
for all. Providing a material which accelerates research and development for
improved computing will create a game changing impact on the $500B integrated
circuit market and potentially create billions of dollars in revenue. This
project is focused on the needs of the nanoelectronics industry because of the
impact possible in that market, but other markets such as biosensing or flexible
electronics would benefit from the same materials and often at relaxed
specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
Phase I project will greatly expand the utilization of carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
in nanoelectronics by making industrially relevant material available. This will
allow application oriented nanoelectronics teams to move forward with R&amp;D
projects. Further, the project's work on the fundamentals of aligned CNT growth
and purification will benefit the CNT materials community by the extension of
the material into commercial manufacturing. The research objectives are on two
fronts: 1) growth of CMOS compatible aligned CNTs and 2) purification of aligned
CNTs. Growth of highly aligned CNT populations has typically utilized catalysts
which are not compatible with front end of line CMOS fabrication, hindering the
use of material in conjunction with Si integrated circuits. Current methods of
CNT purification to remove metallic CNTs suffer from either destroying the
critical CNT alignment, utilization of non-CMOS compatible materials, or the
need of extensive post-processing. This project will develop a growth process
and a purification process that preserves alignment while maintaining CMOS
compatibility and utilizes wafer scale batch processes that allow high
throughput manufacturing. The purification scheme is a proprietary method which
must be characterized and refined to meet the exacting purification standards of
99.99% semiconducting CNTs or better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.