* 1844715
* CAREER: A Case Study of Malaria Elimination Efforts with Relation to Vernacular Knowledge, Expertise, and Ethics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Melissa Graboyes, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 448,937.00

This CAREER award supports new research that focuses on a century of malaria
elimination attempts in sub-Saharan Africa and on the island of Zanzibar. The
research will chart the global institutions involved, changes in disease
environments, and risks that accrued to local communities. Key mentoring and
educational activities include developing new STS/African Studies courses;
running an undergraduate global health research group; hiring undergraduates to
work as research assistants; serving as primary advisor for students writing
undergraduate theses; and providing a year of mentorship for a post-doctoral
scholar in STS/African Studies. Research findings will be disseminated in the
form of a book, four articles, blog posts, conference presentations, invited
lectures at universities, and student presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project on malaria elimination attempts in Africa uses archival,
ethnographic, and oral research in Africa, Europe, and the US. It will draw on
STS frameworks while engaging with literatures on the anthropology of science
and biomedicine, and it will result in a series of closely-linked research and
educational outputs centered around questions of history, ethics, and the role
of vernacular knowledge in global health campaigns. Findings will contribute to
the African Studies/STS literature about how to integrate vernacular knowledge
into dominant epistemological frameworks and add to the postcolonial
technoscience literature by doing ethnographically and historically informed
research about the ethics of global health
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.