* 1844210
* I-Corps: Earth Abundant Antimony Chalcogenides for High Efficiency and Sustainable Thin Films Solar Cells
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Feng Yan, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 03/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is from a more
cost-effective thin film technology to harvest sunlight and convert into
electricity through the photovoltaic effect. The solar energy market is
dominated by the crystalline silicon and cadmium telluride (CdTe) thin film
solar panels. The CdTe thin-film panels require high energy consumption during
manufacturing, and are constrained by the toxicity of Cd and limited earth
storage of Te. The project will explore the commercial opportunities of
manufacturing antimony chalcogenides thin-film solar panel with lower cost,
higher efficiency, and less energy consumption for residential, commercial and
utility level application. The cost of the traditional thin-film solar panel
could be significantly reduced by utilizing the knowledge of increasing the thin
film solar cell efficiency and developing a cost-effective earth abundant
antimony chalcogenide source. The reduced solar energy cost will further boost
the application of solar energy in the US and provide alternative and
sustainable clean energy for the whole of society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is to discover which customer segment would value the
photovoltaic efficiency of the Sb2Se3 thin film solar cells such that the
commercialization potential will be realized. The Sb2Se3 is antimony based
chalcogenides with orthorhombic structure (non-cubic structure), which are
opposite to the traditional cubic chalcogenides thin film solar cells (i.e.,
CdTe, CuInGaSe). These orthorhombic materials exhibit unique crystal structure
which consists of quasi-one-dimensional ribbons weakly bonded by van der Waals
forces, leading it to be a promising absorber material for photovoltaic
application due to its properties of the high absorption coefficient,
approximately 1.1 eV bandgap optimal for single junction solar cells. Sb2Se3, an
earth-abundant constituent, has low toxicity and uses a low energy manufacture
process. These above factors make Sb2Se3 to be a promising candidate to replace
Cd, Ga/In in the commercial thin-film solar modules. These Sb2Se3 can be
compatible with the traditional high throughput CdTe thin film solar cells
manufacturing process. The Sb2Se3 technology provides alternative options for t
lower cost solar energy in the US with a healthier environment footprint.
Through the I-Corps project, the team expects to further investigate the which
customer segment values this technology for thin film solar cells
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.