* 1844886
* Preparation and Distribution of DOC Consensus Reference Materials
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Dennis Hansell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 03/31/2023
* USD 493,630.00

Dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the ocean is part of the global carbon cycle.
DOC interacts with the Earth's climate system through its connection to carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere. Keeping track of DOC requires the cooperation of many
marine laboratories worldwide. Making sure that all of these laboratories are
making accurate DOC measurements requires that each can access a standardized
sample of seawater for which the DOC concentration is set by international
agreement. This award funds the University of Miami to continue a consensus
reference material (CRM) program that was first developed in 1998 in support of
consistent, high quality measurements of dissolved organic carbon by the
international ocean chemistry community. With continuation of this work, the US
and international communities can make consistent measurements of a major marine
carbon reservoir and advance society's ability to assess changes in the marine
carbon cycle and the role of the ocean in climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With continued strong international efforts to
investigate the marine carbon cycle, the existing CRM program provides the
necessary benchmark for globally comparable marine DOC measurements. Water from
the deep Florida Strait (approximately 42 umol/kg DOC) will be collected, placed
in ampoules, and distributed to the US and international community. Over the
time period of this program, approximately 228,000 vials of reference waters
have been distributed to approximately 240 US and international laboratories in
43 nations, currently at a rate of about 23,000 vials/year. With continuation of
the reference material program for a seventh 3-year period of support,
distribution of deep ocean water containing biologically refractory dissolved
organic carbon and low carbon reference water will continue to aid the
analytical work of the community studying dissolved organic matter in the ocean.
A website is maintained that provides direct and convenient links to a growing
number of DOC data collected from the global ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.