* 1844155
* Investigating Approximate Number System Computation in Children
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Melissa Kibbe, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 578,589.00

This project investigates children's capacity for arithmetic computation without
symbols or formal notation, before they encounter formal mathematics training in
school. The Approximate Number System (ANS), a cognitive system which is
operational from early infancy onward, allows humans to approximately quantify
sets of items without language or symbols. Research suggests that the ANS could
potentially support arithmetic operations, such as addition and subtraction, and
that the ANS could therefore serve as a bridge to learning formal mathematics.
However, the arithmetic capacity of the ANS, and how this capacity develops, is
not well understood. This project fills that knowledge gap by systematically
examining the computational capacity of the ANS using a series of experiments
designed to assess young children before they learn the formal rules of
arithmetic in school. The project addresses theoretical debates about the early
cognitive architecture of the ANS and its role in arithmetic computation. The
project will identify potential ways that educators could leverage children's
pre-symbolic mathematical intuitions in order to help them learn formal
mathematics. This has implications for STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics) education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the
degree to which computations performed over ANS representations parallel true
arithmetic computations. The development of the computational capacity of the
ANS will be examined. Symbolic arithmetic computation obeys a set of functional
rules. For example, the result of an arithmetic computation like 5+6 is a new,
independent quantity that is just as precise as the quantities it was derived
from, and which can be manipulated and used in further computations. These
functional rules make symbolic arithmetic computation both powerful and
flexible. This project aims to identify the functional rules of non-symbolic
arithmetic with the ANS. In a series of experiments, four to six year-old
children will be asked to solve non-symbolic problems with unknown addends
(e.g., 5+__=11). This task requires children to perform arithmetic-like
computation, holding two separate ANS representations in mind (e.g.
approximately five and approximately 11) and performing a computation over them
(e.g. subtracting approximately five from approximately 11) to derive a
solution. Each experiment is aimed at examining different components of the
functional rules of non-symbolic arithmetic, including the representational
structure and precision of the solutions to ANS computations and the extent to
which these solutions can be used in further computations. Additional measures
of working memory capacity, symbolic math performance, and ANS representational
precision are used to elucidate contributions of these cognitive systems to the
computational capacity and development of the ANS. Data will be analyzed using a
combination of traditional null hypothesis significance testing, Bayes factor
analysis, and logistic regression. The project will therefore compliment what is
known about the representational structure of the ANS by shedding light on its
computational architecture and the development of this architecture in early
childhood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.