* 1844906
* CAREER:  Testing the contributions of selection, gene-flow, and recombination to reinforcement
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Robin Hopkins, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,359,051.00

Understanding the generation of biodiversity involves figuring out how and why
speciation occurs. Speciation involves the buildup of barriers to reproduction
between diverging species. This buildup can result from the interplay of
evolutionary forces such as natural selection and gene flow. This research
investigates these evolutionary forces in a group of three native Texas Phlox
wildflowers. Focusing on these three species, the research will determine how
and why reproductive isolation evolves. Across Texas, these species of
wildflowers can be found growing together in populations and hybridizing. This
research involves a detailed investigation of what drives the evolution of
traits to decrease hybridization between one pair of species and prevents the
evolution of these traits in another pair. This research combines ecological
studies with genetic and genomic studies. By doing so, it will test long
standing hypotheses about how and why species form. This project integrates
undergraduate students in a course-based research experience. This experience
will allow students to study speciation hands-on and learn about the scientific
method. By working with the local natural history museum, this project will
engage K-12 grade students and teachers in plant evolution-based
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how selection, gene
flow, and recombination contribute to the evolution of reproductive isolation
between co-occurring species. Phlox drummondii co-occurs with two closely
related Phlox species but has evolved increased reproductive isolation with only
one of these two species. To determine why reproductive isolation evolves with
one species and not the other this project will measure the cost of
hybridization. Further, the research will measure the strength of existing
barriers to reproduction and the amount and direction of gene flow between
species. This project integrates field-based studies of pollinator attraction
with greenhouse studies of controlled matings and hybrid success. In addition,
it will include detailed genomic studies to investigate the genetic architecture
of reproductive isolation and gene flow between
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.