* 1844505
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Type II: Data-Driven Characterization and Engineering of Protein Hydrophobicity
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Andrew Ferguson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2021
* USD 52,982.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports research and education
involving a new collaboration kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon event focused on
advancing understanding of how water interacts with proteins and complex
molecular assemblies. Oil and water don't mix. Examples of this common wisdom
are prevalent in everyday life from the sheen formed on a rain puddle by spilled
gasoline, to the separation of oil and vinegar in a bottle of salad dressing.
These are large-scale examples of a physical principle known as hydrophobicity -
a word derived from Ancient Greek that characterizes the "horror for water"
experienced by particular molecules. This physical principle is also active at
microscopic scales, with hydrophobicity playing an important role in controlling
the structure and function of molecules in water. Of particular interest is the
behavior of proteins: a class of molecules that use the hydrophobic effect to
perform functions critical to life, serving as - among many other things -
enzymes to help break down food, hormones to regulate physiology, and antibodies
to protect against infection. Some physical forces can be described by simple
and elegant equations, such as Newton's law of gravitation or Coulomb's law of
electrostatics, but decades of work have shown that no such simple descriptions
seem to exist for hydrophobicity. Instead, the hydrophobic interaction is a very
complicated force that depends sensitively on the details of the hydrophobic
molecule and its interactions with the water molecules around it. Unraveling the
details of this interaction in the context of proteins is important in helping
understand the fundamentals of this ubiquitous and important force, and in
helping discover and design proteins to serve as new drugs or novel molecular
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How might one probe and understand the
complexities of hydrophobicity? Artificial intelligence techniques are now
ubiquitous in modern life, serving as recommendation engines for online
shopping, automatically recognizing faces in camera phones, and enabling
autonomous and assisted driving. Conventional computer programs work by
executing a pre-programmed set of rules to achieve an outcome; modern artificial
intelligence techniques are instead provided with a set of examples and
automatically learn the rules from the data. This research project will use
artificial intelligence techniques to learn the rules of hydrophobicity from
computer simulations of water around proteins. Specifically, using sophisticated
molecular simulations to model the interactions and dynamics of water molecules,
and special tools to measure hydrophobicity, databases of the "horror for water"
of different regions of the protein surface will be compiled. Artificial
intelligence tools will then analyze these databases to find a mathematical
model between hydrophobicity and the chemical composition and shape of the
protein surface. The models learned in this way will help untangle the
complexities of hydrophobicity, and can be used to quickly predict how proteins
in water will behave. The tools will also be adapted and analyzed to provide
human-interpretable explanations that help provide new understanding of
hydrophobicity rather than just furnishing a complicated mathematical
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research activities will provide new models
and understanding of protein hydrophobicity that can be used to search for new
drug molecules and engineer proteins with new structures and functions. The
simulation and artificial intelligence tools will be made broadly available to
the scientific community and general public through open source molecular
simulation packages, free software libraries, and through online code sharing
sites. Undergraduate students will be involved in the research projects through
10-week paid summer internships to be offered in each year of the award. These
research experiences will be designed according to best practices in providing
authentic and valuable training experiences, and special efforts will be made to
recruit students from groups traditionally underrepresented in science,
technology, engineering, and math fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER award supports research and education involving a
new collaboration kindled at the MATDAT18 Datathon event focused on integrating
sophisticated molecular simulation tools with machine learning techniques to
understand hydrophobicity at the nanoscale. The hydrophobic effect - the
tendency for non-polar moieties to cluster together and exclude water molecules
in aqueous solvent - plays an important role in the interactions and assemblies
of complex molecules, such as cavitands, dendrimers, and proteins. However,
quantifying the hydrophobicity of such molecules, which display complex chemical
and topographical patterns at the nanoscale, has proven to be an enduring and
open challenge. Recent work has illuminated the failure of additive approaches
that attempt to break down molecular hydrophobicity as a sum of the
hydrophobicities of the constituent surface groups, and demonstrated that
hydrophobicity at the nanoscale is a complex, collective, many-body response of
hydration waters to chemical and topographical surface cues. This complexity not
only frustrates a fundamental molecular understanding of hydrophobicity at the
nanoscale, but also has important practical consequences, such as the inability
to accurately screen ligands for drug discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this research project is to conduct enhanced sampling molecular
simulations to accurately quantify the hydrophobicity of an extensive library of
nanostructured surfaces through the free energy of cavity formation, and to
deploy supervised machine learning techniques to unveil new understanding of the
physical, chemical, and topographical cues governing surface hydrophobicity. The
central hypothesis of this project is that the application of data-centric tools
can provide new understanding of the molecular determinants of hydrophobicity
beyond what is possible with simple conceptual models and human intuition. The
first objective of this work is to quantify the hydrophobicity of an extensive
library of patterned self-assembled monolayer surfaces and proteins by
estimating the free energy of interfacial cavity formation using enhanced
sampling techniques. The second objective is to conduct supervised learning over
the hydrophobicity libraries to construct quantitative structure property
relationship models relating chemical composition and physical structure to the
free energy of interfacial cavity formation. A number of machine learning
techniques will be explored, including support vector machines, random forests,
partial least squares regression, and artificial neural networks. The techniques
will be adapted to be physics-aware by "baking in" the physics of hydrophobicity
into the model, and to be explainable by furnishing human-interpretable
understanding of their behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of
this research will have impacts in both materials and data science. From a
materials science perspective, unveiling the molecular determinants of protein
hydrophobicity - the relation between the topographical and chemical patterns
displayed by the protein and the free energy of cavity formation - will shed new
light on the driving force behind protein interactions and assembly, furnish
precepts for rational engineering of protein structure and function, and open up
applications in virtual high-throughput screening for the computational
discovery of drugs, ligands, bioseparation agents, and co-solutes to modulate
protein solubility. From a data science perspective, this work will establish
new physics/chemistry-aware machine learning tools whose behaviors are more
interpretable and comprehensible in the analysis of molecular behaviors than
generic off-the-shelf techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials
Research and the Chemistry Division contribute funds to this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.