* 1844820
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The role of iconicity and gradience in children's acquisition of American Sign Language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Jennifer Lu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 08/31/2021
* USD 17,136.00

Language is not only characterized by arbitrary mappings of words to meaning,
but also contains iconic mappings. As iconicity is prevalent in sign languages,
one might think that deaf children would have an advantage in learning new
iconic signs. However, this does not appear to be the case, at least for some
iconic signs. For example, depicting constructions (DCs) in sign language are
iconic, yet children acquire these signs at a prolonged timescale relative to
other signs. This research asks why, and thus has implications for early
intervention in deaf children with language delays. There is a great need for
sign language tests to assess children's sign language knowledge, and this
project can inform the development of these
tests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Depicting constructions (DCs) have non-discrete,
gradient properties, which may be difficult for children to understand. One
hypothesis is that young learners are biased to interpret all movements within a
linguistic system as categorical, resulting in difficulty in interpreting
gradient mappings in sign, which leads to errors in DCs. Children might not
apply this same linguistic bias to non-linguistic stimuli (such as gesture,
which has no linguistic categories) and, and if so, should be able to interpret
gradience within gesture. The alternative hypothesis is that young learners can
interpret gradient mappings in both sign and gesture, but do not know the
phonological constraints on forming DCs and thus overuse gradience, which leads
to errors in DCs. This research has three aims: (1) examine the types of errors
native signing children form when producing DCs; (2) understand how these
learners interpret iconic, gradient movements within linguistic (sign) and non-
linguistic domains (e.g., gesture); and (3) understand how specific language
experiences shape children's assumptions about gesture and sign by testing
children exposed to sign language and those not exposed to
sign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.