* 1844406
* CAREER: Adaptive Physical Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Stefanie Mueller, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2024
* USD 589,223.00

Adaptive User Interfaces, i.e. interfaces that change their layout and
functionality based on working context, capabilities, skills, and motivations of
users can help to complete tasks faster and widen access for populations with
diverse abilities. For instance, an adaptive website re-layouts its content when
viewed on a phone rather than a laptop screen to preserve fast access to
information, an adaptive menu re-orders its functions to display the ones that
are frequently used in the most prominent location, and an adaptive webpage
stylizer replaces color schemes that are hard to see for users with visual
impairments with those that are easy to process. So far, adaptive user
interfaces have mainly been explored for on-screen user interfaces, such as
webpages and other digital applications running on desktop computers, laptops,
and mobile phones. However, with computing moving into our environment and the
increased availability of "smart" everyday objects with integrated sensing, it
now becomes feasible to ask how the approach deployed for digital adaptive user
interfaces can be applied to physical user interfaces, i.e. the physical objects
we use in our everyday lives. For instance, consider the example of a child
learning how to ride a bike with the help of training wheels: sensors integrated
in the wheels can measure how well the child is balancing and determine the
current learning progress, then motors can lift or lower the training wheels to
increase or decrease the difficulty level according to the child's progress. The
research team will study a range of application use cases in the areas of
learning (e.g., adaptive writing aids, adaptive toys for child development),
health and rehabilitation (e.g., adaptive walkers, canes, casts), and
accessibility (e.g., adaptive tools for meal preparation, personal care, and
recreation). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will follow the research
plan that was initially deployed for influential early work on digital adaptive
user interfaces. In the first phase, application areas and use cases will be
identified for physically adaptive tools. After clustering the application
areas, the team will build exemplary prototypes for physically adaptive tools.
After finishing the first round of prototypes, usability testing and evaluation
will be conducted. For the user studies, the team will compare user performance
between adaptive physical tools vs. their non-adaptive counterparts. Each study
task will be designed to match the context of the tool (e.g., measuring learning
gain, productivity increase, health improvement), but the main study design will
be coherent across all tools. Using the insights gained from this investigation,
the team will build a framework of design principles for building adaptive
physical tools and propose a set of metrics for measuring their successful
application. The framework will cover aspects, such as the adaptation time
during interaction (i.e., the time for the tool to change its physical state),
the adaptation range (i.e., the range actuators have to cover when changing the
physical tool), and the adaptation integration (i.e., adding sensors and
actuators in a way that does not interfere with the user interaction). Based on
the framework of design principles, the team will develop a design tool that
facilitates the development of adaptive physical tools. With the framework,
design tool, and formalized study design in hand, the team will investigate
specific application areas, such as adaptive learning, health and
rehabilitation, and accessibility, in depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.