* 1844282
* Workshop: Advancing Research in Phonology via Articulatory Phonology (ARP_AP): July 29-31, 2019 Monterrey, CA
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Louis Goldstein, Haskins Laboratories, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2020
* USD 44,417.00

This workshop will bring experts and students together to investigate
innovations in understanding the structure of words and the basic principles
that enable speaking using the theory of Articulatory Phonology. This theory,
unlike most linguistic theories, incorporates time as an inherent part of the
elements that make up words (consonants and vowels). Theoretical testing has
resulted in new and insightful interpretations of phenomena. This project
examines accomplishments and theoretical directions, because symbolic treatments
of phonology (which have sequencing but not time) are in a state of flux. Many
have begun adding elements like those used in Articulatory Phonology, but those
implementations miss critical theoretical elements. Further, measures that
result in the kinds of data that the theory depends on, such as measurements of
tongue movement, have become easier to use and more widely used. The workshop
will include theoretical presentations with promising directions discussed.
Outcomes will include innovative experimental plans and scientific
dissemination, as well as deeper understanding of sounds of speech which could
inform technological advances in
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the basis of phonology, which
allows us to have an unlimited number of words, is important to theoretical
linguistics, to the documentation of endangered languages, and to the
remediation of speech impairments. Despite the progress modern linguists have
made in understanding the sounds of speech, there are still issues that resist
analysis. The variable changes that take place as a speaker speaks more quickly
are continuous in nature, but symbolic representations struggle to accommodate
such results. Vowel and consonant harmony, in which features of one vowel (or
consonant) affect the realization of another in the same word, have been
incompletely accounted for in previous phonologies, despite the sizable number
of languages that exhibit harmony. For endangered languages, preparing material
that will be of use to descendants and the larger community who want to revive
the language has become increasingly important. Because symbolic descriptions
leave out a great deal of detail, they are not ideally suited to this purpose.
The theoretical account of Articulatory Phonology, along with the physiological
records that would be collected in generating an account, could provide a better
platform for revitalization. Many speech disorders are considered
"phonological", but the theory that underlies the procedures in speech pathology
is not always fully articulated. Reexamination of the basic units, such as
comparing phonemes to articulatory gestures, holds promise of further
improvement in remediation. This workshop will provide evidence for many of
these issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.