* 1844380
* CAREER: Understanding Cloud Feedback and Natural Aerosol Fingerprints to Interpret Past Warm Climate Forcing and Constrain Tropical Climate Sensitivity
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Natalie Burls, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 814,219.00

Equilibrium climate sensitivity refers to as the average surface temperature
change of the planet in response to a change in external forcing (e.g., the
doubling of the atmospheric CO2 concentration) once the climate system has
reached a balanced state. Equilibrium climate sensitivity is a central concept
in climate science for estimating the future temperature under the scenario of a
continuous increase of atmospheric CO2 concentration using climate models, as a
large portion of the total climate warming results from other changes in the
climate system in response to the radiative forcing due to anthropogenic
greenhouse gas emissions, such as clouds, atmospheric moisture, and snow/ice
coverage. The research has broader societal impacts as the central goal of this
study is to understand the fundamental physical mechanisms that have controlled
tropical climate and how it responds to warming. This is of significant
practical value in establishing confidence in the ability of climate models to
capture tropical feedbacks under future warming. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will support the careers and training of the PI (an early career female
scientist), a graduate student, and a postdoctoral fellow. The PI will work with
Geology graduate students through summer research visits and development of a
website for students/researchers from across the country to access and analyze
paleoclimate model data. She will mentor local undergraduate and high school
students through George Mason's Aspiring Scientists Summer Internship Program
and present a "weather and climate" module at a George Mason summer camp
designed for females underrepresented in fields of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constraining the range of
climate sensitivity estimates beyond those established over the last three
decades has proven to be one of the grand challenges in climate science. The
limited timespan of the instrumental record makes it difficult to tease out
natural, decadal-plus variability from cloud feedbacks in response to greenhouse
gas induced warming, with signals further complicated by 20th century aerosol
forcing. This project will take a new approach towards constraining the nature
of cloud feedbacks under warming by examining climate sensitivities in past warm
periods of paleo climate records. The current climate models lack ability to
adequately reproduce the reduced meridional surface temperature gradients
reconstructed for the past three warm climates, namely, the Pliocene, Miocene
and Eocene, as constrained by large-scale surface temperature and hydrological
cycle reconstructions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will seek answer about the
required strength of the climate sensitivity, particularly from tropical cloud
radiative feedback, for climate models to simulate these three very different
past warm periods. This multi-warm-climate approach will help establish the
extent to which robust tropical cloud feedback mechanisms can consistently
explain the patterns of warming, and the hydrological cycle response, seen
across the 20th century, Pliocene, Miocene and Eocene. The research project will
integrate the latest scientific advances within both the climate modeling and
paleoclimate reconstruction communities to: 1) address a fundamental gap in our
understanding of the tropical feedbacks needed to simulate distinct past warm
climates and the extent to which they are consistent across warm periods, and 2)
test the robustness of climate mechanisms put forth within the paleoclimate
community to aid in the interpretation and design of climate
reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.