* 1844821
* CAREER: Material Removal Mechanism of Ceramic Materials in Ultra-Precision Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Sangkee Min, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 01/31/2024
* USD 569,998.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program research will create a
fundamental understanding of ceramic material removal during nanoscale
machining. Ceramics, such as sapphire, zirconia, calcium fluoride, etc., have
many superior mechanical, chemical, biomedical and optical properties, but
fabricating ceramic components is very difficult due to their high hardness and
brittleness. However, at a microscopic scale, ceramics can be machined like
metals, although the mechanism explaining this phenomenon is not yet known.
General machining creates cracks on ceramic surfaces because the crystal
structure of the material is prone to fracture. Each crystal structure has
multiple fracture systems; each fracture system can be initiated under some
conditions, especially high pressure. This study will explore how the force
generated by cutting action initiates fracture and will use this understanding
so that cutting can be done without generating cracks. The research will allow
the use of ceramics in various industries, including consumer electronics,
biomedical and defense applications, and optical elements. Thus, the research
directly and favorably affects economic welfare and national security. The
knowledge generated from this project will be distributed through the advanced
CNC (Computer Numerical Control) machine training program, online expert system,
and public media in addition to journal publication and integration into
undergraduate and graduate courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goal is to
understand how the microscopic crystal structure of ceramics influences material
behavior during machining. The research will identify the activation mechanisms
of ductile shear and brittle fracture of ceramics. This knowledge will lead to
the development of machining strategies to suppress brittle fracture and to
enable ductile mode machining on ceramics for a wide range of applications. The
research will initially test the role of three potential parameters (resolved
shear stress, fracture energy, and stress intensity factor) in activating
plastic deformation or crack initiation. Specific contributions will include:
(1) data generation on critical depth of cut where ductile to brittle transition
occurs for all orientations for each distinctive crystal plane of sapphire and
zirconia; (2) identification of triggering parameter(s) on activation of slip
system or fracture system; and (3) modeling of ceramic
machining.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.