* 1844510
* Effects of Teaching Practices on Peer Victimization and Defending Behaviors
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Sheri Bauman, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 678,049.00

Peer victimization negatively impacts academic, psychological, and physiological
functioning in children. Studies have shown that whether and how children defend
their victimized peers has a significant impact on the adjustment of victims.
Although much research has focused on individual factors and on class-level
dynamics of victimization, less is known about the role of teachers. This
project will examine the complex ways in which teachers' characteristics,
practices, and actions affect (1) students' beliefs and attitudes; (2) the
classroom ecology; and (3) victimization and defending behaviors. Future
researchers will be able to use these findings to develop teacher training
programs. Findings may also facilitate the development of anti-bullying policies
and classroom management strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study will address
the following research questions: What is the association between teaching
practices and peer victimization? What is the association between teaching
practices and students' desires to defend their victimized peers? How do
teaching practices contribute to students' attitudes toward victimization, and
are these associations a function of the quality of teacher-student
relationships? Social motivation theoretical models provide an important
interpersonal context for socialization by teachers whereas social cognitive
theory describes how socialization might contribute to student social cognition
and the classroom climate. The researchers will examine reciprocal interactions
between teachers and students in fourth and fifth grade classrooms. The project
will use a short-term longitudinal design. Multimethod (e.g., surveys, in-class
observations) and multi-informant (teachers, students, trained observers)
approaches will be used to gather unique data for multilevel analyses. The use
of observational methodology will facilitate capturing teacher-classroom
practices as well as teacher-student relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.