* 1844290
* RoL:EAGER: DESYN-C3. Bottom-up Synthetic Cells Capable of Darwinism, the Archetypal Trait of Life
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Steven Benner, Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,994.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the Division
of Chemistry is funding work under the direction of Dr. Steven Benner from the
Foundation for Applied Molecular Evolution to create stable artificial cells
that may be used in biotechnology, especially in directed evolution. A "bottom-
up" program to create artificial cells avoids the need to manage the complexity
of modern living cells, a management necessary in "top-down" approaches to
minimal cells. However, it requires in turn a cellular architecture simpler than
the "water-oil-water" architecture of natural cells. The research focuses on
gaining control over phase separation that creates a cell structure with water
inside the cell and oil outside through control over surfactants, which are
small molecules that have a side that "prefers" to orient toward water and
another side that prefers to orient toward the oil. These molecules determine
the properties of boundaries and interfaces between the water and oil and in
turn can be used in the reproducible preparation of artificial cells that are
uniform in size. Such control has been sought for 20 years now and the
availability of "off-the-shelf" surfactants that make control possible would
boost the efforts to create an artificial cell using a bottom up approach. The
research focuses on the incorporation into the artificial cell of genetic
systems that themselves can evolve, ultimately to influence the properties of
the cells in a way that alters cellular fitness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will create synthetic pipelines to make surfactants that give
reproducible control over the physical properties of water-oil emulsions from
which stable, robust and uniformly sized nanodroplets (synthetic cells) in oil
can be prepared. We will develop surfactants that do not denature the enzymes,
genes, and other biologics that reside within the cells. The artificial cell
architecture involves just two phases, an external lipid phase and internal
water phase. Systems that allow the delivery of water and other small molecules
to the cell will be integrated in the synthetic cells. The research will then
aim to create a mechanism by which the synthetic cells can change their external
traits in response to molecular evolution processes that takes plan in the
cell.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.