* 1844235
* The Afranaph Project Development Workshop: Washington, D.C., Fall 2019
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2020
* Ruth Kramer, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Joan Maling
* 08/31/2020
* USD 39,509.00

The Afranaph Project aims to build an active research community around
electronic resources for the study of African languages. For the past 15 years,
native speaker consultants have been contributing data about particular areas of
grammatical interest, with a view toward discovering grammatical structures in
under-reported languages (some of them endangered) and uncovering patterns new
to linguistic science. With data from almost 50 consultants and almost as many
languages freely available online and in the Afranaph Database, Afranaph has
become a valuable resource for a wide range of linguistic researchers, in
addition to serving as a tool for linguistic pedagogy, a model for similar
projects on other language areas, and a partner in language projects for non-
scholarly communities (e.g., dictionaries for NGOs).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
the Fall of 2019, the Afranaph Project Development Workshop will bring linguists
from Africa, Europe and North America to Georgetown University in order to
present their research. This capstone event will include reports from the
leaders of the Afranaph research projects, new work from linguists investigating
the languages of Afranaph, and proposals for new research directions employing
Afranaph resources. Work by the native speaker consultants will be highlighted,
since many of them are early career researchers who have less access to
resources in their local communities, and can benefit from collaboration and
engagement with each other and the western academic community. Overall, this
workshop will allow researchers to explore the discoveries and strengthen the
research community and infrastructure that Afranaph has developed. Moreover, it
is a rare opportunity for new theoretical research on understudied African
languages to be presented to an expert audience, where new empirical patterns
can be identified and their impact on the field can be
recognized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.