* 1844518
* EAGER: Collaborative Research: Toward Informing Users About Algorithmic Fairness
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Michael Tschantz, International Computer Science Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2020
* USD 52,170.00

Computers make important decisions about people, including about criminal
justice issues such as sentencing and bail. These decisions can sometimes be
considered discriminatory if the computer system does not treat people -- for
example, people of different races -- fairly. However, deciding what it means
for a computer system to be "fair" is complicated: there are many possible
mathematical definitions of fairness, and a system cannot achieve them all at
the same time. For society to make policy related to these definitions of
fairness, non-technical people -- from legal and policy experts to the general
public -- must be able to understand subtle distinctions between mathematical
concepts. This research will develop and evaluate approaches to explaining these
concepts to non-experts, so that future research can investigate people's
opinions about them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will develop and
evaluate text and graphical descriptions and/or vignettes illustrating different
nondiscrimination properties and their tradeoffs. For concreteness, in this
exploratory work the project will focus only on accuracy-like nondiscrimination
properties, only in the context of criminal justice, such as algorithms used in
bail and sentencing decisions. The project will use iterative, qualitative,
person-centered design, including interviews and co-design studies with both
non-computer-science subject-matter experts in law and social science and
laypeople to develop and preliminarily evaluate the explanations. In parallel,
the project will systematize the space of nondiscrimination properties. This
effort will inform qualitative design efforts; concurrently, interviews with
legal and ethical experts will also shape the systematization, in a process of
iterative refinement. The end product will be a description of how various
nondiscrimination definitions differ along the axes empirical studies find most
important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.