* 1844589
* NCS-FO: Collaborative Research: Developing Underwater EEG Electrodes for Octopus Research
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Peter Tse, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 159,999.00

The octopus is a social animal, with high intelligence and problem-solving
skills, that is very distant from humans in terms of its evolution. This project
aims to fabricate neuroelectric sensors and experimental protocols that would
enable studying visual and higher level cognitive processes in the octopus while
they are engaged in natural behaviors in an underwater environment. This will
necessitate development of new engineering solutions for crafting
electroencephalography (EEG) sensors that can record signal underwater, new
solutions for removing noise artifacts from these highly complicated recordings,
as well as careful design of experiments that could study such behaviors in a
virtual-reality environment. While the brain of the octopus is very different
from that of the human, it does support well-defined cognitive functions.
Therefore, understanding whether and how octopuses' brains implement processes
such as learning, attention, habituation, and surprise can produce new and
important understandings of how neurobiological systems can support function.
This research might reveal that the neural substrates of cognitive function in
the octopus are organized according to principles that differ drastically from
those found in in humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project has several
aims. It will develop the first underwater EEG, first testing well-validated
paradigms on humans performing task underwater and benchmarking against known
waveforms. The electrodes will be constructed so that they do not corrode in
salt water. It will also develop high-quality virtual reality stimulation that
could impact octopuses' behavior in an underwater environment. It will utilize
EEG frequency-tagging techniques to determine processing of environmental
stimulus by the octopus. This will allow studying whether octopuses present
characteristic responses that are analogous to surprise, adaptation, working
memory and attention effects (in primates and other vertebrates). The study will
also allow answering how and in what manner do octopuses sleep. All data,
artifacts and modeling software will be made publicly available and constitute
an important resource for the community. The results of this study could impact
our general understanding of how brains support complex cognitive functions,
with direct relevance to artificial intelligence
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.