* 1844720
* CAREER: Toward Resilient Stormwater Quality Practices: Biotransformation for Sustained Removal of Emerging Contaminants
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Gregory LeFevre, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Stormwater runoff is a national challenge that increases in scope as population
and urbanization increases. When rain falls on streets, rooftops, and other hard
surfaces, contaminants can be washed into rivers and lakes, impacting aquatic
life and drinking water sources. Green stormwater treatment was developed to
remove stormwater contaminants as a solution to this problem. Although this
technology has potential to transform stormwater from a waste to a valuable
resource, the treatment mechanisms in most systems is poorly understood. This
knowledge gap prevents the wider adoption of this technology. To address this
gap, the research team will use cutting-edge chemical and biological analytical
tools to understand how bacteria, fungi, and plants combine with engineered
stormwater filter media for enhanced treatment efficiency. The broader impacts
to society include wider adoption of inexpensive, low-maintenance stormwater
treatment systems to improve water quality and protect the Nation's drinking
water sources. The investigator will engage college and middle school students
in the teaching-learning continuum to increase scientific literacy. An added
benefit is the enhancement of the 'pipeline' of students from diverse
backgrounds into the field of water supply science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this CAREER project is to
provide fundamental insights into the coupled biological and abiotic processes
in stormwater green infrastructure systems to sustain contaminant removal.
Specific objectives of the research plan are to: 1) discover novel approaches to
bioaugment stormwater infiltration media; 2) determine uptake and transformation
of stormwater contaminants in plants; and 3) characterize coupled biological-
abiotic redox transformations. Advanced high-resolution mass spectrometry
coupled with semi-targeted metabolomics will be used to elucidate novel
contaminant transformation products and pathways. New biological enrichment
approaches will be applied to create stormwater filtration media with redox-
active sorptive surfaces. Electron shuttling for stormwater contaminant
transformation will be characterized using x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and
electrochemistry. The research plan will be fully integrated into a formally-
assessed education plan to engage the public on water quality and inspire and
train the next generation of scientists and engineers. Educational objectives
will: 1) create 8th grade water science and engineering content modules to meet
teacher needs for next generation science standards by engaging university
students; 2) host STEM education teachers for hands-on research experiences; 3)
engage members of the public on stormwater quality topics at STEM festivals; and
4) disseminate research to current practitioners and decision makers. The
integrated research and education plan will help move society toward low-energy
water quality solutions in the face of increasing impacts from non-point
pollutants and shift stormwater from a waste to a
resource.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.