* 1844435
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying rates of biome shifts under climate change in arctic and boreal ecosystems
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Melissa Lucash, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 12/31/2020
* USD 570,799.00

Boreal, or taiga, forests store approximately 30-50% of carbon worldwide and are
facing multiple types of disturbance. As temperatures continue to rise rapidly
at high latitudes, increases in wildfire, insect outbreaks, and thawing frozen
soil, or permafrost, release more carbon into the atmosphere. In addition, the
pressure to harvest timber from this region is growing. Perhaps the biggest
unknown in predicting the future of these systems is how climate change will
affect conversions from tundra to forest and forest to grasslands, and in turn,
how these changes will feed back to the climate system. This project will use a
multi-scale modeling approach to reduce uncertainty in our understanding of how
disturbance and climate change will affect boreal terrestrial ecosystems in
Siberia. It will enhance international research collaboration through data
sharing, conferences, seminars, and workshops in the United States, Austria, and
Russia. The investigators will support education of middle school students
through a collaboration with the Alaska Summer Research Academy, a field-based
science camp in Alaska, and train postdoctoral scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, global models play a key role in our current
understanding of how vegetation may shift due to climate change. However,
vegetation is simulated as functional types rather than species, and not all
important disturbances are included. In contrast, forest landscape models are
able to simulate succession at the species-level and include disturbances like
insects and wind. Unlike global models, however, landscape models do not
simulate feedbacks between vegetation and the atmosphere, which is critical in
arctic and boreal regions where even small shifts in vegetation type may have
global repercussions for climate change. The objective of this study is to
determine how climate change and disturbance will affect boreal ecosystems and
to compare these estimates between global and landscape models. The research
focuses on four areas at risk of conversion (e.g, tundra to boreal forest,
grassland) across a large latitudinal gradient (53-73 degrees N) in Siberian
Russia, an understudied region of the world. Capitalizing on a rich empirical
dataset, the investigators will compare results from landscape and global scale
models predicting future species composition and carbon dynamics. This
comparison will: 1) quantify potential shifts in vegetation under climate change
and 2) estimate the relative magnitude and direction of the influence of
vegetation on climate (and vice-versa) in northern
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.