* 1844789
* I-Corps: Replenishing the Skin Microbiome
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Olga Petrova, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is based on its
focus on promoting balanced human microflora. The project aims at commercial
development of a novel prebiotic and probiotic skincare line to improve skin
appearance and overall health. Considering the increasing recognition of the
importance of microflora in human health and the growing demand for natural
products, the focus is on developing prebiotic and probiotic skincare product
lines to fit within the $10-billion+ organic beauty market. However, the
approach has broader implications for the general skincare and healthcare
markets. Currently, most treatments for skin conditions such as eczema and
psoriasis ignore the bacterial component, instead utilizing harsh chemical and
invasive solutions. If successful, efforts will ultimately shift toward more
intrinsic and natural solutions that aid the body in healing itself, without
contributing to further disruption of skin integrity. As the skin and its
associated bacteria contribute to defending the body against environmental
contaminants and foreign invaders, the approach also paves the way for novel
prebiotic and probiotic products for promoting robust immune function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project focuses on the use of skin-associated
microorganisms to improve overall appearance and health. Beneficial bacteria
exist on the human body, helping it function properly and protecting it from
various diseases. The skin is the largest organ of the immune system and the
first line of defense against toxins and pathogens; the presence of beneficial
skin bacteria is essential not only for appearance, but also for overall human
health. The bacteria exist on the skin as cooperating, surface-attached
communities. A balance of specific bacterial species, as well as proper
attachment to the skin, is essential for the protective beneficial functions of
these communities. Disruption of the microflora balance and/or of bacterial
attachment to the skin can result in a variety of disorders. To promote skin
health, the investigators have identified specific beneficial skin bacteria, as
well as factors that promote the establishment of the functional bacterial
communities--in particular, naturally produced factors that promote the
attachment of bacteria to biotic surfaces, such as the skin. Based on those
results, they have developed a system to balance the skin microbiome that
utilizes proprietary probiotic formulations containing live skin-associated
bacteria and prebiotic factors, which promote the interactions of these bacteria
with the skin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.