* 1844767
* CAREER: Revolutionizing sulfur removal in transportation fuels via adsorption in ion exchanged zeolites
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Ioulia Valla, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Mandatory government- and industry-issued standards require the reduction of
sulfur in transportation fuels (e.g., gasoline, diesel, and jet fuels) to near-
zero levels. Hydrodesulfurization (HDS) is the widely-accepted commercial
refinery technology used for the removal of sulfur in fuels. Although HDS is
effective for this purpose, it is also energy intensive, particularly as
refineries attempt to meet tighter regulatory standards of sulfur. This project
will establish a new technological platform and associated fundamental science
enabling the development of environment-friendly "filters" for the efficient and
cost-effective adsorptive desulfurization (ADS) of liquid hydrocarbon fuels at
ambient conditions. Such "filters" will be portable, compact, and regenerable
and may eventually be integrated into vehicle engines or gas stations.
Successful design of these desulfurization "filters" will transform the fuel
processing industry by reducing combustion-based sulfur emissions, the energy
requirements, and the cost of fuel desulfurization. Achieving sulfur-free fuels
has widespread human health and environmental implications; thus, the results of
this research also have the potential to benefit national health and prosperity.
The proposed ADS process will be based on porous minerals, called ion-exchanged
zeolites. It is expected that the ADS process will be combined with existing HDS
processes to specifically target the sulfur-containing molecules that are
particularly difficult to degrade. Through this approach, ultra-low sulfur
levels in fuels can be reached. This project will focus on developing an
integrated experimental and modeling methodology to investigate correlation of
the intrinsic properties of the ion-exchanged zeolites and their performance as
a sulfur molecule "filter." Research and education are integrated in the project
through the development of an innovative class that will train the students to
become community-engaged scholars and even policy makers through a service
learning pedagogy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term career goal is to
create novel materials and processes for clean fuels production. Toward this
goal, the overarching research objective for this project is to advance the
fundamental science of ion-exchanged zeolites for use in the ADS process.
Zeolites are excellent molecular sieves due to their active sites, high surface
area, and porous structure. However, to transform zeolites into effective sulfur
sorbents, the following research challenges need to be addressed: (1) diffusion
- zeolite pores need to be large enough to accommodate the sterically hindered
sulfur molecules; (2) capacity and selectivity - zeolite active sites need to
have high capacity and adsorb sulfur molecules selectively (leaving the rest of
the aromatic molecules in the hydrocarbons intact); and (3) feasibility and
lifetime - the process should be spontaneous, and the zeolites regenerative and
reusable. To address these challenges, a dynamic-learning methodology will be
developed that integrates materials tailoring and characterization, ADS testing
using sulfur model compounds in model fuels, and data science. This methodology
will be an iterative process between experiments and modeling and will create
fundamental knowledge on how the properties of metal and bimetal-exchanged Y
zeolites, such as pore size, metals properties, location, oxidation state and
interaction, affect the ADS process. The outcome of the study will be
fundamental knowledge leading to the prediction and design of optimum zeolites
for ADS. The optimum zeolite will then be tested using real fuels, namely
gasoline, jet fuel, and diesel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.