* 1844987
* CAREER: Complex Phase Behavior in Block Copolymer Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Christopher Bates, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 599,799.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The properties of all materials
depend on their structure across various length scales, from the microscopic
arrangement of atoms to macroscopic shapes fashioned during processing.
Nanometer-sized structures that spontaneously form ("self-assemble") in a class
of materials known as "block copolymers" are widely used to create synthetic
rubbers, adhesives, and next-generation computer chips among other applications.
To date, there remains an incomplete understanding of what nanostructures are
accessible with block copolymers, which limits new ways that they might be used.
This program will uncover the fundamental molecular design rules that control
structure formation in block copolymers through a combination of experiments and
theory. The approach leverages synthesis to systematically manipulate polymer
chemistry using concepts that are predicted to stabilize unique structures.
X-ray measurements will provide insight into how self-assembly depends on
composition and processing. Simulations will rationalize why certain structures
are stable over others and inform refined molecular design. Fundamental
knowledge uncovered in this research will promote the progress of science by
elucidating the types of structure/property relationships that are central to
the utility of soft materials. The outreach portion of this proposal involves
broadening interest in polymer science, particularly among underrepresented
demographics, via a plan targeting grade school, undergraduate, and graduate
students. A series of hands-on structure/property workshops will provide 7-12th
grade students with an introduction to polymer science using basic concepts from
chemistry and physics. The impact of these demos will be amplified through
teacher training that provides a mechanism for continual improvement and use.
Curriculum development will further benefit undergraduate and graduate students
who are interested in advanced topics aligned with the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The utility of block copolymers derives from their
ability to self-assemble into well-ordered mesostructures, but the traditional
phase behavior of materials with two types of block chemistries is limited to a
handful of classical morphologies. Recently, a number of complex sphere packings
known as Frank-Kasper phases have been discovered in simple AB diblock copolymer
melts. However, to date there remains an incomplete understanding of what
structures are accessible, why they develop, and how to bias their formation.
This program will unravel the material design principles that govern the self-
assembly of block copolymers into non-classical phases using a combination of
synthesis, physical characterization, and theory. The central hypothesis
underpinning this research posits that three factors known to promote
interfacial curvature will influence complex phase behavior: (1) extreme
conformational asymmetry in the form of statistical segment length differences
between blocks, (2) the miktoarm star architecture, and (3) molecular
dispersity. These topics will be investigated with a unified materials platform
comprising poly(lactide) and poly(alkyl (meth)acrylate) blocks that enables
systematic control over all three objectives. Small-angle X-ray scattering will
be used to interrogate the structure of these materials in reciprocal space,
augmented by density reconstructions and electron microscopy to probe real
space. Rheological measurements will provide insight into order-disorder and
order-order transitions. Self-consistent field theoretic simulations will be
leveraged to rationalize these observations and guide iterative molecular
design. The planned research will advance knowledge by revealing fundamental
factors that control self-assembly and mesoscopic packing in soft
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.