* 1844273
* Upstate New York Topology Seminar
* MPS,DMS
* 11/15/2018,10/31/2020
* Brenda Johnson, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 10/31/2020
* USD 5,980.00

This National Science Foundation award provides support for the first Upstate
New York Topology Seminar (UNYTS) that will take place at the University at
Albany, State University of New York, on Saturday and Sunday, November 10-11,
2018. The state of New York is home to one of the largest collections of
colleges and universities in the country, and many of these institutions in
upstate New York are just far enough apart to make regular and sustained
interactions between departments with active topology programs difficult. In
recent years, a number of promising early-career topologists have started
tenure-track positions in these departments. This, coupled with the phenomenal
recent growth in applications of topology, creates the potential for bringing
many new researchers into topological fields and producing significant ground-
breaking work. With this award, the principle investigators seek to foster the
development of newcomers to topology and increase the level of interaction among
all researchers in topology in upstate New York by creating an annual series of
weekend conferences. These conferences will highlight work done by New York
topologists, and will also provide New York topologists with the opportunity to
interact with each other and with established and emerging leaders in the field.

The conference will feature eight 45-minute plenary lectures accessible to an
audience of algebraic, applied, and geometric topologists. The speakers are
chosen so that participants will have the opportunity to learn about recent work
in a wide range of fields within topology. Question and answer sessions
following the talks will enable participants to engage in productive
conversations with both the speakers and other attendees. Ample breaks along
with conference breakfasts and a dinner will catalyze interactions between
speakers and participants and encourage informal exchanges of ideas. The
conference website may be found at https://www.albany.edu/~mv312143/unyts/.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.