* 1844707
* Collaborative Research:  BTT EAGER:  A wearable plant sensor for real-time monitoring of sap flow and stem diameter to accelerate breeding for water use efficiency
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* James Schnable, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 04/30/2024
* USD 99,299.00

Breeding plants for increased drought resistance without sacrificing yield is a
major goal of breeding efforts around the world. However, drought resistance and
yield tend to be inversely correlated. The rate that water flows through the
stalk of plants on its way to the leaves is a critical variable in explaining
differences in drought tolerance between different varieties of plants. However,
current technologies for measuring the rate of this flow are bulky and can
damage the plant when they remain applied for long time periods; thus they are
not able to monitor plants throughout a growing season. In addition, the data
collected from current sensors requires measurements of stem size in order to
accurately measure flow rates. If stems grow over the course of the experiment,
these measurements can introduce error is. This project develops a wearable
plant sensor that enables accurate long-term quantification of flow rates across
many environments and genotypes. Large numbers of low-cost sensors can be
deployed in breeding programs enabling direct evaluation of lines. From these
lines specific genetic loci controlling variation in sap flow rates under
different environmental conditions can be identified. Likewise data from these
sensors can be used in genomic prediction models that prioritize new breeding
lines prior to the investment of resources field trials. This research will
enhance workforce development by providing research opportunities to next-
generation researchers at the intersection of engineering and plant science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project will integrate advances in
sensors, microsystems, nanomaterials, and plant sciences to realize a novel sap
flow measurement method that ultimately advances functional genomics research
and the breeding of drought tolerant crops. The objective is to develop a
wearable plant sensor for long-term, accurate, and affordable monitoring of sap
flow over an entire growing season. The sensor design allows efficient thermal
insulation of the microscale sap flow sensing unit from external environments,
thus eliminating the traditional need of additional bulky thermal insulation
setup and increasing the response to sap flow. Spatial averaging of multiple sap
flow measurements around the stem enhances measurement accuracy. By using
stretchability of the sensor materials and structures, physical constraints of
the sensor on plant growth is minimized for long-term monitoring. The proposed
wearable sensors can be manufactured at large scale and low cost, allowing it to
be incorporated into breeding programs tolerating drought tolerance. Lastly, the
sensors are characterized, calibrated and validated over time using gravimetric
measures of plant water use in the greenhouse. Initial pilot field measurements
are performed, where the sensors are applied to several maize hybrids grown
under irrigated and non-irrigated conditions as part of the Nebraska
contribution to Genomes to Fields (an existing public-private
partnership).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.