* 1844670
* CAREER: 3D Magnetic Structuring and Hierarchical Integration of Multi-functional Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Namiko Yamamoto, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2024
* USD 548,413.00

Carbon nanotubes are lighter, stronger, and conduct more electricity/heat than
other engineering materials for the same weight. Carbon nanotubes and composites
utilizing them can improve the performance of aircraft/spacecraft, cars, and
buildings. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports
research which advances knowledge about manufacturing of these promising nano-
engineered materials, promoting the progress of science and advancing the
national prosperity. To achieve the highest performance, these carbon nanotubes
must be incorporated and ordered within the polymer matrix based on its final
macroscopic structure. A novel and scalable magnetic method is used to mix and
order the nanotubes within materials. This controlled nanotube structuring is
the key to fully harness their potential to potentially replace much heavier
structural metals, resulting in energy-efficient, low-maintenance, and safer
transport vehicles. This magnetic manufacturing technology could be applied to
engineer materials for power and biomedical applications, such as battery
electrodes, artificial muscles, etc., that are of national interest. Educational
activities to promote diverse participation in STEM careers and to close the gap
between engineering education and real-world demands are integrated into the
research plans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of lightweight carbon
nanotubes into aerospace or other structural -reinforced plastic composites are
investigated for multifunctional property enhancement. Organized carbon nanotube
networks are expected to improve interlaminar strength, to replace heavier metal
shielding against electromagnetic interference protection, and to function as
sensing/actuation layers. However, composite property improvement with carbon
nanotubes is currently limited because (1) multi-scale structure-interphase-
property relationships are not well understood, and (2) scalable and tailorable
integration of nano-sized carbon nanotubes into macro-sized composites needs to
be developed. This grant addresses these two challenges. First, tailorable 3D
structuring of nanotubes in polymer matrices using low-frequency magnetic fields
will be studied to enable control over carbon nanotube spacing and the
interphase conditions. Second, the effects of carbon nanotube implementation,
such as 3D structures and nanotube-polymer interphases, on multifunctional
properties of fiber-reinforced plastic composites will be experimentally
evaluated and modeled using analytical and Monte Carlo simulation approaches.
The knowledge of magnetic assembly and of scaling effects, together with a
scalable manufacturing technology, will accelerate design and fabrication of
hierarchically structured nanofiller-implemented composites with advanced
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.