* 1844693
* CAREER:  The evolution of centromere organization in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Amanda Larracuente, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,266,623.00

This project investigates centromere function and evolution in fruit flies
(Drosophila). Centromeres are essential chromosome regions that ensure proper
chromosome segregation during cell divisions. Variation in centromeres impacts
genome evolution, speciation, and human disease. Little is known about the role
of specific DNA sequences in centromere function and evolution. Drosophila
species are excellent model organisms to study fundamental aspects of centromere
biology because of their compact genome sizes. The project will investigate
centromere variation within and between species to gain insights into the
function and evolution of centromeric DNA sequences. The project will also
generate interdisciplinary research opportunities for undergraduate, graduate,
and postdoctoral trainees, with a focus on increasing participation from
underrepresented groups in STEM. The educational goals are to: 1) integrate
research and data from the project into the PI's "Applied Genomics" course; 2)
recruit diverse undergraduates for research on the project; and 3) increase
participation from groups underrepresented in STEM through summer
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Centromeres vary in size and complexity across
organisms. Retrotransposons are conserved features of centromeres in plants,
mammals, yeast, and insects, but their roles in centromere function and
evolution are unknown. The project will investigate centromere dynamics in
Drosophila to understand how retrotransposons shape molecular and evolutionary
aspects of centromere organization. The research goals are to combine genomic,
molecular, and genetic approaches to: 1) determine centromere organization in
closely related species of Drosophila melanogaster and the simulans clade; and
2) study the pattern, age, frequency, and activity of retrotransposon insertions
to test the hypothesis that these elements are under selection for centromere
function. This work is important for broadly understanding the functional
implications of structural variation at centromeres and the role of
retrotransposons in genome evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.