* 1844932
* CAREER: Bubble fragmentation in turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Luc Deike, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 512,647.00

Bubble break up in turbulent flows is important in many environmental and
industrial situations. These include oil spill mitigation, air entrained in bow
waves in ships and submarines, and ocean-atmosphere interactions associated with
breaking waves. The bubble interface may deform and break violently under the
action of turbulent flows, and the newly formed interfaces dramatically increase
transfer of heat and mass between the gas and liquid phases. This award
describes a series of state-of-the-art numerical and experimental studies of the
fragmentation of bubbles in turbulent flow. The goal is to produce a general
model that describes the roles of turbulent flow and the interface properties on
the rupture of bubbles. This will result in a major step forward and a valuable
tool in designing engineering solutions and ocean and climate modeling. The
award will also support educational activities for elementary school students,
undergraduates, and graduate students. Software developed through this work will
be open source and widely available to the public and other researchers
interested in modeling multiphase flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will develop an understanding of the multi-scale nature of bubble break-up
phenomena under realistic conditions in terms of turbulent flow and the physico-
chemical complexity of the interfaces. The break-up of bubbles far from the
critical break-up size exhibits dramatic behavior, with the formation of
multiple tiny satellite bubbles. The presence of surfactants at the bubble
interface, ubiquitous in nature and industry, lowers the interfacial tension and
affects the break-up processes. However, this latter aspect remains largely
unexplored. Systematic experiments and direct numerical simulations for various
turbulence configurations will probe these multi-scale regimes. The researchers
will also characterize experimentally the role of the physico-chemical
properties of the interface by working with controlled surfactant and salinity
conditions. In the absence of surfactant, researchers will determine how the
break-up dynamics and child bubble statistics are controlled by the ratio
between the bubble size and the turbulent Taylor microscale, which controls the
excitation range scale, and the ratio between the bubble size and the critical
Hinze scale, which controls the break-up mode and the local or non-local range
of child bubble size production. In the presence of surfactants, researchers
will characterize the filamentary structures that arise due to the extended
stability of interfaces, leading to the generation of much smaller bubble
fragments. From these extensive data sets, a mathematical framework that can be
implemented in multi-phase simulations of the Navier-Stokes equations will be
developed. This will allow the modeling of fragmentation in turbulent flow with
complex surface rheology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.