* 1844234
* CAREER:Foundation of Communication-Efficient Distributed Computation and Monitoring
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Qin Zhang, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 05/31/2024
* USD 499,698.00

Through the massive use of mobile devices, data clouds, and the rise of the
Internet of Things, large amounts of data have been generated, digitized, and
analyzed for the benefit of society. As data are often collected and maintained
at different sites, communication has become necessary for nearly every
computational task. Moreover, decision makers naturally want to maintain a
centralized view of all the data in a timely manner, which requires frequent
queries on the distributed data and, in the extreme, continuous monitoring of
the query output. The cost of communication has naturally become the bottleneck
for such applications. This project aims to develop communication-efficient
solutions for distributed computation and monitoring. The products will be
integrated into a trilogy of courses in the foundations of data science. The
project will involve training students at all levels, with an emphasis on gender
diversity and participation of underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets three fundamental aspects of
distributed computation: (1) the tradeoffs between the communication cost and
the number of rounds of the computation in distributed one-shot computation, (2)
the power of data partitioning, and (3) the connections between distributed one-
shot computation and continuous monitoring. The PI will approach these
directions via the study of fundamental algorithmic problems in databases, data
mining, networking, and machine learning. A systematic theory of communication-
efficient computation and monitoring has the potential to impact a wide range of
rapidly developing areas in theoretical foundations of big data, including
streaming algorithms, sketching algorithms, and parallel and distributed
computing. It will also deepen our understanding of communication complexity and
information theory in theoretical computer science and
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.