* 1844528
* A Faculty-Development Workshop for Junior Faculty in the Sciences and Engineering
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Blain Christen, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Nilsen
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,915.00

This proposal will fund a series of workshops to help computer science junior
faculty learn to become more effective educators and researchers. Junior faculty
often encounter difficulties in balancing their investment of time and energy
among teaching, research, fundraising, and service. As a result, initially
promising junior faculty may leave academia, exacerbating the national shortage
of faculty in computer science, or remain and perform sub-optimally in their
academic roles. These problems are particular pressing for members of
underrepresented groups in computing, who often lack role models and mentors who
can identify with their experiences and help guide them through the steps of
building a successful academic career. The workshops will use a fictionalized
case-study to spark discussion of effective strategies for dealing with specific
challenges such as so-called "imposter syndrome" and building a portfolio of
accomplishments to support winning tenure - that is, a permanent university
position. (At most universities, junior faculty who do not win tenure must leave
their positions.) The workshops will be valuable both for junior faculty and
more senior faculty who are involved in the process of making decisions on
tenure. Benefits of the workshops include better preparing junior faculty for
tenure, especially members of underrepresented groups; helping faculty serving
on tenure committees to make unbiased decisions; and increasing the diversity of
tenured faculty in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three faculty
development workshops, each at a major computer science conference, will be
supported by this proposal. The workshops provides junior faculty with a better
understanding of the potential challenges and pitfalls they may encounter in a
tenure track position, and strategies for effectively navigating the tenure
process. It also helps senior faculty to be more aware of challenges that
disproportionately impact members of groups underrepresented in computer
science. The workshops will begin with the reading of a short play about a
fictional tenure case. Previous presentations of the play at two previous
science conferences sparked excellent discussions and feedback, demonstrating
its effectiveness as a educational medium. The will be followed by a day-long
series of discussions and panels on topics such as publishing, power imbalance,
imposter syndrome, and dealing with hostile colleagues. After the conclusion of
the workshops, a guide will be prepared that will enable the workshop to be
easily replicated in whole or in part.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.