* 1844532
* Sora Typological Characteristics: Towards a Re-Evaluation of South Asian Human History
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Mark Donohue, Living Tongues Institute for Endangered Languages
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 09/30/2023
* USD 376,320.00

This project will provide a comprehensive study of the Sora language, spoken by
an indigenous 'tribal' people in India with a population of over 300,000,
located in several districts of southern Odisha State. This project focuses on
the features of Sora's sound system, grammar and vocabulary which stand out in
various significant ways, both from related languages and other languages of the
region. These analyses will inform (and be informed by) current debates in
language contact and language change in the South Asian and Southeast Asian
regions, as well as by current work in linguistic typology, and may necessitate
a reformulation of the prehistory of South Asia. Sora presents several
challenging features, including a possibly unique form of noun incorporation
that has been explicitly predicted to be impossible. Once these details of Sora
are better understood, and its changes over time have been analyzed, new
insights into the murky linguistic pre-history of South Asia will emerge. The
project also offers unique opportunities for indigenous scientists to play major
roles in the research as key team members, thus offering capacity building and
STEM field research opportunities to some of the most underserved and
underrepresented communities of scientists. It also helps promote the visibility
of indigenous peoples whose histories have been missing from mainstream accounts
of regional South Asian history. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will produce
A Grammar of Sora (with texts, a comparative lexicon and grammar of the various
Sora dialects) and create an exhaustive, annotated archival deposit of the Sora
dialect materials. These are to be collected through a combination of
spontaneous narrative recordings and targeted elicitation with speakers,
recorded in audio and video format. Topics to be explored include the
'expressive' lexicon, which is a highly developed system in Sora with many
attested complex reduplication patterns, as well as the systems of grammatical
agreement seen in different verb classes. We will also examine the typological
shifts that may have accompanied the Dravidian and Aryan migrations into South
Asia that marginalized the groups already there, such as the Proto-Munda
ancestors to the Sora, and the ancestral language to Kusunda to the periphery.
These typological shifts may have submerged or replaced what may have been more
widespread older features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.