* 1844447
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The acquisition of Mandarin by heritage speakers and second language learners
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Tania Ionin, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tyler Kendall
* 02/28/2022
* USD 18,976.00

In the US, Chinese is the third most-spoken language, after English and Spanish.
As China gains visibility on the world stage, the number of adult (post-puberty)
second language learners of Mandarin is growing, as is the number of Mandarin
heritage speakers, individuals who were exposed to Mandarin from their parents
since birth, but as adults are dominant in English. This project will examine
how second language learners and heritage speakers of Mandarin acquire four
different linguistic properties of Mandarin. The project will have potential
implications for language pedagogy, by identifying problem areas facing learners
of Mandarin and providing information about challenges that face heritage
speakers vs. traditional classroom learners. Given that Mandarin is a relatively
understudied language, this project will increase our understanding of this
language. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies on heritage Spanish have found
heritage speakers to have a selective advantage over second language learners on
phonology but not on morphosyntax. The goal of this study is to examine whether
such selective advantages hold for Mandarin, one of the hardest languages for
English speakers to acquire. This study investigates whether, when both Mandarin
proficiency and the dominant language (English) are held constant, early age of
acquisition confers an advantage to heritage speakers over second language
learners, and whether this depends on the linguistic domain (phonology, morpho-
semantics, syntax, and syntax-semantics interface). Three groups (native
speakers, heritage speakers and second language learners) will complete three
psycholinguistic tasks testing four Mandarin linguistic phenomena: tone sandhi,
aspect marking, relative clauses, and long-distance reflexives. These are chosen
because (i) they represent different subdomains in linguistics, (ii) they differ
regarding the age of acquisition in monolingual children, and (iii) English and
Mandarin differ on these phenomena, which is important for both pedagogical and
linguistic reasons. The results will contribute to the fields of Chinese
linguistics and language acquisition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.