* 1844332
* Incubator Meeting on Metamaterial Films for In-Space Propulsion by Radiation Pressure, at OSA Headquarters, Washington, DC, 7-9 October 2018
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Michael Duncan, Optical Society of America
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 02/28/2019
* USD 10,000.00

Advanced photonic materials called metamaterials provide new opportunities to
navigate space by means of radiation pressure. This Incubator meeting, to be
held at The Optical Society headquarters on 7-9 October 2018, will support
multiple coordination activities with academia and industry by bringing together
experts in the areas of diffractive metamaterials, radiation pressure, and
astronautics to advance the development of in-space sailcraft propulsion,
navigation, and control. The goal of the program is to showcase promising new
research and technology while building enthusiasm around and establishing a path
toward solar or laser-driven sailcraft using passive or active films based on
engineered transmissive or reflective metamaterials. By advancing the technology
for new ways to maneuver in space, this Incubator will have broad impact on the
economics of space utilization, affecting everything from communication and
remote sensing satellites to solar system and interstellar probes. These
advances will enhance partnerships between academia, industry, and NASA, improve
national security, and increase the economic competitiveness of the US.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Incubator meeting will bring together three different
communities in space, materials, and opto-mechanics to stimulate and foster new
applications for metamaterial films in light-driven space vehicles. As with many
intellectually active areas in science, where advances come from the
intersections between otherwise separate disciplines, the meeting will combine
the relevant experts in the three communities to advance the understanding of
how metamaterial films can be used to opto-mechanically steer sailcraft in outer
space. Intellectually, the impact will be to stimulate advanced thinking of
metamaterial film composition given the limitations of weight and thickness for
space applications and to stimulate innovative uses of such a capability by
spacecraft and satellite designers. The benefits will be to advance knowledge in
how to create relevant materials and metamaterials for space sailcraft
applications and to advance how spacecraft designers think about propulsion
mechanisms with new capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.