* 1844904
* CAREER: Biomimetic 2-in-1 Sensor for Probing Mechanical and Electrical Cellular Responses Simultaneously
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jun Yao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The cell is a basic functional element in biology, and as such the cellular
state is ultimately connected to every aspect in human health and bodily
function. The mechanical and electrical behaviors of a cell are two basic
properties that indicate cell state, and consequently are important for health
monitoring, disease diagnosis, and tissue repair. A comprehensive assessment of
cellular status requires the knowledge of both mechanical and electrical
properties at the same time, which remains challenging because the two
properties are usually measured by different sensors, while the degree of cell
perturbation increases with the number of sensors used. This project aims to
develop a type of nanoscale (i.e., very small) sensor which can simultaneously
measure both the mechanical and electrical properties in a cell. The convergence
of both measurements in one sensor will provide (1) an automatic solution to the
simultaneous measurement of both properties, and (2) a means of acquiring
information without introducing additional cell perturbation. This sensor
technology can lead to more precise biomedical devices for disease modeling,
drug screening, and health diagnostics. The interdisciplinary research will also
serve as a platform for outreach and broadening participation in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate multiple sensing
mechanisms in a nanostructured sensor to enable simultaneous mechanical- and
electrical-signal couplings and transductions at the cell-sensor interface. The
central approach is to borrow from structures in multifunctional biological
sensory organelles to engineer a nanoscale sensor, which is expected to yield
functional emulation for multi-parameter sensing. The concept of merging
multiple sensing functions in one device will broaden the capabilities of
general bio-interface engineering, yielding (1) a solution in synchronization
and scalability for multiparameter measurements and (2) a ?2-in-1? economical
integration approach important for minimizing invasiveness to biosystems.
Eventually the biomimetic ?one-for-more? sensor concept will lead to efficient,
parallel, and multi-thread cellular monitoring and communication. The developed
sensor technology will also provide a new tool for fundamental studies in cell
mechanics and electrophysiology. The research will also provide new insight on
biomimetic approaches to building efficient interface to
biosystems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.