* 1844828
* Documentation and comparative grammatical analysis of aspects of five Iranian languages
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Michael Hammond, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 11/30/2023
* USD 388,428.00

This project will be the first comparative study to describe the basic
properties of the sound systems, word formation processes and sentence
structures of five major Iranian languages: Baluchi and Sorani (Northwest),
Persian (Southwest), Ossetian (Northeast) and Pashto (Southeast). The
comparative aspect of this project enriches our knowledge of a major language
family. Data collection will be conducted via standard linguistic elicitation
with native speaker consultants. The research team will transcribe, catalogue
and enter the data into a database accessible to the public, and use the
collected data to create content for Wikipedia pages. The results of this
research will appear as journal articles and a book volume enumerating the
grammatical similarities and differences of these languages, and thus opening up
the opportunity for a broader description of them that will be useful to
communities outside of linguistics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical goals
of the investigation are to analyze some of the challenging grammatical
properties of these languages: (1) examination of various types of ellipsis; (2)
positioning of clitics, especially in those languages with split-ergative
constructions, providing an ideal laboratory for investigating the interaction
of syntax, morphology and phonology; (3) micro-parametric variation in passive
constructions; and (4) the headedness parameter. The Iranian language family
represents a cline of head-finality which bears on important theoretical
hypotheses about the role of linearization algorithms and movement in
determining word order. The theoretical aspect provides a crucial source of data
for the development of theories of human language, and adds yet another layer to
our linguistic knowledge. Finally, the micro-parametric comparison of these
languages will break new ground in the evaluation of the existing linguistic
theories regarding long-standing questions about parameters, whether they exist,
and if so, where in the architecture of the grammar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.