* 1844346
* RoL:EAGER:DESYN-C3 Programmable Porous Lipid Sponges as Synthetic Cell Factories
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Neal Devaraj, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, as part of the Rules of Life (RoL): Design and Engineering of
Synthetic Cells and Cell Components (DESYN-C3) initiative, is funding Dr. Neal
Devaraj from the University of California, San Diego, to investigate lipid
"sponges" as programmable compartments for application to the design of
synthetic cells. This work capitalizes on an exciting and unexpected finding
from the Devaraj lab, that biomimetic materials can be programmed to absorb
biomolecules out of solution and concentrate them in a sponge-like interior.
Synthetic cells have the promise to revolutionize biomanufacturing by overcoming
inherent limitations faced by living cells, for instance their inability to
withstand harsh conditions and toxins. Similar to organs in the human body,
living cells have evolved to have interior compartments known as organelles,
which have specific functions and assist in cell maintenance and function by
concentrating reactants or separating mutually incompatible reactions. However
it is unclear how much spatial organization and compartmentalization is
necessary for the construction of a synthetic cell. Lipid sponges can help
answer this question because they can be programmed to trap diverse classes of
biomolecules and reactions. This project is training graduate students in
supramolecular chemistry, biochemistry, soft matter, and molecular biology. The
work is also contributing to outreach activities that are introducing the
concept of synthetic cells to the broader San Diego educational community, with
the aim of stimulating the entry of low-income and underrepresented student
populations into STEM fields. The studies are providing unique insight into how
compartmentalization can assist the complex chemical reactions that govern life.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living cells possess an astoundingly high macromolecular
concentration. Confinement and crowding effects play critical roles in the
kinetics of gene expression, protein folding, and enzymatic reactions. It has
been extremely challenging to achieve reproducibly high concentrations of
macromolecules inside conventional synthetic cell models such as vesicles. A
lipidic mesophase system recently discovered in the Devaraj lab is being
developed into a synthetic cell compartment capable of mimicking the highly
crowded environment of a cell and achieving high rates and export of biological
products. Surfactants can form micron-sized sponge mesophase droplets in aqueous
media. These structures are termed lipid sponges to reflect their sponge-like
interior network and capacity to absorb and retain biological molecules. Thanks
to the high internal surface area and porous nanostructure, lipid sponges can
spontaneously encapsulate high quantities of dyes and small molecules. The
porous continuous structure of the lipid mesophase enables facile transport into
and out of the droplets surmounting one of the key issues that has plagued lipid
vesicle-based synthetic cell studies. The specific aims of this project are: (1)
engineering the physico-chemical properties of lipid sponge droplets by studying
the nanostructures that are formed from binary mixtures of surfactants, with the
goal of improving stability and uniformity, and (2) achieving programmable
compartmentalization of biochemical pathways within the droplets. Two key
biochemical pathways are being studied: carbon fixation, to demonstrate the
ability to supply increased levels of CO2 within a droplet and improve reaction
kinetics; and controlled protein synthesis and release, through encapsulation of
a DNA-programmable TX-TL (transcription-translation) system. The project has the
potential to significantly advance bottom-up synthetic cell design by achieving
a novel modular and programmable organelle for incorporation into artificial
cells, and is providing a valuable model system for the studying the effects of
colocalization and sequestration on biochemical
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.