* 1844719
* STEM+C Education Research Summit
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2020
* Joyce Malyn-Smith, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Arlene de Strulle
* 08/31/2020
* USD 438,647.00

The STEM+C Program focuses on research and development of interdisciplinary and
transdisciplinary approaches to the integration of computing within science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teaching and learning for
preK-12 students in both formal and informal settings. The Education Development
Center (EDC) will develop and facilitate a STEM+C Education Research Summit that
will support the STEM+C research community to collect, share, and analyze their
research findings; address NSF's Big Ideas in computational STEM fields; and
because of the powerful innovation and application of computing in the STEM
disciplines, the Summit will continue to catalyze the research field for
advancing real-world, interdisciplinary, and computational preparation of
students from the early grades through high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
STEM+C Research Summit design will be drawn from literature on best practices of
innovation networks and communities of practice (COPs) to foster the development
of a STEM+C innovation COP. The COP meeting design and facilitation will give
PIs an opportunity to expand on their work and explore the confluence of issues
and overlaps within the STEM+C community. To encourage a research culture that
is globally engaged, an international panel of STEM+C researchers will be
invited to present their research on advances in STEM+C in various countries.
The Summit will be a working meeting, during which STEM+C community members will
learn about advances made by community members, synthesize findings around
emerging research themes, and identify and/or recommend new directions for
STEM+C research. Working groups organized around emerging themes will represent
a nexus of intellectual work that provides opportunities for PIs to deepen
understandings and relationships in those areas. Outcomes of the Summit will
include, development of a unique, interdisciplinary community of practice;
collectively producing artifacts and products; increased understanding of the
findings of STEM+C research projects; advancement of STEM+C evaluation methods
to build expertise in designing research that will lead to viable outcomes as
the foundation for education innovation; develop professional peer connections
leading to future research collaborations; provide opportunities to engage in
syntheses research activities and ongoing articulation of program-wide findings
and lessons learned; and participation in a working group that will address
future strategies for STEM+C education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.