* 1844359
* SBP: Prototypes and Perceptions of Sexual Harassment
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Cheryl Kaiser, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 428,831.00

Sexual harassment is widespread. It has harmful effects on its targets,
including disengagement and withdrawal from work and school, decreased
performance, and increased anxiety, depression, and physical symptoms that
adversely affect health. The effects of sexual harassment extend beyond those
personally targeted by these incidents. For example, it can undermine
organizational outcomes, leading to a loss of human capital, reduced
organizational diversity, lowered productivity and profits, and fiscal damages.
To remedy the effects of sexual harassment and lessen these costs requires that
people are able to perceive and recognize sexual harassment when it occurs. Yet
research shows that sexual harassment is extremely under-reported both by its
targets and by others in society. This project explores one important potential
barrier that prevents individuals from perceiving sexual harassment. It focuses
on people's mental images of womanhood, and how those mental images influence
the perception of sexual harassment. The conceptual development of this project
compares narrow mental images of traditional womanhood (as White, straight,
traditionally feminine) with broader mental images of womanhood that include
those who are not White, not straight, or not traditionally feminine. By
uncovering ways to broaden the image of who experiences sexual harassment,
sexual harassment should be more readily identified. Because identifying sexual
harassment is fundamental to its resolution, understanding and addressing the
barriers to perceiving sexual harassment is essential to the realization of
civil rights as well as to reducing costs to individuals and society that exist
when sexual harassment goes undetected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses
laboratory and field methods to investigate the relationship between images
people possess about targets of sexual harassment and their images of womanhood.
The studies consider whether images of sexual harassment targets overlap with
images of traditional womanhood, and whether sexual harassment is more readily
perceived by observers and potential targets the more closely women fit with the
image of traditional womanhood. A final set of experiments explores whether
broadening the image of the types of women who experience sexual harassment
increases perceptions of sexual harassment targeting those who do not fit the
traditional womanhood image. Participants in the studies include college
students, non-student adults, and legal gatekeepers. Traditional womanhood is
operationalized along personality dimensions that vary within women and using
broader group identities (e.g., race, sexual orientation) that overlap to
varying degrees with the traditional image of womanhood. The research will
identify a potential barrier that prevents perceptions of sexual harassment, and
will suggest low-cost solutions that can remove this barrier. This project will
be helpful to scholars and practitioners who address civil rights law, as well
as to organizations seeking to address sexual harassment. Evidence concerning
best practices will be important in the development of more effective approaches
to sexual harassment, ultimately improving workforce diversity and mitigating
the deleterious effects of sexual harassment on its
targets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.