* 1844660
* EAGER: Soft-Actuated Bionic Regenerative Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Cato Laurencin, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 09/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project will develop a model system of a soft-robotic prosthetic designed
to treat joint disease. Through the use of models of osteoarthritis progression
and how mechanical loading impacts disease onset, progression, and regression,
combined with models of continuous, compliant and configurable prosthetics, the
research team will develop a soft-robotic prosthetic that is capable of
responding in real time, based on implanted sensors, to the changing pressures
of the joint while moving, such that the optimal dislocation will be achieved to
promote healing. The research brings together two radically different concepts
and approaches: (1) that the manipulation of mechanical forces can bring about
regeneration of the knee cartilage and be curative for osteoarthritis, and (2)
through the novel use of a robotic system, precise determination of forces and
precise manipulation of the knee joint environment can occur to provide evidence
of repair and regeneration of the knee joint. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
team will evaluate knee osteoarthritis as their testbed, but the program could
have far reaching capabilities for other musculoskeletal disorders like hip-
related osteoarthritis, gait-dependent back pain, and other disorders that would
benefit from dynamic input rather than static control. Development of an
engineered bioactive soft-robotic brace would be transformative to the field of
musculoskeletal regeneration, as it is unlike any previous attempt to treat
osteoarthritis. The approach is non-invasive, responds dynamically to the
physical loads imposed upon the joint, is informed by the actual extent of
disease progression of the joint, and is highly cost-effective. The project is
high-risk, but may create a new engineered paradigm for the treatment of one of
the world?s most prevalent diseases. The results of this project will be shared
amongst the greater research community through peer-reviewed publications,
conference proceedings, podium presentations, and poster presentations, and as
content of any invited chapters or reviews on topics germane to the work
described.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.