* 1844952
* CAREER: Advancing STTRAM Caches for Runtime Adaptable and Energy-Efficient Microarchitectures
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Tosiron Adegbija, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2024
* USD 532,000.00

On-chip caches are important due to their substantial impact on the energy
consumption and performance of a wide variety of computer systems, including
desktop computers, embedded systems, mobile devices, servers, etc. As an
alternative to traditional static random-access memory (SRAM) for implementing
caches, the spin-transfer torque RAM (STTRAM) is a type of non-volatile memory
that promises several advantages, such as high density, low leakage, high
endurance, and compatibility with complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor
(CMOS). However, STTRAM caches still face critical challenges that impede their
widespread adoption, such as high write latency and energy. In addition, users
of computer systems and the programs that run on the systems typically have
variable resource requirements, necessitating caches that can dynamically adapt
to runtime needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will investigate
several interrelated research problems, including: STTRAM's characteristics and
how they can be leveraged for improving the energy efficiency and performance of
computer systems that run diverse programs; techniques for improving the user's
experience while running the programs; new architectures and management
techniques for enabling STTRAM caches that are energy-efficient and can
dynamically adapt to running programs? individual needs; and novel methods to
address the challenges of implementing STTRAM caches in complex multicore
computer systems. Ultimately, the project will develop STTRAM cache
architectures that can automatically adapt to the execution needs of diverse
programs, resulting in more energy-efficient and faster computer
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's broader impacts include
architectures and methods that will improve the performance and energy
efficiency of a wide variety of computer systems for running a wide variety of
programs. With the growth of the Internet of Things (IoT), spanning diverse
computing and user needs, this project represents an important and necessary
step towards adaptable and low-overhead computer systems. This CAREER project
also seeks to foster education and diversity in science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) fields through K-12 seminars, and by engaging and
equipping a diverse group of young engineers with necessary techniques and
skills to design innovative solutions for energy-efficient and adaptable
Internet of Things architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.