* 1844045
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-cost ethylene CS-FET gas sensors for applications in the cold-chain logistics industry
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* HOSSAIN FAHAD, Serinus Labs, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 01/31/2020
* USD 224,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is in contributing towards the global effort in
minimizing food spoilage and combating world hunger. The worldwide cold-chain
freight and logistics industry deals with the storage and transportation of more
than 100 million metric tons of fresh produce annually. In this industry, there
is currently an urgent need to continuously monitor the air quality in shipping
containers where large volumes of perishable food items (fresh fruits and
vegetables) are stored. Poor environmental conditions in these containers such
as unregulated or high temperatures and low humidity can trigger early ripening
of fruits and vegetables, leading to the efflux of specific volatile organic
compounds; predominantly ethylene. Due to large volume of produce stored in
these containers, if gone unchecked, the environment inside can quickly
accumulate high levels of ethylene leading to accelerated ageing and
subsequently spoilage. As one can imagine, an appropriate gas sensing technology
to continuously monitor ethylene levels would allow adaptive climate control
inside the containers, thereby ensuring produce freshness on arrival and
preventing billions of dollars in loss and reducing food waste.

This SBIR phase I project proposes to develop a low-cost ethylene sensing
technology using bulk silicon transistor technology (also called CS-FET or
chemical sensitive field effect transistor), for mass-deployment in refrigerated
containers transporting fresh produce to different parts of the world. This
innovation will address an unmet need in the cold-chain logistics industry where
continuous monitoring of fruits and vegetables is required to ensure quality and
freshness on-arrival. Existing technologies are either too expensive or have
poor sensitivity for deployment in large-scale sensing operations. Specifically,
Phase I seeks to identify and engineer a sensitive nanoscale catalyst/sensing-
layer that will respond to ethylene. To develop the ethylene sensing layers,
this effort will pursue the screening of various nanomaterial systems such as
ultra-thin layers of noble and transition metals, their composites, sub-oxides,
as well as polymeric films using the silicon CS-FET as the backbone technology
platform. Additionally, the proposal will also seek to develop a scientific
understanding of the interaction mechanism between ethylene and the target
sensing layer at both standard ambient conditions as well as conditions
prevalent in reefer containers, i.e. low temperature and high humidity.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.