* 1844588
* BTT EAGER: Controlling meiotic recombination in crops by manipulating DNA methylation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Wojciech Pawlowski, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 02/28/2022
* USD 299,719.00

Meiotic recombination is a process in which two parental chromosomes, one from
the father and one from the mother, physically exchange parts to give rise to
the next generation during sexual reproduction. Recombination is a major force
behind species evolution and genetic variation, and is the basis of nearly all
plant and animal breeding. These crucial events are not evenly distributed along
chromosomes. In particular, in many plant species with large genomes, including
most crops, recombination tends to take place near chromosome ends. In contrast,
central portions of chromosomes largely lack recombination, causing a major
obstacle to crop breeding. The goal of this project is to better understand how
modifying DNA in the cell affects meiotic recombination in crops. Recent
advances in understanding recombination suggest that the distribution of
recombination events on chromosomes can be altered by reducing DNA methylation,
a special, naturally occurring type of modification of DNA molecules. This
project will elucidate how exactly DNA methylation affects recombination. It
will also examine whether DNA methylation can be artificially controlled during
reproduction to change recombination patterns, which will be very useful for
plant breeding. Gaining the ability to increase recombination in low-
recombination regions of chromosomes will allow breeders to create novel
combinations of genes that are located in these regions, and help them produce
superior crop varieties. This project is conducted in collaboration with Drs.
Chris Franklin and Eugenio Sanchez-Moran at the University of Birmingham, UK, as
part of the Breakthrough Technologies to Advance Crop Breeding and Functional
Genomics (BTT) initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recombination is initiated by
the formation of numerous programmed double-strand breaks in chromosomal DNA, a
small proportion of which are processed to form crossovers. Thus, the genetic
variation generated by a single round of meiotic recombination is limited.
Furthermore, the distribution of crossovers in plants with large genomes, which
include most crops, is highly biased towards chromosomes ends. Extensive
interstitial and centromere-proximal chromosome regions rarely recombine. Yet,
these large genome areas contain roughly one-fifth of the genes in maize and
even larger gene fractions in some other crops, which presents a serious
impediment to plant breeding. Recent studies indicate that DNA methylation is a
critical factor controlling which double-strand breaks become the sites of
crossovers, thus shaping crossover landscape. However, the exact relationship
between recombination and DNA methylation is not understood. This project seeks
to elucidate how DNA methylation affects recombination patterns at the
mechanistic level and lay foundations for methods to control crossover
landscapes in crops by altering DNA methylation. To elucidate the effect of DNA
methylation on meiotic recombination, a protocol to transiently alter DNA
methylation patterns in meiosis using DNA methylation inhibitors will be
developed. Chemically demethylated plants and selected mutants defective in DNA
methylation will be used to determine which steps and processes of meiosis are
altered by DNA methylation. The study will be conducted in maize and Brassica
rapa, to explore the behavior of both monocot and dicot
genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.