* 1844351
* RAPID: Exploring the Design and Implementation of Buyout Programs in Post-Disaster Settings
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2020
* Sherri Binder, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Walter Peacock
* 01/31/2020
* USD 19,975.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project examines how local government
agencies develop, design, and implement home buyout programs in the United
States. Home buyout programs are intended to permanently reduce vulnerability
from disasters by relocating residents away from areas that are prone to
repeated hurricanes, flooding, or other hazards. Buyouts are typically funded by
the federal government but implemented by state, county, or municipal agencies.
How these programs are designed, communicated to the public, and carried out
determines whether they achieve their purpose of mitigating against future
disasters. Currently, however, local government agencies frequently struggle to
implement buyouts because guidelines are unclear and there is an absence of
agreed, well-founded practices for this type of program. Even with this
limitation, buyouts are increasingly considered the best solution for improving
the future for communities that experience repeated disasters. This scientific
research contribution thus supports NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science and to advance our national welfare with benefits that will inform
planning to improve the resilience of United States communities, in particular
to flooding. This project is funded through the RAPID grant mechanism to examine
the home buyout program currently in process following the severe 2017 flooding
in Harris County, Texas, which includes the city of Houston.

This project examines at the micro level, the critical processes in the initial
phases of post-disaster home buyout programs, examining decisions and outcomes
in Harris County, Texas. This project uses semi-structured, qualitative
interviews with government stakeholders and affected residents, observational
data, and content analysis of internal and public program documents to address
two key theoretical questions identified in the literature. First, it will
further the understanding of the nature of buyout programs, as they are designed
as mitigation programs and perceived as such by government agencies, but
implemented in the time-compressed recovery period and viewed by residents as
vehicles of recovery. Secondly, it will contribute to the literature on post-
buyout land use and management by examining how implementing agencies plan to
reintegrate buyout properties into public ownership and use.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.