* 1844920
* CAREER: Designing Elastic Hydrogen-bonded Crosslinked Porous Organic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Chenfeng Ke, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2024
* USD 648,116.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Porous organic frameworks are carbon-based,
light-weight crystalline materials with defined nano-sized pores. Such materials
are promising for applications in molecular and energy storage, environmental
remediation, as well as separation of important chemical intermediates and
products. The key challenge associated with the development of porous organic
frameworks is the tradeoff between high crystallinity for selective molecular
adsorption and separation, and high chemical stability for long-term usage. With
joint support from the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), this CAREER project addresses this challenge and
develops a new family of highly ordered, chemically stable, and elastic porous
organic materials. Through a new synthesis approach elasticity becomes a feature
of porous organic frameworks, allowing them to dynamically expand their
structure by breaking hydrogen bonds, and recover to their original crystalline
form by reforming the temporary bonds. These elastic materials are expected to
achieve high adsorption capacity and selectivity over the existing porous
organic materials. Furthermore, incorporating active species into these
materials enables next-generation environmental and energy-related applications
to advance national prosperity. Through the integrated education and outreach
activities Prof. Ke and his research group make abstract scientific concepts
more accessible to students at all levels as well as the general public, and
show how material science can address global problems. Specifically, this is
done by (1) designing an interactive demonstration named "Traveling Through Nano
Space" to illustrate fundamental concepts related to porous materials, (2)
mentoring high-school and undergraduate students to develop an easy-to-replicate
3D printer and materials; and (3) developing an active-learning class to engage
students, especially those from underrepresented groups, in their STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With this CAREER
project, jointly supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the next-generation of elastic porous organic
materials are designed and synthesized. In particular, this class of materials
has high crystallinity, allowing for precise structure-property analysis and
endowing them with high chemical stability for applications such as chemical
storage, separation and potentially catalysis. A series of hydrogen-bonded
crosslinked organic framework (HCOF) materials are constructed through the
combination of hydrogen bond directed assembly and photo-crosslinking in single
crystals. The project provides an in-depth understanding of the structure-
property relationship of HCOF materials by focusing on three aspects: First, the
crystal structures of HCOFs and their molecular precursors can reveal atomic-
level structural information that are difficult to obtain in conventional porous
organic frameworks. Second, integration of flexible crosslinkers provides HCOFs
with unique elasticity, which enables them to dynamically adjust their 3D
architecture by breaking and reforming hydrogen bonds, thereby increasing the
guest binding capacity and selectivity based on different substrate-framework
interactions. Third, decreasing the degree of crosslinking in HCOFs provides a
range of partially crosslinked frameworks with greater elasticity and novel
nanoscale morphologies, which are not accessible using the synthetic strategies
of traditional porous organic frameworks. This approach also enables HCOFs to
incorporate catalytically active moieties that are not compatible with
traditional organic framework materials, supporting next-generation
environmental and energy-related applications. The research efforts enrich the
educational and outreach activities of this project, which aim to make abstract
scientific concepts more accessible to students at all levels as well as the
general public. This is achieved by (1) designing an interactive demonstration
named "Traveling Through Nano Space" to illustrate fundamental concepts related
to porous materials, (2) mentoring high-school and undergraduate students to
develop an easy-to-replicate 3D printer and materials; and (3) developing an
active-learning class to engage students, especially those from underrepresented
groups, in their STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.