* 1844267
* 7th Midwest Women in Mathematics Symposium
* MPS,DMS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Elif Kuz, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 01/31/2022
* USD 20,000.00

Midwest Women in Mathematics Symposium (WIMS) has been an annual event since
2013, hosted by different universities in the Midwest region each year. The host
of 2019 symposium is the University of Iowa. It is the first time that the
meeting is taking place in the West of the Mississippi River. The meeting brings
female graduate students and professional mathematicians of all ranks from
postdoctoral researchers to professors together to discuss current mathematical
research problems and learn how to search for academic and STEM-related jobs.
(The symposium is open to everyone regardless of gender.) In this modern age,
the development of mathematics is significantly fast and areas of research are
widely spread. Reality is that people in different fields hardly communicate and
collaborate. The Symposium is essential in bridging these gaps by building a
sense of community among women in mathematics starting with the Midwest and
promoting new research collaborations and mentoring
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this symposium, presenters and speakers are
chosen from four mathematical fields; (i) Algebra, (ii) Analysis and Partial
Differential Equations, (iii) Mathematical Biology, and (iv) Geometry and
Topology, that vary from pure math to applied math. One of the goals of the
Symposium is to encounter current hot subjects in these and related fields. The
Symposium features two one-hour plenary talks, twelve thirty-minute invited
lectures and eight graduate student presentations in four parallel sessions and
also a discussion on career issues. Especially the plenary talks are delivered
in colloquium style to make the information more accessible to general
audiences. In the parallel sessions, more detailed presentations of research
will be given. Presentations by graduate students (which is a new feature of
2019 symposium, replacing presenting posters only in previous meetings) is
expected to help them better in finding future collaborators and academic/non-
academic positions. More information about the Symposium including the list of
speakers and abstracts will be available at the symposium web page:
https://math.uiowa.edu/news-events/7th-midwest-women-mathematics-
symposium&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.