* 1844310
* RoL: EAGER: DESYN-C3: A Self-evolving independent ATP battery for Pseudocells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Dan Luo, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,987.00

Energy is essential for life. ATP is a biological energy molecule used by every
known living organism. It is produced inside cells. This project will fabricate
and evaluate the novel concept of an "ATP battery" that will continuously
produce ATP in a controlled and independent manner. Electronic batteries can
power a wide range of electronic devices. The ATP battery would energize a wide
variety of synthetic cell functions. The ATP battery would have energy
generating cells that convert chemicals fed to them into ATP continuously. The
ATP generated could then flow downstream to synthetic cells, powering the
production of vaccines, therapeutic drugs or other valuable products. This
project also has a detailed education and outreach plan. It focuses on expanding
the research experiences and horizons for high school and undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ATP is an ideal energy choice for a synthetic
cell. However, efficient production of ATP is currently limited to biological
mechanisms. The creation of a controllable means to connect ATP generation to
bioprocesses and supply it in a stand-alone manner, i.e. an ATP battery, would
support the development of synthetic cells. Therefore, the primary goal of this
project is to develop a device producing sufficient ATP in a continuous and
controllable manner to drive external synthetic cells. An additional goal is to
develop the battery in such a way that it can be evolved to meet the changing
requirements of different synthetic cells. The proposed approach is inspired by
electric batteries and cellular mitochondria. It builds on the research team's
expertise and previous work on DNA hydrogels and synthetic biology. Utilizing
cloned ATP synthase genes and combining 3D printing and microfluidics, the
research team will build a stand-alone ATP battery that can convert a proton
gradient to ATP continuously. The produced ATP will also be used to power the
evolution of the battery cells themselves. The self-evolvable nature will make
the proposed ATP batteries versatile, enabling applications beyond synthetic
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.