* 1844868
* I-Corps: A freezable fluid cell for high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Rebecca Menapace, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this I-Corps project are as
follows: Cryo-Electron Microscopy (Cryo-EM) is a method for obtaining 3D
structures of biological molecules. The method has growing importance in basic
life science research and in the pharmaceutical sector for defining how drugs
interact with their targets. Cryo-EM as a whole has matured into a powerful tool
in recent years, culminating in the 2017 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, but the
process of protein 'sample preparation' for 3D study has not advanced
appreciably and is widely considered to represent the major bottleneck in the
overall method. This bottleneck also presents a major commercial opportunity.
The present project advances new nanofluidic-based technology aimed at
addressing this bottleneck. Successful development of this technology will yield
a consumable product ready for commercialization. Fulfillment of this goal will
greatly advance and open new possibilities in cryo-EM structure determination.
The resulting acceleration and enhancement of basic science and drug discovery
would translate to broad societal benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project advances a new technology, supported by prototype data, to breach the
major bottleneck in the rapidly growing cryo-EM field, with broad impact in life
science and drug discovery. Cryo-EM is performed by taking images of frozen
proteins using an electron microscope, then processing the images with a
computer to obtain a 3D protein structure. To image and obtain a structure, the
protein sample must first be frozen into a thin layer (~50-200 nm). With
existing technology, this process is poorly controlled, lacks reproducibility
and substantially adds to the time required to get a structure. Our device is
designed to directly mitigate these sample preparation problems. It is a self-
contained, freezable fluid cell nanofabricated to specification, giving full
control over sample geometry and protein environment. Protein is passively
loaded into the fluid cell, the loaded device is frozen, and can then be imaged
directly. Materials on the top and bottom of the fluid cell are selected to
transmit the electron beam through the protein sample with minimal noise.
Successful prototype testing and data collection has shown the viability of the
core design, with future work focused on refining the design and materials and
streamlining manufacturing for eventual
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.