* 1844298
* NSF I-Corps - Broadening Participation Summit
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* John Blaho, CUNY City University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 350,000.00

This project focuses on women and minorities and approaches to increasing their
representation in innovation, entrepreneurship, commercialization, and the lean-
startup methodologies associated with NSF's Innovation Corps (I-Corps). The
project consists of a national Summit for Broadening Participation (BP) and
inclusiveness within the academic community that comprises the NSF National
Innovation Network (NIN). This BP Summit initiative is motivated by several
statistics: while Blacks comprise over 14% of the workforce in all private
industries in the United States, they account for only 7.4% of the high-tech
workforce, and people of color represent only 8% of US innovators. By contrast,
whites account for nearly 64% of the workforce in all private U.S. industries,
but over 68% of the high-tech workforce. Hispanic workers are also
underrepresented, comprising just under 14% of jobs in all private U.S.
industries, but less than 8% in high-tech industries, and women represent only
12% of US Innovators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The BP Summit for inclusiveness in
innovation and entrepreneurship has several key objectives: provide participants
with an understanding of how academic institutions and individuals can boot-
strap themselves into the mainstream sphere of commercialization, particularly
through the I-Corps programs; provide insights into the impacts that programs
like I-Corps have had on individuals and institutions; connect champions at MSIs
with existing I-Corps Nodes and Sites personnel; highlight winning strategies
employed by individuals and institutions and outcomes of successful innovations;
increase the participation of under-represented groups in I-Corps training at
the local, regional, and national levels, both at the team and instructor
levels; provide opportunities for networking and collaborations between
attendees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Summit brings together representatives of:
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Tribal Colleges and
Universities (TCUs), Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI), I-Corps Node and Site
personnel, researchers in the fields of inclusiveness and entrepreneurship, and,
leadership from organizations serving the target population who can help
innovation and entrepreneurship to their members such as the National Society of
Black Engineers (NSBE), the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers (SHPE),
the Society of Women Engineers (SWE), the Association of Students of African
Origin (ASAO), Women in Engineering ProActive Network (WEPAN), and the National
Action Council for Minorities in Engineering (NACME).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.