* 1844350
* The Social Networks of Ethnic Minority Group Speakers in Washington State
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,08/31/2023
* Alicia Wassink, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 317,756.00

This research investigates the linkages between social network composition,
ethnicity and linguistic structure. Spoken language use reflects many factors,
including cognitive constraints on production and perception of sound, speech
community membership, and cultural practices, among others. This study models
the interrelationships between these factors and participation in regional sound
changes or resistance to change, bilectal use of mainstream English together
with a heritage language variety used in the local speech community, or
monolectal use of an ethnic variety of English. The study site is Washington
state. Unlike many places in the United States where ethnic groups settled into
small communities with relatively insular social networks (resulting in the
famous ethnic enclaves of the East coast and Inland North), the Pacific
Northwest has long been characterized by regional and social mobility. The
notion of "community" itself is complex, but requires better understanding as
non-white, mobile individuals become a larger part of the US population. This
study also uses practice-based, rather than assignment-based methods for
determining ethnic group membership. General practice in the language sciences
in North America has been to sample primarily from majority-ethnicity groups in
a speech community. The assumption taken has been that non-white speakers do not
participate in regional sound changes, but are embedded in separate speech
communities defined by shared ethnic identity. While partly true, this
assumption has been shown to be a vast oversimplification. There is scholarship
showing that speakers' use of ethnolectal forms is not predicted by race as much
as by social network composition. But complex social models need to be better-
integrated into linguistic research. Race has been conflated with ethnicity, for
one thing. Race (physical appearance or genetic heritage), rather than ethnicity
(cultural heritage, practice, and perceived affiliation) has been used as an
initial tool for constructing research samples, leading to a priori
determinations about speech community membership. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project utilizes social network measures of localness of affective network,
homophily (similarity-based affiliation), network range, and referential
network. Linguistic data are drawn from vowel system recordings and measures of
the acoustic cues to phonetic production, focusing on sets of features known to
be associated with mainstream as well as local dialects. Spoken data provide the
stimuli for cross-dialect testing of listener sensitivity to fine-grained, time-
varying differences in sound. The result is a model of participation in
linguistic change relevant for mobile, non-white Pacific Northwest speakers,
contributing to sociolinguistic theorization of dialect evolution and
interethnic contact, as well as listeners' use of social information in the
perception of phonetic variation. The study involves collaboration between
researchers at the University of Washington, and Heritage University, located on
Yakama First Nation lands in Toppenish, Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.