* 1844944
* EAGER: Exploring Magnetic Communications for Challenging Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Krishna Kant, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 03/31/2023
* USD 110,000.00

Magnetic Induction (MI) refers to the phenomenon where a current passed through
a transmitter coil induces a current in a receiver coil that is separated by a
short distance from the transmitter coil and is tuned to the same resonance
frequency. MI can also be used to carry information by modulating the current.
Unlike radio frequency (RF) communication, MI-based communication can provide
several benefits such as low energy use, ability to work reliably in a variety
of difficult propagation media (e.g., fresh/sea water, non-ferromagnetic metals,
underground, etc.), and low leakage possibility because of fast decay of the
signal with distance. Furthermore, since the MI technology is useful for
efficient power transfer as well, it provides the possibility of passive tagging
as well. MI technology is currently not well explored, and there are no
commercial circuit boards that can be flexibly configured for experimentation.
The primary purpose of this project is to develop relatively inexpensive MI-
based transceiver boards and use them to explore the use of MI technology in
several emerging applications, particularly those in the emerging smart
infrastructure context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop circuit
boards for MI-based communications to support experimental research into this
technology. The boards will provide flexible control of the operational
frequency, coil size, and operating voltage. The project will experimentally
explore the range, power consumption, robustness of the MI communications
through a variety of media to enhance the understanding of the merits and
limitations of the technology. It will also explore the Multiple-Input,
Multiple-Output (MIMO) capabilities in this setup for increasing data rates, and
techniques to increase the range. By building several MI communications boards,
the project will explore their use in several applications including on-line
monitoring and tracking of fresh food supply chain, automated identification of
MI tagged items in the smart shopping context and online monitoring of soil in
the smart agriculture context. Each of these applications has a unique set of
characteristics and requirements and thus can provide a comprehensive
experimental evaluation of MI-based communications. The project will also enable
other researchers to use our design and boards to further explore the MI
technology for a variety of other smart infrastructure applications of societal
importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.