* 1844701
* BTT EAGER:  Plant genome editing and engineering via novel nanotechnology-based systems
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Xuehua Zhong, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2022
* USD 299,521.00

There is a national and global need to develop crop plants that yield greater
food, feed, fiber and bioenergy related products. At the same time there is a
need to develop crops with an increased tolerance to abiotic and biotic stress
and reduced impacts on the environment. Genetic engineering and genome editing
are important tools used for the study and improvement of crop plants. However,
current genetic engineering/editing systems do not work efficiently, or in some
cases at all in several crop species/varieties. The inability to genetically
engineer certain species of plants, hinders the progress that can be made with
related crops. This project is aimed at developing a new system to genetically
engineer/edit plants using ultra-small, biodegradable, synthetic particles
(nanoparticles). Development of such a system would enable more rapid
advancement in crop genomics research and production of crops with enhanced
traits and performance. In addition, the knowledge generated through this
research may be utilized in the enhancement of other genome editing
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome engineering/editing systems are
critical tools for the advancement of plant functional genomics and epigenomics
research, and for genomics-based crop improvement efforts. Major limitations in
current plant genome engineering/editing systems - such as genotype dependence,
low and variable efficiencies, and/or inability to accomplish integration-free,
germline editing have significantly impeded efficient, widespread utilization of
these technologies for crop genomics research and genetic improvement
applications. To overcome these limitations, and to increase the efficiency and
breadth of plant genome editing a nanoparticle-based systems for introducing
bioengineering molecular machinery into target cells capable of regenerating
germline edited plants is being developed. The specific aim of the research
project is: to demonstrate nanoparticle-mediated delivery of Cas9/sgRNA
ribonuleoprotein (RNP) complexes into target cells in a genotype-independent
manner, and successful editing of target DNA sequences in plant cells/tissues,
as well as regeneration of genome-edited plants. Novel, biodegradeable
nanoparticle-based systems (nanocapsule and polyplex) are used to deliver RNPs
into optimal plant cell/tissue targets to generate genome-edited plant cells and
tissues from which germline edited plants can be recovered. Microscopic, visual
and molecular assays will be conducted to determine genome editing success,
location, frequency and inheritance. What is learned here can be applied not
only to plant systems, but also in non-plant editing applications. Development
of an efficient, genotype-independent nanoparticle-based plant gene editing
system would have significant positive impact on genome engineering-based
functional genomics research and crop improvement
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.