* 1844585
* CAREER: A system of pleas: Using a role-playing simulation to test plea decision models
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Miko Wilford, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/29/2024
* USD 587,014.00

Every United States citizen is guaranteed a number of unique rights: the right
to a jury of our peers; the right to confront our accusers; the right to present
our own witnesses--ultimately, the right to a speedy and public trial. Those
fortunate enough to avoid the scrutiny of the justice system never need exercise
these rights. Those who do find themselves entangled in the criminal justice
system also rarely exercise these rights. Today's accused frequently forgo their
right to a trial, and all related rights, by entering a guilty plea. Guilty
pleas have been increasing over the last 40 years and now account for over 95%
of criminal convictions. The shift away from trials and toward pleas has
unquestionably increased judicial efficiency, allowing defendants faster case
resolutions. Consequently, it is not the increase in pleas, but the increase in
false guilty pleas--cases in which a defendant subsequently proven innocent
pleads guilty--that is particularly worrying. The National Registry of
Exonerations has reported that guilty pleas were a factor in approximately 15%
of wrongful conviction cases, but believes that many more false guilty pleas
have never, and will never be discovered. Juvenile defendants are especially
vulnerable to pleading guilty falsely. Given the transformation of our criminal
justice system to one of pleas, it is of critical importance that we increase
our understanding of what factors might lead one to plead guilty, especially
when factually innocent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current understanding of the
"deals" that lead so many to plead guilty is often tied to the shadow-of-the-
trial (SoT) model, which posits that plea outcomes rely solely on the
discrepancy in penalties from a plea deal versus a trial conviction, factoring
in the probability of conviction at trial. Yet, research has shown that both the
actual guilt status and age of the accused can significantly and systematically
impact plea outcomes. Thus, the research will be conducted with two broad
objectives: 1) testing the predictive validity of the SoT model against an
updated model, which incorporates an interactive effect of guilt status and age
on plea outcomes; and 2) expanding, testing, and disseminating novel plea-
simulation software designed for both research and educational purposes. The
research will employ a 2 (innocent or guilty) x 3 (conviction probability: 20%,
50%, or 80%) x 3 (plea penalty/offer: 6 months, 12 months, or 18 months)
between-participants design. We will recruit a sample of college students, an
adult sample, and a juvenile sample. The results of the proposed research could
have important policy implications regarding current plea procedures. If, for
instance, significant penalty discrepancies are shown to impact the innocent
more than the guilty, it would provide justification for reining in the
discounts prosecutors can offer during plea negotiations. Additionally, the
simulation software will include an educational extension designed to improve
comprehension of the plea process and its consequences among juveniles.
Ultimately, the research will contribute significantly to understanding of how
cases are now adjudicated in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.