* 1844572
* NSF I-Corps: Wide Working Range Test for the Diagnosis of Immune Mediated Disease in Animals
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Yuri Markushin, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be
accomplished through helping more than 85 million US pet owners and their pets,
as owning a companion animal is associated with improved well-being. The
provisional-patent-protected innovation, a single-test immunoassay for pet
disease diagnosis, is expected to lead to significant outcomes in the animal
healthcare commercial market, with an option of expanding to other
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on technology that combines
in a single test (such as a paper strip test) the high sensitivity, selectivity
and wide working range of the particle immunoassay for diagnosing pets' diseases
at various stages. The unique feature of our test is high sensitivity with the
incorporated protection against false-negative analytical bias caused by the
high dose effect, which is important for the diagnostic accuracy of late- and
early-stage disease. The selectivity of the test has been demonstrated to detect
about 0.01 Units per milliliter of ovarian cancer biomarker 125 in human blood
plasma, with near single-molecule assay selectivity. In the proof-of-concept
experiment, the proposed approach was modified based on the heterogeneous-media
encapsulation of gold nanoparticles modified with biotin and iron oxide
microparticles modified with streptavidin. This test offers significant
competitive advantages over existing technologies: it can be used for early- and
late-stages of disease; manufacturing and operational costs are low, based on a
cheap point-of-care application; and it offers the possibility of detecting
multiple modalities of disease in one test.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.