* 1845334
* CAREER:  Scaling-up effects of biodiversity on ecosystem productivity: from local communities to landscapes
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2025
* Forest Isbell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Kendra McLauchlan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 930,677.00

Many species of plants and animals are being driven extinct. This loss of
biodiversity is likely reducing the benefits that people obtain from ecosystems.
Some of these benefits are directly related to plants, including the production
of livestock forage in grasslands and wood in forests. There has been some
progress in understanding the consequences of biodiversity loss. But it remains
challenging to quantify how species loss affects ecosystems over large areas.
This study establishes new experiments to expand knowledge of plant productivity
and biodiversity. The key advance of this project is to study the mechanisms
linking productivity and biodiversity at different spatial scales. Data will be
made publicly available through the Cedar Creek Long Term Ecological Research
website. Results will be incorporated into Cedar Creek's K-12 education and
community engagement programs. These programs serve more than 10,500 K-12
students and visitors each year. The study will also help understand how the
diversity of teams can enhance learning and
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will test predictions about
ecosystem productivity. Productivity depends on local plant diversity and
species interactions at small spatial scales. However, at larger scales,
additional factors such as dispersal and species sorting are likely more
important. At these larger scales, it is important to develop new techniques to
measure biodiversity such as remote sensing using hyperspectral imagery and
LiDAR. This study will investigate the landscape-scale dependence of
productivity on biodiversity using three approaches. First, the impact of
dispersal on biodiversity and productivity in grassland plant communities will
be experimentally tested. Second, remote sensing techniques will be used to
quantify how biodiversity effects on productivity change from local to landscape
scales. Third, the role of dominant species will be experimentally tested across
several habitat types, including grassland, savanna, deciduous forest,
coniferous forest. The hypothesis will be tested that dominant plant species are
optimally sorted across heterogeneous landscapes. This would create positive
effects of landscape diversity on productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.