* 1845531
* CAREER: Bayesian Model of Chemisorption for Adsorbate-Specific Tuning of Electrocatalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Hongliang Xin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2024
* USD 658,003.00

Ammonia (NH3) is best known as a starting material for fertilizers, but its
reaction with oxygen (called oxidation) is required in applications such as
ammonia sensing, wastewater treatment, and direct ammonia fuel cells - all of
which are carried out electrochemically, and usually assisted by a catalyst
material called an electrocatalyst. Even with state-of-the-art platinum-based
electrocatalysts, the oxidation reaction is inefficient and requires excess
electrical energy. The project will investigate, through theoretical and
computational means, the possibility of improving both the energy efficiency and
the rate of electrochemical ammonia oxidation by combining platinum with other
metals in nano-scale particles known as nano-alloys. The predicted nano-alloy
compositions will help guide the design of more efficient electrocatalysts, not
only for ammonia-related applications, but also for a broad range of energy and
environmental technologies. The project also integrates research with
educational and outreach initiatives designed to excite high-school students
about STEM opportunities and train undergraduate and graduate students in the
application of computer models for energy security and environmental
stewardship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrocatalytic reactions at the core of
artificial photosynthesis involve multiple proton-coupled electron transfer
steps. Arguably, for a given type of catalysts, e.g., d-block metals, the
scaling relations among adsorption energies of atoms and their hydrogenated
species limit the efficiency of electrical/chemical energy conversion. To
overcome those obstacles for the ammonia oxidation reaction, the project will
utilize a Bayesian framework for advancing the orbital-level understanding of
adsorbate-surface interactions and catalytic processes at the metal-electrolyte
interfaces, paving the path toward adsorbate-specific tuning of
electrocatalysis. The free formation energies of key reaction species will be
selectively tuned via orbital-wise perturbation of chemical bonding, e.g., nano-
alloying, such that the activation barrier of the rate-limiting N-N bond
formation or N-H cleavage step is reduced without poisoning the surface with
adsorbed N adatoms. Catalysis theory, quantum chemistry, and machine learning
will be combined to unravel atomistic mechanisms of sluggish NH3 electro-
oxidation kinetics and develop the Bayesian model of chemisorption with machine-
learned Hamiltonians. Modulation of adsorbed species by engineering their
interactions with atomically-tailored metal sites guided by the Bayesian models
will further advance the theory of chemisorption and its applications in
catalysis, enabling design of catalytic systems with physically interpretable
insights rather than trial-and-error searches. The educational component of this
CAREER plan aims to further develop the informatics for photon harvesting at
nano-engineered structures, via a mobile device application, iPhanes, developed
by the investigator. This effort will energize student learning using materials
informatics on mobile devices, demonstrate a multidisciplinary perspective of
energy issues, and stimulate the students' collaborative learning via materials
design projects. This "experiment" will enhance recruitment and retention of
women, minorities, and persons with disabilities in STEM fields, and will
motivate the students towards lifelong learning and careers related to advanced
renewable energy and environmental technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.