* 1845900
* CAREER: Interactive Systems for Learning Programming at Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Philip Guo, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2024
* USD 527,860.00

Computer programming is an important skill for many modern professions in fields
ranging from technology to business to healthcare. Millions of people now want
to learn this skill to prepare for a growing variety of careers. Although some
well-resourced schools offer programming courses, the vast majority of people in
this country do not have access to high-quality classroom learning environments.
Thus, there is a critical need to bring the best aspects of these in-person
environments to freely-accessible online settings in order to provide more
people with educational opportunities. The goal of this project is to develop
ways to scale up computer programming education by enabling anyone to receive
free one-on-one tutoring along with computer-generated feedback as they learn
programming. Its outcomes will result in a more diverse and globally-competitive
American technological workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop, deploy, and evaluate two novel interactive systems that enable large
groups of people to help one another learn programming in online environments
where experts are often not available. Specifically, the research team will
develop two new systems atop their widely-used Python Tutor online education
platform: 1) Omnitutor, which organizes learners to tutor one another even while
they are individually working on their own code, 2) Rosetta, which enables
learners to annotate their code and errors with hints that may benefit future
learners who face similar issues. Deploying and evaluating these systems will
advance the state of scientific knowledge regarding: 1) how to coordinate a
group of learners to provide both synchronous and asynchronous help while they
are each working on their own code; 2) how to design interactive technologies
that achieve this goal via new algorithms such as code similarity analysis,
machine-assisted code simplification, and generalization of code annotations; 3)
how these designs enable novices to provide high-quality assistance to people
they do not personally know; and 4) common novice misconceptions about
programming languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.