* 1845603
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Adaptive Myelination
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jacob Hines, Winona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2024
* USD 966,307.00

Experiences alter brain cells, causing structural and functional changes that
are responsible for the ability to learn, think, detect, and respond to stimuli
with greater sensitivity and coordination. Discovering the precise nature and
mechanisms of these changes are necessary in order to understand how the brain
works. This study will carefully examine an under-explored aspect of this
problem: when, where, and how experiences cause changes to glial cells and to
the ways in which glial cells interact with neurons. The study will utilize
embryonic and larval zebrafish as a model organism. Zebrafish possess both
neurons and glia housed within a transparent body and skeleton, yet they share
common mechanisms of neural development with other vertebrates including humans,
and are cost-efficient to work with. The outcomes of this study are expected to
reveal how functional relationships between neurons and glia are remodeled by
experiences, and to discover new molecules and cellular pathways responsible for
these transformations. High school students, both future-first generation
college students and students from underrepresented groups in STEM professions,
will be actively involved as a means to encourage college applications to STEM
programs. High school classrooms and community members will learn about the
importance of model organisms through hands-on outreach activities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Myelination is traditionally viewed as an intrinsic developmental
program proceeding independently of external experiences. This paradigm is
shifting; a new model of adaptive myelination proposes that experiences
influence myelination, and adaptive changes in myelination alter circuit
activity and spike timing in a way that is necessary for normal learning and
cognition. An outstanding gap in knowledge is whether adaptive changes involve
shifts between specific circuits and axon subtypes targeted for myelination. The
purpose of this project is to identify the specific axon subtypes undergoing
adaptive shifts in myelination, to determine the oligodendrocyte cell behaviors
mediating these shifts, and to dissect molecular mechanisms of axon subtype-
specific recognition. Studies will utilize larval zebrafish and in vivo imaging
to directly observe changes to oligodendrocyte-axon interactions occurring in
response to manipulations of gene function and neural activity. Expected
outcomes will advance understanding of how oligodendrocytes and myelin
remodeling contribute to neural plasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.