* 1845230
* CAREER: Enabling nanodisc native mass spectrometry to study membrane active compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Michael Marty, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 04/30/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Cells within the human body are consistently under attack by invaders, which
include bacteria, viruses, and certain molecules in the environment. While it is
known that membrane-active compounds (MACs) defend human cells by interacting
with the invader's cell membranes, exactly how they do this is still unclear.
Dr. Michael Marty of the University of Arizona uses mass spectrometry to gain an
understanding of membrane-active compound behavior and thus, provides
fundamental insight into how the body's immune system functions. This project
uses new mass spectrometry tools to determine how MACs change the structure and
stability of cell membrane mimics. A set of integrated educational activities
provide professional training in mass spectrometry data analysis while engaging
military veterans in science education and research activities. The program
eases the transition of veterans from military service to higher education,
promotes persistence in STEM education (STEM), and broadens participation in
research. Tutorials are also created to enhance the educational infrastructure
and broaden the dissemination of data analysis
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Chemistry of Life
Processes Program, with co-funding from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging
Program, is funding Dr. Michael Marty at the University of Arizona to study
membrane-active compounds (MACs) that directly target lipid membranes. In the
past, these mechanisms of action were not well understood because it is
difficult to quantify MAC interactions within membranes. Dr. Marty is addressing
this challenge through the development of novel chemical measurement techniques
based on native mass spectrometry (MS) methods and lipoprotein nanodisc membrane
mimetics. By measuring the mass of the entire nanodisc assembly with embedded
MAC complexes, it is possible to characterize the oligomeric states of MACs in
different lipid environments. This CAREER project provides the foundation for
these experiments by uncovering the mechanisms of nanodisc stability under
native MS conditions, creating native MS-compatible nanodiscs that model natural
membranes, and developing algorithms for the analysis of complex MS data. The
research objectives are integrated with two educational objectives that involve
the engagement of undergraduate military veterans in STEM research and the
development of professional education tutorials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.