* 1845650
* CAREER: Holistic Assessment of the Impacts of Connected Buildings and People on Community Energy Planning and Management
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Bing Dong, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 391,738.00

Future smart communities will consist of connected buildings, distributed energy
resources, electric vehicles, battery energy storage systems, and peer-to-peer
energy trading at the individual building level. These features will require an
optimal and distributed coordination of a cluster of buildings, distributed
energy resources, and a smart grid, while considering human behavior and
mobility. The development and engagement of smart meters and social media have
opened a new paradigm for community energy planning and underscore the need for
a holistic engineering framework to model a new energy infrastructure of a
community. This project aims to bridge this gap between smart building
technologies, social interactions, energy trading and grid operation through an
integrated research and education program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project,
an approach will be developed that advances current state-of-the-art community
energy planning and management technology through use of large-scale
heterogeneous data sets, including smart meter, occupant behavior and social
media data, an urban scale energy and behavior co-simulation platform, and an
advanced integrated building, grid and distributed energy resources control
framework. The research aims to will bridge the gap between data science and
smart building technologies. To address the challenges involved, the following
research tasks will be pursued: (1) Develop a new mathematical framework to
learn community connections. Occupant behavior from heterogeneous data sets will
be learned, classifies and clustered. A new Markov modeling of occupant movement
and presence will be developed; (2) Develop an innovative co-simulation platform
to integrate a new occupant behavior model with community level energy modeling.
A new spatiotemporal occupant model linking presence and behavior will be
developed, and physical models of community urban energy infrastructure will be
integrated and coupled with a new behavior model; and (3) Develop a hierarchical
control framework to evaluate and quantify energy savings from individual
buildings to a whole community based on community connections and an integrated
co-simulation platform. A multilayer model with predictive control architecture
will be designed to address the time-discrepancy issuesof various energy
systems. This approach sets it sights on a systematic understanding of how a set
of diverse occupant behavior impacts operation decisions and energy efficiency
as a whole in a future smart city. If successful, the approach may transform
current sustainable community design and operation to actively involve macro-
level occupant behavior and human mobility modeling. The PI will work with
existing minority engineering programs, student organizations, and honors
programs at UTSA designed to recruit and graduate minority students, such as the
NSF Louis Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation (LSAMP), the Ronald McNair
Scholars programs, and the Society of Hispanic Professional Engineers. The
principal investigator will also maintain a website to make the research results
and online games available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.