* 1845463
* CAREER:  Illuminating Emergent Microbial Interactions via Modular Synthetic Consortia
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Daniel Ducat, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,033,970.00

Microbial communities contribute important functions towards human health and
biotechnology. Two examples are the many microbes associated with the human body
(e.g., gut microbiome) and species that contribute to soil fertility and plant
health. These natural microbial consortia that contain many different species,
are often composed of poorly-characterized microbes. They also have complicated
signaling networks of compounds and metabolites that are exchanged between
community members. The complexity of natural consortia makes them difficult to
study and can obscure identification of common principles that underlie many
different communities. Consequently, many fundamental questions remain about how
microbial consortia are organized to maintain productivity and resilience in the
face of dynamic environmental conditions. This project makes use of artificial
microbial communities that are relatively simple and composed of well-
characterized microbes. These features of the artificial communities are chosen
to facilitate an investigation that would lead to insight into underlying
principles that guide the structure and function of microbial communities. The
research activities increase knowledge of interaction dynamics in microbial
communities, potentially improving the ability to engineer microbial consortia.
The research also provides insight into the evolution of natural microbial
symbioses. Through this project two graduate students and one postdoctoral
fellow are trained. In addition, there are multiple undergraduate research
experience opportunities. The project also involves promoting the development of
public forums for the discussion of potential benefits and ethical concerns of
bioengineering. These forums are hosted in the Michigan Science Center in
Detroit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is using a cyanobacterium
(Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942) that produces and secretes large quantities
of sucrose from light and CO2. The PI has demonstrated that a variety of other
microbes can be cultivated in the same media in a "modular" fashion. In these
circumstances the co-cultured partner consumes the sucrose produced by the
cyanobacteria. The flexibility in the design of these artificial microbial
communities allows different heterotrophic bacteria to be cultivated with the
cyanobacterium. In this way, common themes and mechanisms of interaction between
the co-cultured species are identified. Approaches that include rational
engineering, forward genetics, directed evolution, metabolic modeling, and
individual-based simulations are used to identify the metabolites and signals
exchanged between species. These approaches are also used to determine how
metabolite exchanges contribute to consortia robustness. The knowledge gained is
used to rationally design microbial communities that are more robust in the face
of environmental pressures, such as invasion by "non-cooperating" microbial
species. It is anticipated that the research efforts from this proposal will
provide insights into fundamental interactions underpinning natural microbial
symbioses, with translational impacts for the development of environmentally-
sustainable cyanobacterial biotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.