* 1845886
* CAREER: Investigating knowledge for effective active-learning instruction in large undergraduate biology courses and how this knowledge develops
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Tessa Andrews, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,264,503.00

Active-learning instruction refers to teaching methods that engage students
during a significant amount of class time in work designed to help them learn.
When compared with traditional lecturing, studies have shown that active-
learning instruction can enhance students' science learning. Active learning is
also associated with increased retention of underrepresented minorities in
science courses. However, studies also show that the learning gains achieved in
active-learning classrooms vary substantially across different instructors. This
variation may result because instructors who teach college science courses are
highly-trained scientists but may not have formal training in teaching. How
effectively instructors teach is likely to be influenced by both their knowledge
of the course material and their knowledge about teaching and learning. Thus, we
need to better understand what knowledge about teaching and learning is
important for facilitating effective active-learning instruction in
undergraduate science courses. This need is especially important in challenging
situations, such as biology classes with large numbers of students. In addition,
understanding the knowledge about teaching and learning that instructors need to
be highly effective would enhance our ability to help instructors to fully
realize the potential of active learning for their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To advance understanding of instructor knowledge
that is essential for planning and facilitating active learning, this project
will elucidate instructor knowledge that is positively associated with students'
conceptual learning gains in large undergraduate biology courses. The studies
will include 100 instructors who use active learning in undergraduate biology
courses that have 50 or more students. The investigators will elicit instructor
knowledge using pre- and post-instruction interviews, including a stimulated
recall approach. They will analyze instructor knowledge exhibited in interviews
using qualitative content analysis grounded in theoretical frameworks of
instructor knowledge and student conceptual change, as well as prior empirical
work. Investigators will use hierarchical linear modeling to examine the
associations between instructor knowledge and student conceptual learning gains,
as well as the extent to which this relationship is mediated by instructional
practices. A second set of investigations will develop longitudinal case studies
to characterize how novice active-learning instructors develop knowledge for
teaching. These investigations will examine instructor knowledge and practices,
the relationship between them, and the factors that influence knowledge
development. By examining instructor knowledge, instructional practices, and
student learning among active-learning instructors, this research is expected to
identify: instructor knowledge that is associated with effective active-learning
instruction; novice instructors' knowledge that professional development can
build upon; and the challenges novices encounter as they develop more expertise
in active-learning instruction. The project's education plans will apply what is
learned through the research to design evidence-based tools that will support
current and future biology instructors in using active learning in their
classrooms. The project team will implement and assess the effectiveness of a
Video Club professional development program for biology graduate students at the
University of Georgia. In addition, they will create resources that will be
added to the curated, online video collection called the Repository for
Envisioning Active-Learning Instruction in Science Education to support
instructors in developing the knowledge needed to effectively use active
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that supports
early-career faculty who have the potential to serve as academic role models in
research and education. This CAREER project is supported by NSF's Education
&amp; Human Resources Directorate Core Research Program and its Improving
Undergraduate STEM Education Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.