* 1845749
* CAREER: A Network Motion Picture Primitive for Network Monitoring and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Vincent Liu, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 05/31/2024
* USD 468,961.00

The Internet is an essential utility for modern life, providing connectivity and
access to information any time, anywhere, and to many services that are
important for businesses and individuals. Thus, the reliability and availability
of the networks that underlie the Internet are critical, and it is important to
have a detailed and holistic understanding of their behavior. However, as
networks have become larger and more complex, visibility into fine-grained,
network-wide behavior that allows network operators to identify and repair
problems is increasingly difficult to come by. This project addresses that
challenge, with a primary goal of developing tools and techniques that enable
unprecedented visibility into the behavior of large and complex computer
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is the development of a
novel primitive that provides whole-network visibility: the Network Motion
Picture, a rapid sequence of network-wide snapshots, where each snapshot is a
consistent set of local observations of state that provide a view of the network
at approximately a single instant in time. In contrast to existing research that
focuses on either developing more advanced metrics for individual
components/paths or improving inference of network-wide conclusions from those
measurements, the proposed primitive makes two key contributions: (1) it treats
emergent and network-wide behavior as a first-class citizen, and (2) it develops
an abstraction for scalable collection of and adaptation to changes in network-
wide behavior. The planned research has three main technical components: i) the
development of a practical framework for collecting Network Motion Pictures; ii)
novel systems for diagnosing, managing, and repairing networked systems; iii)
novel protocols for improving the performance of large, complex networks. Use
cases will include data center, edge, and Internet of Things (IoT) networks. The
researcher plans evaluation using the NSF=funded Cloudlab
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.