* 1845200
* CAREER:Tunable Dissipation in Adaptive Granular Crystals using External Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Nikhil Karanjgaokar, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 07/31/2024
* USD 502,868.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will focus on an
integrated research and educational effort to derive fundamental knowledge about
the role of defects on wave motion in dry or immersed granular materials. The
program will also investigate the capability of ordered granular crystals to
adapt their structure via defect generation using external fields for better
protection against impact. The current strategy for design of granular crystals
and other metamaterials focuses on optimizing fixed structures for specific
applications such as shock absorption and impact protection. This program
presents a significant change in design philosophy to sense-adapt-recover
approach where granular crystals would adapt their internal structure using
external fields based on basic sensor data (velocity, direction of incoming
projectile) to achieve a specified objective (such as protection from incoming
projectile) and revert to their original state. This will help transform the
design of hazard protection gear (such as vests, helmets) for military, sport
and construction sectors, impact/shock protection systems for underground /
underwater infrastructure and excellent lightweight alternative for structural
damping in various civilian and defense applications. The program will also
identify (1) junior-level projects to study socio-technical applications of the
research efforts, and (2) senior-level capstone design projects to perform
complementary research activities. The program would promote diversity in STEM
disciplines by active recruitment of under-represented minorities and women
candidates in research as well as K-12 outreach activities involving the
classroom teaching modules and hands-on experience with simplified experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project would explore two novel strategies
for adaptive dissipation and impact mitigation via defect generation using
external fields: (1) dry granular crystals consisting of active polymer grains
and (2) granular crystals immersed in active rheological fluids
(magnetorheological fluids, shear-thickening fluids). The wave scattering and
attenuation effects around a point defect in a 1D granular chains or 2D granular
crystals are well established. Thus, the unique ability to introduce defect
patterns will allow for highly effective control of the magnitude and direction
of the stress wave propagation in granular crystals. The research efforts will
establish a comprehensive understanding of two fundamental issues; how wave
motion in dry or immersed granular crystals is affected by point or line defects
and how the interactions between multiple defects influences the wave motion.
The semi-empirical models describing the interaction between multiple defects in
granular crystals will make a significant contribution to the continuum modeling
of random particulate media utilized in various fields such as medicine,
construction, defense and geology. Since dry, cohesion-less contact is difficult
to realize at the micro/nanoscale, the research efforts on immersed granular
crystals and their actuation using active rheological fluids would have
significant implications on the miniaturization of granular
metamaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.