* 1845126
* CAREER:  Butterflies on the move: integrating biogeography, physiology and citizen science towards a mechanistic understanding of contemporary range shifts
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Sarah Diamond, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 724,998.00

Species are on the move, appearing in places they never used to be and
disappearing from areas where they once were common. Many species are shifting
in space towards the poles or up mountains but not all species do so. Some stay
put and others shrink their range, presumably unable to move somewhere better.
Ecologists are trying to understand these differences. This award harnesses the
power of long-term, citizen science monitoring of butterflies in the Midwestern
United States to explore whether traits unique to different butterfly species
explain each species' range shifts over the last several decades. Traits include
how well the species flies, the habitat and food it needs, and its physiology.
The research considers not only what the traits are now but how each can change
within and across generations. In other words, to what extent are the traits
fixed or flexible? If fixed, a species may be forced to move to new places when
conditions change. If flexible, the species may be more able to adapt to new
conditions and make do without moving. This project will test these ideas. The
project will provide research and educational/outreach opportunities to a
diverse array of early-career researchers and students including post-doctoral
researchers and graduate, undergraduate and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will advance fundamental research on
the determinants of species ranges and range shifts. A combination of empirical
assessments of butterfly traits, geographic range modeling, and trait-based
statistical approaches will be used to explore the linkages between range shifts
and species traits. Multi-temperature common garden experiments will allow the
assessment of phenotypic plasticity and evolutionary change in physiological
traits to be incorporated in the trait-based models. The project will directly
involve citizen scientists, K-12 students and teachers, and undergraduate and
graduate students in the research. New tools and resources focused on
quantifying the thermal environment of butterflies will be developed for citizen
scientists to engage with their study organisms in novel ways and expand the
range of data collected from the monitoring of butterflies. The results of the
project will be regularly disseminated to citizen scientists through local
meetings and public presentations. These events will build a conduit for direct
interface between citizen scientists and research scientists. Project personnel
will collaborate to develop hands-on, inquiry-based modules for primary school
(grades 2-5) teachers and students to interact with local butterflies, and to
understand how and why butterflies are moving. The modules will be focused
around the theme of bringing the scientific method into the classroom. These
activities will dovetail with Case Western Reserve University's Introduction to
Innovation program, a cross-disciplinary endeavor to develop STEM-focused
teaching modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.