* 1845048
* CAREER: Building on diverse students' funds of knowledge to promote scientific discourse and strengthen connections to science learning in urban classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Christine Bae, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,031,374.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) proposal submitted
to the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. Framed around existing
inequities in science education, particularly within underserved student
populations, the project will aim to investigate how to increase equitable and
active participation of diverse students' science learning in middle schools.
The central premise of this study will be that building upon and integrating
diverse students' funds of knowledge into their learning opportunities would
contribute to create equitable access to effective participation. Thus, the
study will promote "authentic scientific discourse" as a critical feature of
students' participation in science practices. In the context of this work,
scientific discourse will refer to the spoken and written words, and gestures of
students and teachers as they interact in science classrooms. This, in turn,
would promote students' science learning at higher levels defined in the Next
Generation Science Standards (NGSS Lead States, 2013). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve its goal of supporting authentic scientific discourse in diverse middle
school classrooms, the work will address three research questions. (1) What
funds of knowledge do students bring to bear, and how can these be productively
integrated to support participation in authentic scientific discourse? (2) What
are the ways in which students connect cognitively, motivationally, and socially
to science learning when participating in authentic scientific discourse within
urban classrooms? (3) What progress do students make in key aspects of
scientific discourse and their science learning? The study will be conducted
across approximately 15 middle schools and will employ a mixed-methods approach
with a sample of teachers (n= 18) and students (n= 450). The work will be
organized in three phases. Phase 1 will employ mixed methods, longitudinal
approach to describe the complex interactions between students' funds of
knowledge, disciplinary content and practices of authentic scientific discourse,
and connections to science learning. Phase 2 will utilize design-based research
cycles with teachers to apply and develop science instructional materials
focused on improving opportunities for authentic scientific discourse by
integrating students' funds of knowledge in urban classrooms using data from
demographics, classroom videos, post-observation student-focus-group interviews,
surveys, and science assessments. Phase 3 will focus on dissemination of
research and educational findings. The main outcomes of this effort will include
scholarly publications, an authentic scientific discourse framework, and
instructional materials, such as lessons, videos, and student work for
educators. An advisory board will provide both formative and summative
evaluation feedback. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) proposal awarded under the Discovery Research
PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. The Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.