* 1845779
* CAREER: Modeling, Measuring and Controlling Human Comfort in Human-Autonomous-Machine Interaction (HaMI)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Yunyi Jia, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 391,182.00

The next generation of autonomous machines, including collaborative robots and
autonomous vehicles, will interact closely with humans. Despite tremendous
efforts to promote safety and efficiency of such machines, low user acceptance
remains a critical roadblock to their use. This project addresses the problem by
developing techniques to measure human comfort and to modify machine behavior to
increase human comfort while interacting with autonomous machines. The resulting
advances will facilitate successful deployment of next-generation collaborative
robots and autonomous vehicles that humans can interact with comfortably. The
theoretical, computational, experimental, and design principles devised will
apply to other autonomous machines that human interact with closely, such as
surgical robots, domestic robots, and autonomous aircraft. The integrated
education plan of this award will empower students, workforces, and the public
by engaging them in learning about and helping to design next-generation
autonomous machines that interact closely with humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main objective of this project is to advance the underlying science of human
comfort in Human--Autonomous-Machine Interaction (HaMI) and provide
transformative solutions and guidelines to design autonomous machines that
humans interact with comfortably. The project will advance knowledge of the
factors that influence human comfort in HaMI and create new computational models
that give quantitative predictions of human comfort. It will create a novel
multi-modal measurement paradigm for human comfort that uses the computational
models and physiological signals to accurately measure human comfort in real-
time. The project will create a novel framework to optimize the behaviors of
autonomous machines to improve human comfort. Finally, it will create and
disseminate comfort datasets for collaborative robots and autonomous vehicles to
facilitate further research. Research-integrated teaching will educate students
to understand and design autonomous machines that interact closely with humans.
Outreach to K-12 students will inspire youngsters to engage in STEM learning
especially in autonomous machines. Integrated academic, industrial and public
dissemination will create a consortium to collectively understand, work with,
and accept next-generation autonomous machines that interact closely with
humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.