* 1845322
* CAREER: From Connectome to Behavior: Computational Models of Multifunctional Neural Circuits in C. elegans
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Eduardo Izquierdo, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 623,969.00

How an animal flexibly coordinates multiple behaviors as a cohesive unit is one
of the central problems of neuroscience; multifunctionality has also been
recognized as one of the fundamental challenges in the development of a general
artificial intelligence. Although the ability of neural circuits to flexibly
reconfigure is widespread among organisms, most studies of the neural basis of
behaviors focus on isolated circuits and individual behaviors. Studies that
consider multifunctional circuitry tend to focus on the switching between
distinct patterns of activity, with little insight into multifunctional
sensorimotor integration. With the increasing amount of anatomical,
physiological and behavioral data being generated, a computational modeling
framework to understand the neural basis of behavior is essential. The goal of
this project is to model multiple neural circuits that have been identified in
isolation and to integrate them into a single model to better understand how
multifunctionality arises in sensory-driven behavioral circuits. This project is
an important step toward the long-term goal of developing a behaviorally-
functional brain-body-environment model of a living organism at the level of
individual neurons. The cross-disciplinary methodologies developed from this
project will serve as a springboard for understanding multifunctional circuits
in living organisms as well as for generating artificial systems capable of
robustly and efficiently performing multiple functions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses specifically on modeling and analyzing
the circuits responsible for the wide range of spatial orientation behaviors in
the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. This model organism is a uniquely qualified
target for integrated computational modeling of a complete animal because of the
breadth of information known about its genetics, development, anatomy, and
behavior. Despite this substantial knowledge, information about the
electrophysiological properties of its nervous system is less complete. The
project aims to constrain the model by what is known from the anatomy and
physiology of the organism with reasoned simplifications about its body and
environment. Then, stochastic optimization will be used to fill in
electrophysiological unknowns such that the model produces behavior that matches
what has been observed, including the effect of neural manipulations on
behavior. The result of optimization will not be a unique model, but rather an
ensemble of models that are consistent with current knowledge of the system.
Each of these possibilities represents a testable hypothesis for C. elegans. The
next step in the project will be to analyze the structure of this ensemble to
formulate the key experiments that can distinguish between the various classes
of possibilities in the worm. The results of such experiments can then be used
as additional constraints for subsequent optimizations in an iterative cycle of
model refinement. Besides the generation of experimentally-testable predictions
that are specific to C. elegans, through the analysis of the ensemble of models,
the project aims to discover general principles for how multifunctional circuits
operate in living organisms more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.