* 1845588
* CAREER:  Deciphering sorghum resistance mechanisms to phloem-feeding aphids
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Joe Louis, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,515,525.00

Approximately 20 percent of global annual crop loss is attributable to insect
infestation, creating major economic concerns about decreases in the food supply
for a growing global population expected to exceed nine billion by 2050.
Sorghum, one of the world's most important monocot crops grown for food, feed,
and fuel, suffers severe yield losses due to attack by phloem-feeding insects,
including aphids. However, little is known about the extent of genetic variation
that contributes to sorghum resistance or susceptibility to these insects. The
goal of this project is to elucidate previously unknown sorghum resistance
mechanisms to aphids in order to help design novel targets for pest control and
reduce dependence on costly and harmful insecticides. The knowledge gained from
this project identifies key genes, signaling networks, pathways, and/or
regulatory mechanisms that underlie sorghum resistance to phloem-feeding insect
pests. The broader impacts of the project include an innovative and
comprehensive outreach/education program to understand plant resistance to
insects by involving middle and secondary school teachers and middle school and
undergraduate students, particularly those from underserved and underrepresented
groups, as they explore solutions to real-world situations involving concepts of
plant resistance to insect pests. In addition, this project will provide
multidisciplinary training to undergraduate and graduate students and post-
doctoral research associates in the areas of plant biology, genomics, and
entomology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The defense signaling networks underlying
monocot crop resistance to aphids remain largely unknown, and this is especially
true for sorghum. This project fills an important gap in current research by
utilizing genomic resources to gain insight into the underlying genetic networks
and phenotypic traits that contribute to sorghum resistance to aphids. Natural
variation in a panel of sorghum inbred lines is used to elucidate the novel
sources of sorghum resistance to sugarcane aphids. A combination of molecular,
biochemical, and electrophysiological approaches enable a better understanding
of the genetic basis of sorghum resistance to aphids. Four objectives are
proposed: 1) characterization of SCA feeding behavior and the early
physiological defense responses involved in sorghum resistance to aphids, 2)
discovery of novel genes and the underlying transcriptional networks that
contribute to sorghum resistance/susceptibility to SCA, 3) determination of key
defense metabolites in sorghum resistance/susceptibility to SCA, and 4)
development and delivery of outreach and educational programs in plant insect
interactions and plant defense for middle and secondary school teachers and
middle students. The results from this project provide improved insight into how
endogenous defenses and manipulation of defense signaling networks contribute to
the development of more efficient and durable insect pest-resistant varieties of
sorghum. Although the project focuses on sorghum, the knowledge gained has
broader applications to other significant cereal crops such as maize, wheat,
rice and barley.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems (IOS) in the Biological Sciences
Directorate (BIO) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.