* 1845006
* CAREER:  Engineering Tunable Fluorescent Organic Salts for Next Generation Imaging and Photodynamic Therapy
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Sophia Lunt, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project will use fluorescent organic salts to provide a new way for
controlling photoexcited (i.e., activated by light) interactions at the cellular
level. The principal investigator seeks to improve fluorescent dyes to limit
toxicity for application to cell imaging and photodynamic therapy (PDT). The
approach will develop a range of organic salts, assess phototoxicity (i.e.,
toxicity due to light) and then evaluate the chosen contrast agents. Improved
imaging agents will be broadly useful and preliminary data suggest a reduction
in phototoxicity. The research can lead to novel fluorescent probes for broad
societal impact ranging from biomedicine and diagnostics to solar cells by
enabling selective photodynamic therapy without side effects; brighter medical
imaging that penetrate deeper into tissue for tumor detection and image-guided
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator utilizes a new approach
that will pair fluorescent ions with non-fluorescent counterions to
independently modulate frontier molecular orbital levels proposed to be
responsible for cyto- and photo-toxicity, without modifying optical properties.
The principal investigator proposes that the fine-tuning concept can be applied
to both novel and commercially available fluorescent probes and will enable
precise toxicity modulation of fluorescent probes in eukaryotic cells for a
range of applications. The principal investigator will systematically engineer a
series of ions that tune optoelectronic properties of fluorescent organic salts
by modulating the degree of halogenation, steric bulk, and dipole moments. The
central hypothesis will test if fluorescent organic salts provide cytotoxic and
phototoxic tunability through counterion coupling by generating resonant
reactive oxygen species via charge injection in cellular
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.