* 1845969
* CAREER: Robustifying Machine Learning for Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Soumik Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 511,620.00

This robustifying machine learning (ML) for cyber-physical systems (CPSs)
project focuses on detecting and reducing the vulnerabilities of ML models that
have become pervasive and are being deployed for decision-making in real-life
CPS applications including self-driving cars, and robotic air vehicles. The
growing prospect of machine learning approaches such as deep Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) and deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) being used in CPSs
(e.g., self-driving cars) has raised concerns around safety and robustness of
autonomous agents. Recent work on generating adversarial attacks have shown that
it is computationally feasible for a bad actor to fool a deep learning (DL)
model dramatically. Apart from adversarial attacks, such DL models can also
succumb to the so-called 'edge-cases' where the real-life operational situation
presents data that are not well-represented in the training data set. Such cases
have been the primary reason for quite a few self-driving car accidents
recently. Although initial research has begun to address scenarios with specific
attack models, there remains a significant knowledge gap regarding detection and
adaptation of ML models to 'edge-cases' and adversarial attacks in the context
of CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this motivation, this project builds a meta-
learning-based supervisory framework and associated algorithms to detect and
mitigate ML system vulnerabilities which will substantially reduce the risk in
using ML for safety and time-critical systems. The science driver applications
are self-driving cars and robotics. The algorithm validation and evaluation use
experimental self-driving cars and robotics test beds at Iowa State in
collaboration with the Institution of Transportation and
NVIDIA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research is integrated with education to support
the goal of training students in the critical interdisciplinary area of system
theory and data science, which is in dire need of rapid and quality workforce
development for sustained economic and social growth of the United States.
Education plans also include curriculum development at graduate and
undergraduate level, undergraduate research experience, academic competitions
and outreach activities involving both high school students and teachers.
Outcomes of this project will support NSF's mission of "Harnessing the Data
Revolution" for many critical CPSs that currently involve ML or will involve it
in future, such as manufacturing processes, power grid, smart cities and
transportation systems, to make them safer, more efficient and cost
effective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.