* 1845952
* CAREER: Type-Driven Heterogeneous Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2024
* Adrian Sampson, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 12/31/2024
* USD 565,997.00

Computer hardware is becoming more heterogeneous: systems from smartwatches to
datacenters augment traditional CPUs with Graphics Processing Units (GPUs),
Field Programmable Gate Arrays (FPGAs), and single-application accelerators for
efficiency. The programming tools for these heterogeneous systems, however, are
lagging behind. Each new computing technology comes with a new special-purpose
programming model or a best-effort attempt to compile legacy programming
languages like 'C'. This project designs systems that bridge the semantic gap
between application semantics and hardware constraints. The project's novelties
are type-driven approaches to balancing productivity with control over low-level
performance details. The project's impacts are new programming languages for
heterogeneous systems that avoid the usability pitfalls of best-effort
C-language compilation, expose system-level concerns that dictate performance,
and enable cross-device compiler optimizations. The project further seeks to
include broadening access to education and research through interactive online
lessons that target programming for heterogeneous architectures; creating a
series of seminars aimed at increasing engagement in undergraduate research; and
running workshops at computer architecture conferences for broadening
participation of and mentoring of undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two main approaches. The first
approach lifts the latent constraints in one-off compilers for heterogeneous
architectural backends into an intelligible type system. It addresses high-level
synthesis (HLS) compilers for FPGAs, which attempt to translate a loosely-
defined subset of C or C++ to hardware. The project aims to guarantee that well-
typed programs have a realizable hardware implementation. The second approach
embeds a higher level of abstraction into the type system for low-level
computations to prevent bugs and enable new compiler optimizations. It focuses
on linear algebra computations on GPUs. Such computations entangle abstract
algebraic properties with low-level code. A new type system combines abstract
types describing the linear algebra behavior with concrete types describing the
GPU execution. The combined type system avoids subtle bugs and lets the compiler
automatically generate correct-by-construction manipulations of linear algebra
structures such as vector spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.