* 1845924
* CAREER: Becoming Euclid: Characterizing the geometric intuitions that support formal learning in mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Moira Dillon, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,805,399.00

Only humans are capable of doing formal mathematics, like the geometry in
Euclid's Elements. The arguments and proofs of this geometry require one to
imagine points so small they have no dimension and lines that extend so far they
never end. And yet the points and lines experienced in everyday life have
dimension and are finite. Where do the uniquely human ideas of abstract points
and lines come from? To what extent does human reasoning work with idealizations
and abstractions and to what extent does it remain rooted in everyday, physical
finitudes? This project will address such questions by exploring three
interrelated cognitive aspects of human geometric aptitude: 1) the role of
mental simulation and rule-based reasoning in children's and adults' basic
judgments about triangles; 2) the conditions that allow infants, children, and
adults to identify lines as the shortest distance between two points; and 3) the
effects of couching geometry in a physical context (e.g., gravity) on children's
and adults' judgments about the fastest path between two locations in space.
This proposal will characterize how early emerging perceptual sensitivities to
the properties of the scenes and objects of everyday life might form the
foundation of human understanding of the imperceptible. This understanding lies
at the heart of much human achievement and also constitutes one of the main aims
of school learning. The promise of this project is that in uncovering the basic
and universal spatial intuitions humans rely on when confronted with difficult
and novel geometry problems, the field will better be able to develop pedagogies
that build on the strengths and supplement the limitations of these intuitions.
The project is supported by a CAREER award to New York University by the EHR
Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental
research literature on STEM learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In three series of
experiments, the project will both conduct research in active educational
settings and lay the foundation for future educational interventions that
harness our basic and universal spatial intuitions. Series 1 will characterize
how people reason intuitively about the properties of triangles. Are their
properties evaluated through mental simulation and imagery or through abstract
rules? Series 2 will explore how people think about lines. Under what conditions
are lines recognized as the shortest path between two points? How does that
recognition relate to everyday experiences, like navigating from one place to
another, through development? Series 3 will probe geometric intuitions about
efficient paths in physical contexts with gravity. The experiments will take
place in the laboratory and in the National Museum of Mathematics (MoMath).
MoMath will also be a site for general dissemination of the project's findings,
including a talk series that will bring together cognitive scientists,
educators, and the public. This project will thus reach thousands of individuals
through basic science research and through outreach at the
museum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.