* 1845192
* NSF Workshop on State-of-the-Art and Challenges in Resilience
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Saurabh Bagchi, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 09/30/2019
* USD 49,500.00

Our society is crucially dependent on several interdependent critical
infrastructure systems and processes for operating these systems, such as,
industrial control systems, IoT systems underlying our smart cities, large-scale
cyber systems, and built environments like transportation and building
infrastructures. These are subjected to various kinds of hazards and faults,
both natural and malicious, often leading to user-visible failures. The research
community has developed a set of tools to analyze the failure modes of the
infrastructures and systematically build in resilience. This workshop is meant
to bring together select members of these communities who have focused on
resilient and adaptive cyberinfrastructures, resilient cyber-physical systems,
and scientific foundations of resilient socio-technical systems. The
participants will be thought and action leaders in the area of social-technical
resilient systems, drawn from external academic researchers and industrial
practitioners. The workshop will stress the scientific and foundational research
on resilience at the interface of multiple domains, and to promote applications
of societal importance in these domains. This workshop will highlight the
synergies through discussion of foundational techniques and case studies. Then
it will present the salient research and practice challenges that can serve as a
call-to-arms for the respective technical communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop has three broad aims. First, to capture in one accessible forum best
practices in research on resilience spanning multiple research communities.
Second, to disseminate to the community what are the broad open research
challenges, along with prior and ongoing work that can be leveraged to attack
these challenges. Third, to provide artifacts (video lectures, design documents,
software releases) documenting the progress the community has made in resilient
system design and implementation. The workshop, to be held at Purdue University,
will reflect on the current state-of-art and state-of-practice of resilient
system design and will lay out the broad research and translation challenges
that we will need to address to make our infrastructures truly resilient to
natural failures. The workshop will be broad-based in the topical areas of
cyber, cyber-physical, and socio-technical systems. It will draw from the
technical contributions made by the communities, put them in the context of
evolving technological changes, and identify broad-based topic areas where
resilience work is both needed and likely to have high impact. The NSF
communities that are natural fits within this workshop are: Smart and Connected
Communities (S&amp;CC), Cyber Physical Systems (CPS), Computer Systems Research
(CSR), Software and Hardware Foundations (SHF), and Engineering Design and
System Engineering (EDSE). We will invite researchers from these communities
from various universities and at different levels of seniority to participate in
the technical talks, panel discussions, and poster sessions. There will also be
select industry and national lab participants. Three specific deliverables will
come out of the workshop: reports (one for each topical area) documenting the
current state-of-art, state-of-practice, and open research challenges in
designing, developing, and maintaining resilient infrastructures; organized and
curated material (slides, audio, video) of talks and panels; archive of posters
presented by upcoming researchers on current research
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.