* 1845137
* CAREER: Neural mechanisms of flexible sensorimotor processing in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Andrew Leifer, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 05/31/2024
* USD 801,398.00

The brain interprets the world around an organism to guide its actions and
movements, but exactly how the brain does so remains a mystery. This CAREER
award seeks to study how the brain of a small worm detects information about its
environment and transforms that information into actions. The worm's small brain
makes it possible to study the flow of information as it traverses through the
brain with a level of detail and completeness that is not currently possible in
other more complicated animals. The investigation uses new approaches that the
principal investigator developed to record activity of the worm's brain as it
crawls. The results of this study will provide new insights into how brains
flexibly process information and generate actions. The work is integrated with a
comprehensive education and outreach plan. In one component, hands-on workshops
will be held for public policy students to learn about genetic engineering and
machine learning, two cutting-edge technologies that enable the proposed
research and also have the potential to transform
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will investigate circuit-level mechanisms
underlying sensorimotor processing in the nematode C. elegans. The animal
flexibly interprets sensory signals to drive motor outputs dependent upon
internal state. In some states an applied mechanosensory signal will propagate
through the network to elicit a motor response, while in other states it will
not. This project uses whole brain calcium imaging at cellular resolution in
freely moving C. elegans to map out the functional paths by which the sensory
signals propagate. Specifically, the work seeks to locate where in the network
mechanosensory signals transition into locomotory signals, and to identify where
state information impinges on this path using a whole-brain approach. C.
elegans, with its compact nervous system of only 302 neurons, optical
transparency, genetic tractability and mapped connectome is well-suited to
carrying out the investigation. Education and outreach components of this
research grant target students of public policy, undergraduate physics and
engineering students especially from underrepresented groups, and undergraduate
neuroscience students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.