* 1845709
* CAREER: Peripheral nerve recording, analysis, and modulation for neural communication and control
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Zhi Yang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Electroceuticals is a new research area in bioelectronics and neurotechnologies
that can potentially benefit more than 10 million American patients. It aims to
create implants that can monitor and modulate nerve activity to treat
gastrointestinal diseases, diabetes, epilepsy, asthma, arthritis, chronic pain,
and hypertension and other heart conditions. Two significant engineering
challenges to implement electroceuticals are (1) to sense and analyze nerve
neural signals, and (2) to define and incorporate neural feedback to improve
stimulation outcomes. This project aims to develop a novel integrated hardware
and software platform to overcome these two challenges. Thus a future
electroceutical therapy can be implemented and optimized based on neural
feedback and physiological responses. This project also includes an integrated
educational and outreach component to both foster interdisciplinary research
training and to increase participation of underrepresented students in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish a new low-noise
recording capability with a stimulation function to interface with nerves. It
will also generate valuable nerve datasets that will be critical for the
development of deep learning algorithms to analyze neural signals and support
adaptive neuromodulation. The new technical contributions from the hardware
aspects will include a new peripheral nerve recorder with multiple noise
reduction techniques to enable nerve recording, and a new redundant crossfire
stimulator to minimize stimulation noise artifacts for simultaneous recording
and stimulation. From the software aspect, this research proposes a deep neural
network based flow to de-noise the recordings, detect neural signals, and decode
information. This project will also perform novel in-vivo experiments to
validate the proposed technology platform and to simulate a real application in
treating heart failure as a proof-of-concept demonstration of
electroceuticals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.