* 1845639
* CAREER: Towards Reliable and Optimized Data-Driven Cyber-Physical Systems using Human-Centric Sensing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2019,07/31/2021
* Dong Wang, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 07/31/2021
* USD 195,970.00

Participatory science has opened opportunities for many to participate in data
collection for science experiments about the environment, local transportation,
disaster response, and public safety where people live. The nature of the
collection by non-scientists on a large scale carries inherent risks of
sufficient coverage, accuracy and reliability of measurements. This project is
motivated by the challenges in data and predictive analytics and in control for
participatory science data collection and curation in cyber-physical systems
(CPS) experiments.

This project focuses on data-driven frameworks to address these challenges in
CPS-enabled participatory science that builds on statistics, optimization,
control, natural language processing, CPS fundamentals, and coordination of
participants, known as crowd steering. This framework, known as DCCDI for Data-
driven Crowdsensing CPS Design and Implementation, tightly combines the
underlying methods and techniques, especially focusing on physical sensors,
mobility, and model-based approaches, to improve efficiency, effectiveness, and
accountability. Validation of the DCCDI framework is conducted through
simulations, case studies, and on real-world CPS-enabled experiments. This
project closely integrates education and training with foundational research and
public outreach that enhances interdisciplinary thinking about CPS systems,
engages the public through participatory science, and broadens participation in
science, technology, engineering, mathematics, and computer science.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.