* 1845651
* CAREER:  From ecology to neurobiology: spatial cognition in rainforest frogs
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Lauren O'Connell, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,200,000.00

Many animals, including humans, need navigation skills for finding mates and
food, or when returning home for shelter and to care for offspring. Successfully
navigating the environment requires the brain to be capable of learning and
remembering specific features of the environment. In mammals, males tend to have
better spatial memory, and for decades, scientists have explained this as a
necessity for males to navigate over larger areas in search of mates. However,
this hypothesis has never been directly tested, and other researchers have
recently suggested that male superiority in spatial abilities might be a side-
effect of testosterone. Rainforest frogs will be used to test between these
alternative hypotheses. In contrast to mammals, frogs have both the species
where males roam larger rainforest areas and species where females have larger
home ranges than males. Potential sex differences in navigational ability will
be measured across a range of species in the field by tracking their ability to
return home after displacements. Then, standardized behavioral assays will be
used in the lab to detect any sex differences across various species and
identify the brain regions used for spatial memory. Finally, the neuroanatomy of
the amphibian hippocampus will be investigated to determine if frogs use similar
or different brain mechanisms for navigation compared to mammals. Comparing
these mechanisms will shed light on the evolution of spatial capabilities in
animals, including humans. These research activities will be integrated into
education by collaborating with Stanford undergraduates and Canada Community
College students to perform behavior experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to navigate the environment is essential for survival and reproductive
success. Sex differences in spatial abilities have been documented in many taxa.
In mammals, males often outperform females and this superiority in spatial
ability has been attributed to sex differences in life history strategies where
polygamous males maintain larger home ranges. Recent challenges to this theory
suggest that improved spatial ability is a byproduct of high testosterone in
males rather than an adaptation to different life history strategies. The
authors will directly test these alternative hypotheses using an amphibian clade
with contrasting life histories and spatial strategies of males and females
through three aims: 1) Examine sex differences in navigational ability by
tracking translocated frogs in the wild in three species with sex differences in
home range size. 2) Test for species variation and the role of androgens in
spatial memory. Additional experiments will test the influence of androgens on
task performance and link performance differences to patterns of neural
activity. 3) Define the neuroanatomy of the amphibian medial pallium (homolog of
the mammalian hippocampus) using single nuclei sequencing, sequencing active
neurons, and tract tracing to examine potential sex and species differences in
pallial connectivity. Together, this work will contrast and test life-history
adaptation and testosterone spill-over hypotheses using ecologically-relevant
behavioral assays in the wild, controlled behavioral assays in the laboratory,
and neuroanatomical studies. This research will be integrated into education
with courses and internship opportunities developed for undergraduate students
at Stanford University and Canada Community College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.