* 1845053
* CAREER: Rational Design of Phase-Changing Nanomaterials for Spatiotemporal Protein Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Scott Medina, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop ultrasound-sensitive
nanomaterials that can be acoustically activated to deliver otherwise-
impermeable biomolecules into cells with high precision. This is achieved
through the rational design of fluorous phase-changing nanoparticles (PCNs),
which undergo liquid-gas phase transitions in response to acoustic stimuli.
While PCNs have enjoyed success as ultrasound imaging agents, their translation
into drug delivery devices has been impeded by poor cargo loading and variable
biologic outcomes. Building upon prior seminal work, this project will open new
opportunities in the rational design of PCNs by understanding the
interdependence of particle composition and tissue mechanics on their acoustic
activation, and optimize the loading and delivery of biologic cargo. These
objectives will be accomplished through three aims: (1) Prepare bio-inspired
PCNs and identify how physical and chemical properties impacts their ultrasound
activation; (2) Demonstrate successful dispersion of proteins into the liquid
interior of fluorous PCNs and assess delivery under ultrasound; (3) Pair
biophysical cell-based experiments with computational models of membrane
mechanics to advance a more comprehensive mechanism for PCN-mediated cell
permeabilization. Success of this work will enable the design of PCNs with well
controlled acoustic biophysics, yielding new biochemical tools that can be used
to probe and manipulate cells within complex tissue microenvironments with high
precision. Research findings from this project will be integrated with outreach
activities to incorporate principles of biomaterial design and biophysics into
K-12 education. Educational objectives include: (1) Examine the effect of
integrating high-school students with undergraduate engineering design teams on
recruitment and persistence in STEM education; and (2) Develop and implement an
Ultrasound Olympics program that will provide transformative hands-on
experiences to K-12 students in nanotechnology and bioacoustics. Leveraging an
integrated research and outreach program, supported through rigorous and routine
assessment, this project will advance new bio-nanotechnologies and improve
student retention in emerging STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER award is to develop a framework for
the rational design of fluorous phase-changing nanoparticles (PCNs) that can be
vaporized by ultrasound to afford transmembrane delivery of biomolecules into
cells with spatial and temporal precision. Although PCNs have enjoyed success as
ultrasound contrast agents, their translation into clinically useful delivery
vehicles has yet to be realized. This is a consequence of two key gaps in
knowledge that include: (1) a lack of well-defined structure-activity
relationships defining how PCN physicochemical properties regulate their phase-
changing behavior; and (2) an incomplete mechanistic understanding of how local
tissue mechanics impacts PCN biophysics. Using template-driven peptide assembly,
this project will prepare programmable PCNs to elucidate the influence of
particle surface tension and size on their acoustic activation, as well as
identify conditions that allow protein cargo to be loaded into, and delivered
from, the fluorous liquid particle core. In parallel, this project will identify
how particle-cell-matrix interactions work in concert to control the biophysics
of PCNs at the cell surface during vaporization. To engage and train a new
generation of diverse scientists in emerging biotechnologies, such as those
explored here, this project will develop and implement an outreach program to
integrate underrepresented K-12 students in STEM research. Activities will
include incorporating underserved high-school students into undergraduate
engineering design teams, and the creation of an Ultrasound Olympics workshop to
engage grade 6-12 teachers and integrate bioengineering and acoustics concepts
into the classroom. By linking the proposed research program with outreach
activities, this project will contribute to the development of a competitive
STEM workforce capable of tackling diverse challenges in biomaterials design,
molecular biophysics and bioimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.