* 1845448
* CAREER: Utilizing Principles of Energy Recovery Computing for Low-Energy and DPA-Resistant IoT Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Himanshu Thapliyal, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 08/31/2022
* USD 314,737.00

This project will develop circuit design techniques for energy-recovery circuits
and a library of such design cells to facilitate low-power implementation of
block cipher for mobile Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices, where reducing power
consumption is critical. The design challenge is to produce low-energy,
lightweight, and secure devices, which are also resistant against malicious
attacks that use power consumption traces to extract private or sensitive
information. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a set of energy
recovery (ER) principles for low-energy and differential power analysis
(DPA)-resistant IoT devices. The research objectives are: (i) to investigate
information leakage in ER circuits and propose mitigation methodologies; (ii) to
investigate and develop a low-energy and DPA-resistant ER standard cell library
and semi-custom design flow for lightweight cryptographic circuits; and (iii) to
investigate and develop power clock generation and distribution, and silicon
prototyping to evaluate energy dissipation and the DPA-resistance of ER-based
crypto circuits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Outcomes and results from this project
should make a strong case for industry adoption of ER computing for the design
of low-energy and secure IoT devices. Another integral goal of this project is
to broaden graduate, undergraduate, and minority and underrepresented
participation in cyber and hardware security research and education. The project
will develop new courses in hardware security for undergraduate and graduate
students, and conduct workshops. Internships on hardware security will be
offered to Appalachian high-school students and historically underrepresented
minorities, and first-generation students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
repository will be stored electronically and made available through the website
hosted by University of Kentucky, College of Engineering
(http://hthapliyal.engineering.uky.edu/). The data will be retained for at least
three years beyond the duration of the award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.