* 1845833
* CAREER: Secure and ubiquitous position, navigation and timing
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Pau Closas, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The long-term objective of this project is to enable secure position, navigation
and timing (PNT) anywhere, a longstanding goal since ancient times. Currently,
the most pervasive PNT technology is Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS).
However, GNSS exhibits major vulnerabilities and limitations under certain
conditions such as indoor navigation, malicious attacks like jamming or
spoofing, and other GNSS-denied scenarios. This five-year career-development
plan is a comprehensive research, education, and outreach program that will
address GNSS limitations and form the next generation of PNT engineers. The
combination of both elements will unlock the potential of secure and precise PNT
using GNSS technology for indoor, as well as outdoor use. The objectives of the
proposed research and education plan are: 1) to forge a novel, overarching
signal processing paradigm to design advanced GNSS receivers. The PI will adopt
direct-positioning to yield unprecedented ultra-high-sensitivity performance,
enabling GNSS indoors; 2) to further reinforce of the theory of direct-
positioning by incorporating security guarantees and mechanisms by using robust
statistics; and 3) to implement an ambitious educational plan that includes
multifaceted activities involving the use of the open source GNSS software-
defined radio (GNSS-SDR) project. In turn, the GNSS-SDR will be deeply
integrated with the research endeavors as a testbed, which naturally intertwines
both research and education aspects of this project following the PI's ongoing
efforts. The success of the proposed research will impact many applications
where PNT is provided by GNSS, for which current limitations prevent faster
adoption. This includes critical infrastructures, such as the power grid, first-
responder squads, unmanned and autonomous vehicles, intelligent transportation
systems, precision surveying, agriculture, or mass-market applications involving
hand-held devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses a fundamental
question in secure and ubiquitous PNT: what are the real limits of GNSS-denied
scenarios. The research deepens around the direct-positioning paradigm, which is
recognized by the GNSS community as a breakthrough in the design and
understanding of GNSS technology. The main intuition is that synchronization
parameters of all satellites are intimately related among them through the
receiver position and velocity. The fact that all those signals are received at
the same location and time instant is a strong constraint that is not exploited
in current PNT schemes. In contrast, direct position estimation (DPE) jointly
processes those signals, increasing its sensitivity and robustness to common
propagation challenges such as weak signal, amplitude fading, multipath,
jamming, spoofing, or ionospheric scintillation, therefore yielding to superior
resilience in currently GNSS-denied environments. The research goals are
structured in three thrusts: 1) to establish a DPE framework that allows for
ultra-high-sensitivity receivers to operate in extreme environments, such as
indoors. Tasks include derivation of the fundamental estimation bounds as well
as investigation of the signal processing and sensor fusion methods that enable
to efficiently attain those limits. The project will investigate the integration
of DPE with real-time kinematics, extending the availability of high-precision
PNT; 2) to secure GNSS receivers against malicious attacks, and ionospheric
scintillation. DPE schemes will be leveraged to combat such interferences in
combination with robust statistics, machine learning, and Bayesian inference
tools. As a result, a transformative, unified framework will be conceived for
sub-decimetric precision GNSS receivers that are both secure and can operate in
denied scenarios but are not possible using current technology; and 3) to
implement and validate the developed techniques on an end-to-end GNSS-SDR
receiver, around which a research and educational plan is conceived to boost and
consolidate the area of secure and ubiquitous PNT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.