* 1845979
* CAREER: Integrated Research and Education for Professional Identity Development in Undergraduate Architecture, Engineering, and Construction (AEC) Women
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Andrea Ofori-Boadu, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 02/29/2024
* USD 559,991.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior faculty who
exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research, excellent
education, and the integration of education and research within the context of
the mission of their organizations. This project awarded to a CAREER scholar at
North Carolina A&amp;T State University has the goal to understand the
professional identity development (PID) processes of emerging women
professionals in the fields or architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC)
towards informing educational and institutional transformations that strengthen
women's persistence in becoming AEC professionals. This project integrates
research and education by developing a year-round blended Professional
Development Certificate Program (PDCP) and establishing the Emerging Built
Environment Women (EBEW) center. This award is supported by the Historically
Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program. HBCU-UP encourages STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in broadening
participation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal of this project, robust
foundational grounded theories will be constructed to provide nuanced insights
into why and how the multiple identities, lived experiences and major concerns
of undergraduate AEC women interact with their PID process. A multi-year, multi-
site, and multi-method constructivist approach to grounded theory research will
be utilized with primary data obtained from intensive interviews with critical
incident and symbolic interactionist emphasis. The comparative and iterative
synthesis of coded and emergent data obtained from a cohort of undergraduate AEC
women from five institutions over a four-year period will provide a longitudinal
understanding of why and how their views and actions change with their lived
experiences across educational stages. Methodological triangulation methods of
data include textual analysis of formal documents and open-ended question
surveys. Emergent theories from the research will inform practical
implementation of the PDCP and the EBWE center and subsequent findings will
provide greater insights into research findings. The construction of robust
discipline-specific PID process theories will bridge gaps in identity and
diversity theories and inform transformations for more gender inclusive AEC
educational and institutional environments, which will enhance the early
awareness, attraction, preparation, and persistence of the next generation of
women AEC professionals. Theoretical foundations will guide future identity and
diversity research that can be extended to other persistent male-dominant STEM
disciplines. Improved gender inclusive environments will expand the pool of
qualified AEC women for a more diverse AEC workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.