* 1845673
* CAREER:  How the Dissatisfaction nuclear receptor regulates Drosophila courtship behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Troy Shirangi, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2024
* USD 646,754.00

The formation of a nervous system capable of integrating outside inputs, making
decisions, and coordinating motor outputs is critical for a healthy life. To
uncover basic principles that guide this process, this project investigates how
a developmental gene in fruit flies controls their reproductive behaviors and
nervous system development. The project involves the application of cutting-edge
genetic and neuroscience tools to identify the behaviorally-relevant neurons and
their location within the key neural circuit, uncover how the gene contributes
to the development of the circuit, the connections of the gene-expressing
neurons within the circuit and their function, and what genes important for the
behavioral output are regulated by the developmental gene. This project also
includes an education plan that integrates high school and undergraduate
students into the research activities. A discovery-based project is introduced
to two Philadelphia-area high schools, including one with students from
predominantly low-income households. This aspect of the project examines whether
authentic research experiences can enhance the attitudes of high school students
towards STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work investigates the gene
and neural networks that underlie sexual behavior in Drosophila focusing on the
dissatisfaction (dsf) gene. Dsf encodes a tailless-like developmental nuclear
receptor, mutations in which cause sex-specific courtship and fertility defects
in both sexes. Preliminary work mapped most DSF-controlled phenotypes to an
exceedingly sparse number (i.e., 3+) of interneurons. This project tests the
hypothesis that dsf contributes to behavior by regulating the expression of
target genes that specify the function and connectivity of discrete neural
circuit elements for courtship. The project includes delineation of the position
of the identified interneurons in the circuits that control courtship;
determination of how dsf contributes to neurodevelopment and circuit
connectivity; and identification of the genes that dsf transcriptionally
regulates. A key outcome of this work is the establishment of causal links
between the activity of dsf, the development and function of the neural circuits
it influences, and courtship behavior. Additionally, this work will set the
stage for understanding how dsf acts with other sexual differentiation
regulatory genes either within or between neurons to pattern
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.