* 1845460
* CAREER: Computational Journalism: Integrating Algorithms and People in the Production of News Information
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Nicholas Diakopoulos, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 01/31/2024
* USD 565,562.00

The goal of this project is to develop computational news-report discovery
workflows and tools that weave together expert journalists, online crowd
contributors, and algorithms, with the intent of lowering the cost and
increasing the efficiency, effectiveness, and scale at which new news reports
can be identified. This goal will be reinforced by an integrated education plan
aimed at advancing the skills and capabilities of professional and aspiring
computational and data journalists through a series of public writings,
professional workshops, and curricula. By synthesizing computational and
crowdsourced information processing approaches with theories of newsworthiness
from communication and journalism studies, this research will produce
foundational knowledge and principles for the field of computational journalism.
Beyond the specific domain, contributions will advance and catalyze research in
broader fields of information science and human-computer interaction in relation
to the efficiency and effectiveness of hybrid processes for information
production, and the design of information interfaces to enable experts to more
effectively monitor the world for important events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research project will (1) develop a conceptual design framework based on a user-
centered needs assessment of computational story discovery tools, (2)
instantiate that framework in a series of novel sociotechnical systems that will
be adapted to three reporting scenarios including investigative, factchecking,
and social journalism, and (3) produce empirical knowledge about the cost
efficiency and effectiveness of story discovery tools, which will provide
insights into the role of algorithms in supporting the sustainability of public
interest news information. System evaluations, including field deployments with
professional journalists, will assess the efficiency and effectiveness of the
novel workflows and interfaces developed in order to understand potential
impacts on the utility and sustainability of news information production.
Insights will further refine the design framework and expose new opportunities
in adjacent information monitoring domains such as open source intelligence and
crisis informatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.