* 1845605
* CAREER: What Governs Salt Mobilization and Transport in Upland Semi-Arid Catchments?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Ryan Bailey, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,862.00

Salinity is one of the most common water quality threats in river basins and
irrigated regions worldwide. High salinity in soils and groundwater decreases
yield from crops, threatening the longevity of communities worldwide and the
livelihood of growers. In many semi-arid river valleys, salt accumulates in the
soil due to salty irrigation water, poor drainage in the root zone, and the
release of salt from natural mineral deposits in soils. A large quantity of
salt, however, can enter the valleys from small streams that drain dry, upland
areas. These upland areas often contain vast areas of salt minerals deposits,
which can dissolve and flow into streams during large rainstorms. This project
will investigate how salt is mobilized during storms and measure the amount of
salt leaving the upland area into the river valley. Understanding these
processes can assist in managing overall salt movement in large river basins and
thereby sustain crop productivity. The field work for this project will take
place in the Arkansas River Basin in southeastern Colorado, a region affected by
high soil salinity. Due to the similarities between this basin and other
irrigated, salinity-affected river valleys worldwide, results from this project
can help other regions. This project also includes educational activities for
middle schools, high schools, and graduate university classes. Middle school and
high school instruction and field trips will introduce students to general and
local water issues, teach students about salt and measuring salt in local
waters, and seek to instill a desire to pursue careers in sciences. Teachers
will be trained so that in-class instruction and field trip experiences can
serve students attending the schools in coming
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Salinity is one of the most common water
quality threats in river basins and irrigated regions worldwide. Sustainability
of crop production in irrigated areas in semi-arid and arid areas is threatened
by over-irrigation, poor quality of irrigation water (high salinity), inadequate
drainage, shallow saline groundwater, and salinization of soil and underlying
groundwater, all of which can lead to decreased crop yield. Numerous studies
have been conducted worldwide to assess salinity build-up, loading, transport,
and fate in irrigated regions using a combination of field and modeling methods.
However, relatively little attention has been given to upland catchments that
mobilize and load salt to the rivers of irrigated regions. These salt loads from
upland areas can be significant compared to the salt loads in the main stem of
the rivers, thus contributing to decreased crop yield, poor water security, and
a decrease in ecological health in downstream regions. This project will enhance
understanding of salinity mobilization, movement, and transport in arid upland
catchments by quantifying salt mobilization in upland catchment areas during
storm events and quantifying the contribution of various transport pathways to
total salt export from upland catchments and total salt loading in the river
basin. These objectives will be accomplished through laboratory and field
rainfall simulator experiments, field data collection, process-based numerical
modeling, and educational activities that involve middle school and high school
students in knowledge discovery and field methods. Educational activities
include STEM kits to guide classroom instruction, field data collection, and
analysis. The study sites for data collection and model application are within
the Lower Arkansas River Basin in southeastern Colorado, an area with high
levels of salinity in groundwater and surface water. For modeling, a salinity
transport module for the SWAT watershed model will be developed, which will be
included in the main SWAT source code and disseminated for use worldwide to
manage salt loadings in watersheds. The module will simulate the reactive
transport of major salt ions in soils, groundwater, and surface water, and will
account for the effect of soil salinity on crop
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.