* 1845513
* CAREER: Integrating research and training to illuminate mechanisms of teleost fin ray morphogenesis and diversity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sarah McMenamin, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 843,006.00

The bony fins of ray-finned fish show considerable diversity in structure, and
changes to the fin skeleton necessarily underlie adaptations to different
swimming strategies and other functions. Many fish have fin rays that branch one
or more times, and the presence, number and position of these branches are
highly variant between species. Understanding the developmental processes that
determine branch position can lead to a better understanding of how evolution
has shaped fin diversity. This research program aims to use the fin ray skeleton
to reveal fundamental mechanisms that allow bones to establish, remember and re-
create their shapes. Further, since the functional significance of fin structure
is incompletely understood, this research is integrated with an undergraduate
training program that will address outstanding questions about the diversity,
performance and evolution of fin ray structures and branching patterns. This
course will reciprocally inform and enrich the overall research effort, and will
mentor students from diverse backgrounds in answering research questions of
their own design. This integrated research program is anticipated to provide a
better understanding of fish fin development and adaptation; will yield insights
into skeleton and limb development in other organisms, including humans, with
likely relevance to regenerative medicine; and will help to prepare scientists
at multiple educational levels for independent careers in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses zebrafish caudal fin rays to
test a model by which proximo-distal positional identity is coordinated with fin
outgrowth to specify ray morphology during both development and regeneration.
Researchers will test a model in which a global endocrine factor coordinates
proximate cellular and molecular processes known to underlie ray branching,
further investigating the mechanisms by which positional information is stored
and re-deployed during regeneration. Leveraging an investigation-based
undergraduate research training course, this integrated program will further
address related questions about the functional biomechanics and evolution of fin
and fin ray morphology in actinopterigians. In all, this CAREER research program
is expected to uncover mechanisms by which an important aspect of fish
morphology is established during development and may be modulated during
evolutionary adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.