* 1845486
* CAREER: Chemical Biology Approaches to Study 5-Methylcytidine Derivatives in RNA and Develop CRISPR-Tet2-Based Epitranscriptomic Tool for Gene Regulation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jia Sheng, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Nucleotides make up ribonucleic acids (RNAs) and contain the crucial "blueprint"
of genetic information that is used by cells to make proteins. With this award,
the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry is funding
Dr. Jia Sheng, from the State University of New York at Albany, to develop tools
to incorporate modified nucleotides into RNA with high precision. These
modifications change the RNA structure and function. These changes help us
understand the role of RNA in numerous biological processes. The research
focuses on the determining the three-dimensional structure of RNAs containing
the modified nucleotides, understanding how these changes affect the reactivity
of the RNA and then studying the study of the nucleotides' role in gene
expression. The Dr. Sheng makes the new natural nucleotides and their 3D
structures available to a wide range of researchers. The strategies developed
under this project may be applicable to other enzymes targeting different RNA
modifications, leading to a new general approach for RNA editing and thus, this
research is considered to be within the Understanding the Rules of Life
initiative. The research methodologies and outcomes of the study are integrated
into a new course "Nucleic Acid Chemistry". Dr. Sheng is a leader in the "World
of Chemistry" program which helps freshmen chemistry majors transition to
college successfully. Dr. Sheng also organizes the annual "RNA Day" in his lab
for local K-12 students offering experimental demonstrations and presentations
to awaken their inner scientist. Finally, the research group recruits students
and teachers to participate in summer research through the "University in the
High School" program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research studies made possible by
this award focus on the relatively new epigenetic significance of chemically-
modified cytosines in RNA. Synthetic 5-methylcytosine (5mC) and its oxidized
variants (5xrC) are systematically incorporated into RNAs to determine their
impact on the stability and local and global conformations of the RNAs. In
addition, studies with 5xrC-modified RNAs reveal their effects on enzyme
recognition and the mechanism of enzymatic oxidation of 5mC by the ten-eleven
translocation (TET) family of oxygenases. Finally, the sequence targeting the
clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) enzyme is
fused with a TET oxygenase to create a tool that site-selectively oxidizes 5mC
in natural RNAs. This tool is used to determine how 5xrC nucleotides affect the
efficiency of translating cellular mRNAs into proteins. The knowledge gained and
new general approaches developed by Dr. Sheng may benefit other scientists who
study epitranscriptomic modifications of messenger RNA and posttranscriptional
regulation of gene expression in eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.