* 1845336
* CAREER: Harnessing biology to tackle fluorinated alkyl substances in the environment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Carla Ng, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Per- and polyfluorinated alkyl substances (PFAS) are chemicals that contain
multiple carbon-fluorine bonds. Due to their useful oil- and water-repellent
properties, PFAS are used in many consumer products, industrial processes, and
in firefighting foams. These uses have led to their release to the environment
through multiple pathways. The carbon-fluorine bonds in PFAS make them extremely
durable, so they do not naturally break down in the environment. Conventional
drinking water treatment is not effective at removing most PFAS from water. This
is of particular concern because some PFAS are known to cause harm. They can
build up in the bodies of humans and wildlife, disrupt normal development, and
impair the immune system. Yet no reliable information is available about the
properties and health impacts of most PFAS. Recent estimates suggest that more
than 4000 different PFAS may have been used and released over time. Detailed
toxicity testing data are available for only a handful of these. It is therefore
critical that we build our knowledge base regarding the potential impacts of
PFAS and identify effective ways of removing them from the environment. The goal
of this CAREER proposal is to tackle the enormous challenge posed by PFAS
through an innovative complementary approach using predictive modeling and
experiments. The results of this study will transform our understanding of PFAS
behavior with broad benefits to society through better design of products to
reduce environmental impacts at greatly reduced cost. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of this CAREER proposal are threefold: (1) to use molecular and
organism-scale models to conduct large-scale predictive screening of PFAS
hazard; (2) to use this new knowledge of structure-interaction relationships to
design new bio-inspired sorbents to remove PFAS from water; and (3) to reimagine
K-12 and undergraduate education through the use of collaborative model-building
in a game-like environment. An experimental, chemical-by-chemical approach to
building a comprehensive PFAS knowledge base would be extremely costly in terms
of time, laboratory animals, and resources needed. This would delay action in
preventing the release of potentially harmful chemicals that could persist
indefinitely in the environment without active treatment. By leveraging the
power of molecular dynamics to rank the strength of PFAS-biomolecule
interactions, coupled to organism-scale physiological models, those PFAS most
likely to accumulate in specific tissues or elicit a receptor-specific toxic
impact can be rapidly identified. Further, strong interactions with particular
biological molecules can be used to design an entirely novel class of selective
sorbents. This capitalizes on the very property that makes PFAS hazardous (their
tendency to bind to biological macromolecules like proteins) to remove them from
water in an efficient and targeted way. Moreover, the broad structural knowledge
base that will be created during this CAREER program can be leveraged to 'design
out' hazardous properties in future chemicals. Throughout this research program,
the power of modeling and simulation will engage and inspire thousands of middle
and high school students and their teachers through both formal educational
programs and informal STEM outreach, and will be used to enhance systems-level
thinking and self-confidence among undergraduates, thereby enhancing the
recruitment and retention of diverse cohorts of future STEM
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.