* 1845631
* CAREER: Vapor-Phase Deposition onto Ordered Liquid Surfaces to Create Oriented and Hierarchical Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Laura Bradley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Scientists emulate biological assembly mechanisms to form synthetic materials
with unique and technologically useful structure-function relationships.
Biological systems often form structures at liquid surfaces or within liquid
solutions. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will
investigate the assembly of polymer films on liquid crystal surfaces and support
fundamental research into harnessing liquid-surface-based assembly for producing
materials with ordered and oriented. The liquid crystals possess a long-range
order which can serve to direct the formation of an ordered or structured
polymer film deposited on its surface. These naturally-structured polymer films
could impact many areas of technology providing to increase national prosperity
such as in the production of water filtration membranes with oriented pores that
increase permeability without sacrificing selectivity. Currently, no scalable
method makes oriented membranes with high pore densities. Broader impacts of
this work will promote interdisciplinary innovation by combining the fields of
materials engineering, physics, and polymer science. The grant provides for the
broadening participation of women and underrepresented groups in STEM activities
through peer mentoring programs with the Society of Women Engineers and the
National Society of Black Engineers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Harnessing
continuous two-dimensional assembly at fluid interfaces opens new routes for
bottom-up fabrication of hierarchical and anisotropic polymeric materials.
Vapor-phase deposition methods offer unique capabilities for controlling the
deposition and chemistry of polymer formation. When polymer deposition occurs on
liquid substrates, surface diffusion and aggregation mechanisms at the polymer-
liquid interface will processes underlying the controlled polymer assembly.
Vapor-phase deposition onto liquids provides a versatile approach to control
continuous materials transport to the liquid surface independently of
interfacial assembly mechanisms. To address challenges in producing uniform and
ordered morphologies, ordered liquid substrates, specifically liquid crystals,
will be used as a template to direct nucleation and growth of polymers at the
surfaces. The central goal of this CAREER grant is to elucidate underlying
mechanisms in which vapor-phase transport and liquid crystal-mediated assembly
are cooperatively coupled for bottom-up materials processing at fluid
interfaces. The process could open up new regimes for the development of
colloidal-based thin films. These films could have impact in a wide cross-
section of technological applications such as membrane formation, flexible
electronics, and types of sensing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.