* 1845354
* CAREER: Locally Enhanced Electric Field Treatment (LEEFT) for Chemical-Free Water Disinfection
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Xing Xie, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 534,480.00

Over 800 million people worldwide do not have adequate supply of safe drinking
water. In many areas serviced by drinking water treatment plants, chlorine is
used to kill harmful microbes. However, chlorination can produce chemicals that
are known human carcinogens. An innovative technology that can provide point-of-
service treatment to areas without adequate drinking water supply is locally
enhanced electric field treatment (LEEFT). High disinfection has been achieved
by LEEFT operated at low voltages with a short treatment time of a few seconds.
LEEFT has the added benefits of being relatively inexpensive, chemical-free,
robust, and easy to operate. In this project, the PI will study how harmful
microbes in drinking water are killed during LEEFT treatment. This work has the
goal of developing LEEFT for wide-scale adoption for drinking water treatment to
protect public health. The educational plan of this project focuses on training
future environmental engineering leaders at the high school, undergraduate, and
graduate level. This effort will be complimented by public outreach to increase
awareness of water safety and better prepare the public to respond to
disruptions in water supply due to unexpected natural
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LEEFT is a physical treatment process that aims
to utilize a strong electric field to disrupt cell membranes and thus inactivate
pathogens in drinking water. The electrodes installed in a LEEFT device are
typically modified with one-dimensional nanostructures so that the electric
field is not uniform but enhanced locally near the tips of the nanostructures.
This project will systematically investigate the behavior of bacteria during
LEEFT with four specific objectives: i) obtaining LEEFT platforms that are
suitable for mechanistic study, ii) understanding the mechanisms for bacteria
inactivation during LEEFT, iii) revealing the processes for cell transportation
in LEEFT devices, and iv) developing a mechanistic model of LEEFT for
performance prediction. The core hypothesis is that during LEEFT, bacteria are
transported to the regions with strong electric field by a combination of
hydrodynamic-, electrophoretic-, and dielectrophoretic-forces, and then
inactivated primarily due to irreversible electroporation. Some platforms in
this project will be constructed on lab-on-a-chip devices fabricated using
micro-electro-mechanical-systems (MEMS) technologies. LEEFT experiments will be
performed under various conditions, e.g., electrode materials, frequency of the
electric pulses, mixing conditions, and model bacteria. The model will be built
based on experimental results using COMSOL Multiphysics, a software using
advanced numerical methods to analyze, solve, and simulate physics-based
problems. The integrated educational activities involve a program entitled WE-
HUG (Water-safety Education and training for High school, Undergraduate, &amp;
Graduate students), where a vertical team of high school teachers and students
are recruited to develop and deliver education modules that reflect the
scientific and engineering aspects of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.