* 1845544
* CAREER:  When do mycorrhizal fungi influence plant community dynamics?
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kabir Peay, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,012,735.00

There is a growing recognition that microbial organisms are not simply agents of
disease, but play important positive roles in the everyday health of plants and
animals. Much of this paradigm change has been driven by the availability of new
DNA sequencing technologies that enable accurate quantification of the normally
hidden microbial biodiversity. While there has been a great deal of research on
the effects of the microbiome on human health, understanding the role of
microbial symbiosis in structuring natural ecosystems is a current research
frontier in ecology. This project will build on a long-term research program by
the investigator who has used DNA based techniques to establish key patterns in
the diversity and ecology of one the most common forms of plant-microbe
cooperation - mycorrhizal symbiosis. Using this knowledge, the project will
determine how mycorrhizal symbiosis affects the diversity, productivity, and
composition of natural plant communities. Given that over 90% of all plants
engage in mycorrhizal symbiosis, better understanding of these interactions will
help scientists and land managers sustain robust and resilient ecosystems. In
addition, this project will support development of an integrated teaching and
research program to train undergraduates to use publicly available DNA sequence
data and citizen science data to build species distribution models for fungi,
and then publicly disseminate this information to help inspire public science
participation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While molecular tools have finally enabled
increasingly accurate description of the diversity and structure of mycorrhizal
fungal communities, this new information has not been well integrated with
existing theoretical frameworks for plant ecology. This project will use an
established research system on mycorrhizal fungi in coastal California as the
basis for greenhouse, field, and modeling experiments designed to identify the
mechanisms and conditions under which mycorrhizal fungi strongly influence plant
species coexistence at local, landscape, and regional scales. This will be
carried out through a combination of greenhouse studies that manipulate the
presence of mycorrhizal fungi and observe the effects on plant competition,
field experiments testing the effects of mycorrhizal symbiosis for organic
matter decomposition under different environmental conditions, and simulation
modeling to predict the effects of mycorrhizal symbiosis on patterns of
vegetation development over large spatial and temporal
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.