* 1845143
* CAREER: Computation-Enabled Rational Design of Cytochrome P450 for Ionic Liquid Biodegradation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jindal Shah, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 514,262.00

Ionic liquids, composed of molecular cation and anion pairs, can be designed to
exist as liquids under ambient conditions. Negligible volatility and ability to
design ionic liquids with desired physicochemical and biological properties are
the drivers for the current and emerging development of ionic liquid
technologies on an industrial scale. Such advances also elevate the concerns
that the release of ionic liquids into the environment from wastewater
discharges, accidental spillage or a chemical plant accident, is likely to lead
to aquatic and groundwater contamination due to their water solubility and
limited biodegradability. The proposed research aims to generate foundational
knowledge and computational methodologies that can be extended to enzyme
engineering for ionic liquid biodegradation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
the proposed research is to unravel the thermodynamics and kinetics of the
bacterial cytochrome P450-mediated hydroxylation, the first step in the
biodegradation, of imidazolium-based ionic liquids. The knowledge will then be
utilized to rationally design the P450 BM3 enzyme to activate or accelerate the
hydroxylation step. The research is guided by the hypothesis that the molecular
level understanding of the intermediate steps leading to ionic liquid
hydroxylation can be leveraged to identify amino acid residues in the enzyme
binding pocket and the substrate access channel that present a thermodynamic
and/or kinetic barrier to the reaction. The hypothesis will be tested by (i)
characterizing the thermodynamics of the catalytic cycle of ionic liquid
hydroxylation; (ii) determining kinetic aspects of the catalytic cycle of ionic
liquid hydroxylation, and (iii) evaluating the influence of in silico
modification of the key P450 catalytic center residues on the thermodynamics and
kinetics of ionic liquid hydroxylation. Free energy-based molecular dynamics
simulations will be employed to determine the thermodynamic driving force for
ionic liquid binding and product release from the catalytic center. A hybrid
approach involving quantum mechanical treatment of the reacting species and
molecular mechanics representation of the protein environment and the solvent
will be adopted for the intermediate reaction steps. Integration of research and
education will be achieved by training high school chemistry and biology
teachers and aspiring teachers from the OSUTeach program in using molecular
editing and visualization tools, incorporating quantum calculations into a
graduate level course on modeling and simulation, and teaching undergraduate
students how to utilize computation and visualization in their
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.