* 1845023
* CAREER: Visually Encoding Personal Data for Vulnerable Populations
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jaime Snyder, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/2024
* USD 597,966.00

"How well did I sleep last night? How relaxed am I right now? Will I feel better
or worse tomorrow?" These questions are increasingly answerable with personal
data collected through fitness trackers and other sensors. Many of the tools
that enable this kind of self knowledge rely on visualizations of the data to
help users make sense of it. Choices made in the design of these visualizations
typically focus on how data are displayed, which data are given priority, and
how different types of data will be compared. All of these decisions impact how
self-knowledge is created and supported by personal data tools. For populations
with complex social identities (such as people experiencing serious mental
illness or members of marginalized communities), visual conventions applied to
personal data often carry problematic assumptions regarding what is "normal" and
what "progress" looks like. For example, common data science techniques for
visually representing data such as statistical smoothing, normative baselines,
and continuous temporal models often do not match well with the lived day-to-day
experiences of people with mood or cognitive disorders who self-track as a form
of therapy. This project will develop design methods and recommendations for
personal data visualizations that better match unique needs of people's
identities. The work will also result in non-discriminatory data visualization
practices, teaching materials, and professional resources for more reflective
approaches to the design of personal data visualizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research and related educational activities will
focus on the visual encoding of personal data for populations particularly
vulnerable to discriminatory and biased technology. Empirical design research
will engage two vulnerable groups: 1) transgender and gender nonconforming young
adults, who are at risk for mental illness and whose identities often badly
match common gender assumptions in personal informatics systems and 2) autistic
young adults, for whom social activities and visualizations may be quite
different from neurotypical individuals. A series of grounded design inquiries
will provide HCI, visualization, and data science communities with: 1) evidence
of how non-expert data practices are formed through interacting with
visualizations; 2) participatory design activities and collaborative visual
elicitation protocols; 3) analysis of opportunities, impacts, and implications
of non-discriminatory visual encodings of personal data; and 4) development and
assessment of medium-fidelity prototypes for personal informatics systems for
vulnerable populations. Educational activities will train data science students
in human-centered design methods to provide future data scientists with tools to
mitigate discriminatory design practices as they enter the workforce.
Educational assessment will focus on impacts of these methods to prepare
students to advocate against biases and make responsible decisions when working
with data of vulnerable stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.