* 1845840
* CAREER: Scalable Software and Algorithmic Infrastructure for Probabilistic Graphical Modeling
* CSE,OAC
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Jaroslaw Zola, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 01/31/2024
* USD 519,569.00

The data-driven reasoning is one of the major factors propelling progress in
science and engineering. In many practical applications, especially in biology
and medicine, data-driven reasoning has been based on probabilistic graphical
models, that are preferred because of the accuracy in data representation and
ease of interpretation. In probabilistic graphical modeling, the modeled
objects, for example, the attributes of a patient stored in electronic health
records, are represented as random variables, and the goal is to learn
dependencies between these variables. However, the methods to learn high-quality
probabilistic graphical models from the data are computationally challenging,
and do not scale to datasets emerging in modern applications. Therefore, this
project aims to enable high-quality probabilistic graphical modeling of large
datasets by using high performance computing techniques. To this end, the
project introduces a framework of fundamental operations underlying
probabilistic graphical modeling, including for managing data and coordinating
computations, together with their software fulfillment, that can efficiently
leverage large-scale parallel computers. The framework is designed to benefit
both practitioners interested in the analysis of large-scale data, and
researchers interested in the development of new learning algorithms. The
validation and evaluation of the framework is based on the analysis of
electronic health records with the goal of early prognosis and diagnosis of
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease - problems vital for
improving quality and reducing the cost of healthcare. Furthermore, the
framework provides the foundation to train the next generation of biomedical
professionals in the use of data analytics on advanced cyberinfrastructure.
Thus, the project is aligned with NSF's mission to promote the progress of
science, and to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project responds to the recognized and
growing demand for scalable machine learning methods that could capitalize on
parallel architectures such as large clusters of multi-core processors. The
research focus is on exact structure learning of probabilistic graphical models,
for example Bayesian networks and Markov random fields, in the context of
biomedical data analytics. The project is based on the two main components: a
new high performance abstraction for managing data in machine learning
applications, including memory efficient strategies for answering counting
queries on multi-core processors, and a new programming model for distributed
memory systems to facilitate efficient exploration of large-scale combinatorial
search spaces, such as those described by tress, lattices or graphs. These
abstractions are used to realize a set of new parallel, exact algorithms for
structure search, and the related problems, for example Markov blankets
identification, that accelerate learning by exploiting various properties of the
input data and the underlying search spaces. The research component is driven by
the timely and socially relevant application in personalized and preventive
medicine, enabled by a massive collection of the actual electronic health
records. The project aims to delivers multiple artifacts, including MPI and
OpenMP-based software, benchmark data and educational materials, all released as
open source for use, further development, enhancement, and incorporation by the
community. The research activities are tightly coupled with multiple educational
efforts, spanning development of an interdisciplinary course for medical
professionals to train them in the use of advanced cyberinfrastructure,
engagement of undergraduate students and underrepresented minorities in
research, and outreach to middle and high school students to attract them to
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.