* 1845021
* CAREER:  Higher systematics and co-evolution in the Diplostomoidea (Platyhelminthes, Digenea)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Sean Locke, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 818,760.00

Members of the superfamily Diplostomoidea are parasitic flatworms that infect
humans and wildlife, and many species are of importance in aquaculture and
wildlife health. Diplostomoids have complex life cycles, sequentially infecting
a series of hosts depending on life stage. While commonly encountered, the life
cycles of specific flat worms are poorly understood, and their evolutionary
history is unclear. This is problematic for robust discrimination of species,
and in turn impedes efforts to understand their ecology, protect biodiversity
and control diseases. In this project, a data-rich genomic approach will be used
to comprehensively analyze the evolutionary relationships in this superfamily,
revise higher taxonomy, describe new species, and match adult and juvenile
helminth stages. Relationships among parasite species will be compared to those
of their hosts to determine co-evolutionary patters with hosts across life
stages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collections will take place mainly in the
Americas, including regions and host taxa little studied to date, and vouchered
samples will be studied morphologically and processed using Sanger and several
rounds of next-generation sequencing. Whole-genome sequencing will be used to
develop a probe set targeting &gt;1000 conserved genomic elements, which will
then be selectively sequenced in the remaining samples from ongoing and past
collections for the construction of robust phylogenies. The probe set will be
applicable and of benefit for the study of other, non-diplostomoid trematodes.
The project is based in Puerto Rico and will support local graduate studentships
and a postdoctoral researcher. Undergraduate courses will be modified (peer-
mentoring, active learning, research experience) to increase learning and
retention among underrepresented minorities in STEM, and to yield data relevant
to the research component of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Division of Environmental Biology (Systematics and
Biodiversity Science Cluster) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.