* 1845514
* CAREER: Marlin: A Unified Framework for Automatic and Interactive Quantitative Program Analysis
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jan Hoffmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2024
* USD 534,815.00

Achieving reliability and security of software systems that we use on a daily
basis is one of the most pressing challenges of modern technology. It has been
demonstrated that software verification with mathematical methods is an
important component in meeting this challenge. However, most extant verification
projects and tools focus on demonstrating the functional correctness of
software. They do not analyze important quantitative properties of software such
as resource usage, side channels, and probabilistic guarantees, which are
crucial for reliability and security. The project's novelty is the design and
implementation of a general framework for quantitative verification that can be
applied to analyze resource usage, probabilistic programs (that incorporate
randomness), and side channels. The project's impact is that this framework
enables software developers to reduce the energy consumption of data centers, to
mitigate serious security vulnerabilities, and to connect statistical safety
guarantees to software systems that have machine-learning components. The
project also provides a pedagogical opportunity for curriculum development and
outreach activities. Quantitative verification and analysis tools implemented in
the project are being integrated in Carnegie-Mellon's undergraduate courses on
functional programming and data structures and algorithms, to both help students
reason about the complexity of their code, and help instructors and teaching
assistants automatically grade programming assignments by verifying complexity
requirements. As part of the project's outreach activities, the investigator is
designing two course modules for high-school students that are rolled out
through existing programs at Carnegie-Mellon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
research on quantitative analysis and verification is often problem-specific,
separated into manual or automatic techniques, and there is little cross-
fertilization between different areas. The aim of this project is to develop
Marlin, a unified framework for quantitative verification. A distinctive feature
of Marlin is the tight integration of interactive and automatic reasoning. This
includes converting manually derived quantitative properties into constraints
that can be consumed by automatic techniques and supporting more lightweight
forms of automation beyond full inference. Marlin is based on a full-featured
probabilistic programming language and an expressive quantitative program logic
that supports compositional and relational reasoning. Specific innovations of
Marlin include easily-understood descriptions of sub-languages for which the
automation is guaranteed to succeed, the automatic generation of worst-case
inputs, tail-bound analysis with higher moments, and automatic relational
reasoning. Marlin's foundation is shared by three specialized quantitative
analysis tools: Resource Aware ML (RaML), a language for static resource
analysis; ParML, a new language for side-channel free programming; and Borel, a
tool for probabilistic inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.