* 1845344
* CAREER: Abstract Universals in (Morpho)Syntax: Computational Characterizations and Empirical Implications
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Thomas Graf, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 03/31/2024
* USD 423,833.00

Language technology permeates the daily life of all Americans: from spam filters
and spellcheckers to Google translate and digital assistants like Alexa and
Siri. But not all language communities benefit equally. In order to perform
well, current language technology requires enormous amounts of data, which are
not available for smaller languages and dialects such as Navajo or African
American Vernacular English. This requirement stands in stark contrast to the
learning needs of children, who do not require much to acquire their native
language perfectly. Linguists have attributed the ease of language acquisition
to innate learning biases--all languages share universal properties, and a
learning algorithm that is aware of these universals requires less data. But
linguistic models of language universals are couched in terms that make them
hard to incorporate into current learning algorithms. Bridging the gap between
linguistic theory and language technology requires a mathematically and
computationally grounded understanding of universals, both of which are
incorporated in this project to inform language science and language
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a computational model of
universals in the domain of sentence structure and how it interacts with the
shape of words. It adopts a framework that is built on techniques from
theoretical computer science, mathematical logic, and abstract algebra. This
makes it possible to characterize universals in a manner that is both rigorous
and sufficiently flexible to easily accommodate the rich diversity of languages.
The researcher will generalize this formal machinery from sounds to words and
sentences. The project draws from from the linguistic literature on universals,
and feeds it by deriving new universals from the computational analysis. The
results will allow for new machine learning algorithms that incorporate
linguistic universals as a strong learning bias. In addition, this award
supports the development of an interactive, online learning platform. This
resource will enable linguistics students across the country to master the
skills they need to study language through a computational lens. Both the
research and the education component of this project thus serve the purpose of
bridging the gap between language science and language
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.