* 1845734
* CAREER:   Structural aspects of glutamine-rich domain liquid-liquid phase separation in transcription and RNA processing
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Nicolas Fawzi, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 01/31/2024
* USD 913,703.00

Living objects carry out instructions stored in chromosomal DNA by creating
thousands of distinct RNA molecules. These RNA molecules, code for, and regulate
other biological molecules that perform cellular functions. Synthesis,
processing, and destruction of these RNAs is frequently spatially organized into
compartments found in all domains of eukaryotic life, from single-celled fungi
to the specialized cells of multicellular organisms. These micron-sized
structures have long been observed by microscopy in different cell types and
locations but only recently have they been identified as membraneless
organelles. This project will visualize the molecular contacts that hold
together membraneless organelles associated with RNA transcription and
processing. These data will be essential to understand how these organelles
assemble, how they function, and how the formation and dissolution of these
assemblies is regulated. The plan for outreach provides an opportunity for local
K-12 public school students to contribute to this detailed view of phase
separating protein biophysics. The PI will 1) develop a module highlighting the
biological importance of protein structure and disorder for a Rhode Island high
school science outreach program, including training and competition using
Foldit, the protein folding/interaction video game, 2) pair two high school
students per year from this program with an undergraduate student mentor for a
one month project characterizing protein structure and phase separation, 3)
archive the lesson and hands-on training materials in a public database.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins with unstructured/disordered regions containing a
large amount of the amino acid glutamine are necessary for assembly of many of
the membraneless organelles in vivo and are sufficient for liquid-liquid phase
separation into protein droplets in vitro. Yet, the contacts formed within
membraneless organelles are invisible to traditional techniques in structural
biology. Therefore, membraneless organelle molecular architecture and
mechanistic function remain poorly understood. The planned research will answer
the general question: How do the glutamine-rich sequences in intrinsically
disordered protein domains encode the structure and interactions associated with
self- and co-assembly into membraneless organelles? The question will be
answered by characterizing the atomic structure and interactions of glutamine-
rich domains and their assemblies using NMR spectroscopy, microscopy, and
molecular simulation. Three different glutamine-rich proteins found in yeast and
invertebrate animals all known to be essential for physiological membraneless
organelle formation will be used as models. As representative members of a
diverse family of proteins, the results of the project will serve as the
foundation for understanding the structure, interactions, regulation, and
function of an entire class of RNA processing assemblies. Structural models and
in vitro findings will be tested in established in cell phase separation and in
organism phenotypic assays. This work serves as the first step in the long-term
objective to map the mechanistic link between the sequence, structure and
complexes of low complexity interaction domains and their assembly into
membraneless organelles. This project will provide atomically detailed
information on this important but mysterious phenomenon in eukaryotic cell
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.