* 1845003
* CAREER:   Assembly Mechanisms of Supramolecular Signaling Platforms
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Jungsan Sohn, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,010,895.00

The numerous reactions that support life must be highly coordinated in the cell
to optimize the use of resources and respond to environmental cues. Isolation of
competing processes into distinct sub-cellular organelles minimizes some
potential intracellular conflicts. However, not all sub-cellular organizational
units classify as organelles, as they lack a membrane barrier that would define
them as such. A newly appreciated organizational unit in the cell is a signaling
"hub." Construction of the hub from the ordered assembly of protein building
blocks can be triggered by diverse molecular events. This hub, or platform, then
recruits additional molecules that initiate the cell's response to the triggers
by activating and releasing a downstream signal. The hub both amplifies distress
signals and allows for a coordinated response to simultaneous events or insults.
This project aims to establish a framework for understanding how these signal
platforms assemble and operate at the molecular level. This information is
fundamental to understanding the coordination of the complex network of cellular
processes. The PI directs the Biophysics Research for Baltimore Teens (BRBT)
program, an outreach program for which exposes Baltimore city high school
students to current research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this
project will investigate how supramolecular assemblies mediate stress-response
pathways that lead to cell death. The research strategy includes computational
methods such as Rosetta and Monte Carlo simulations, Cryo-Electron Microscopy,
and quantitative measurements in both cell-free and cell-based systems. The
first goal is to determine how different upstream receptors preferentially homo-
polymerize, avoid crosstalk, yet recognize a single adaptor assembly. The second
goal is to elucidate how different regulators target and inhibit specific
signaling components in these pathways. The outcome here will delineate
structural and biochemical mechanisms by which supramolecular assemblies
coordinate signal integration at different stages of the cell-death
pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.