* 1845241
* Practitioner Workshop for Deploying SciStarter Affiliate Tools To Support Strategic STEM Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Steve Gano, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 08/31/2019
* USD 74,990.00

This workshop is funded by the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program,
which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based understanding of,
the design and development of STEM learning in informal environments. This
includes providing multiple pathways for broadening access to and engagement in
STEM learning experiences, advancing innovative research on and assessment of
STEM learning in informal environments, and developing understandings of deeper
learning by participants. The project will conduct a two-day workshop that will
gather citizen science project leaders to address barriers in citizen science
research and infrastructure: The inability to holistically study the movement,
engagement, persistence and learning outcomes among volunteers engaged in
multiple projects. The past few years have been a time of tremendous growth in
awareness of and interest in citizen science projects. The project will address
an increasing gap preventing projects in three now-popular categories (apps,
projects hosted on government websites, and event-based projects) from adopting
the digital tools created and available through SciStarter.com. The workshop
will bring citizen science project leaders together to deepen an understanding
of their needs regarding the adoption of digital tools, developed by Scistarter,
which will result in more comprehensive data in support of research in informal
science learning outcomes of volunteers engaged in citizen science across
projects and platforms. The in-person and online contributions from participants
will guide the development of resources and tutorials to scale
adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SciStarter is a repository of hundreds of citizen
science projects. Through previous NSF support, SciStarter developed digital
affiliate tools which project leaders use on their own websites to enable
analytics (statistics gathered from user activity online) to help projects more
easily recruit and coordinator volunteers, help volunteers track their
contributions across projects and platforms, and help researchers holistically
study the movement and learning outcomes across projects and platforms. The
proposed workshop will facilitate iteration and adoption of the tools among
three classes of projects, not originally accounted for, which have dramatically
increased in numbers during the past year: 1) app-based projects, 2) projects
hosted on government websites, and 3) event-based projects.. By co-designing and
implementing iterative versions of the tools among these projects, the project
will address important gaps in research, enable a richer, more comprehensive
understanding of volunteer engagement patterns, and discover opportunities to
build a stronger community of citizen science practitioners who collaborate to
enhance volunteer learning communities. The project will culminate in improved
research in this field and improved management of citizen science projects for
appropriate recruitment and retention that fosters STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.