* 1845417
* CAREER:  Ecosystem Processes in the Age of Antibiotics
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Michael Strickland, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/29/2024
* USD 651,698.00

In 1928, Alexander Fleming identified the antibiotic properties of penicillin.
Since this discovery antibiotics have been a boon for human health as well as
for agricultural livestock production. In fact, the latter utilizes 80% of the
antibiotics produced in the United States, a staggering 33 million pounds a
year. Most of these antibiotics and antibiotic derivatives ultimately enter the
environment, leading to the assertion that no environment on earth is free from
the influence of agricultural antibiotics. Despite this, little research has
examined the environmental influence agricultural antibiotics are likely to
have, for example, on soil microbial communities and the ecosystem processes
they mediate. This research will determine the effect antibiotics have on soil
food webs and ecosystem processes both now and in an uncertain future. While
examining the environmental implications of antibiotics, this project will
include training at the graduate student and postdoctoral levels, and develop an
authentic, expeditionary style curriculum that can be integrated across multiple
middle schools which enables students to actively participate in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a combined set of survey, field, and lab experiments
this research will determine: 1) biogeographic patterns of the soil resistome
(i.e. the collection and diversity of antibiotic resistance genes); 2) the
implications of antibiotics for soil food webs and ecosystem processes; and 3)
the interaction between antibiotic inputs and temperature changes. Soil
microbial communities are central to the healthy functioning of terrestrial
ecosystems. However, these communities are likely to be markedly affected by
antibiotic inputs derived from exogenous sources. For instance, antibiotic
inputs may alter microbial efficiency leading to lower ecosystem carbon and
nutrient retention, affect soil food web structure and community interactions,
and potentially influence the response of soil microbial communities to global
environmental change. This research is designed to investigate the potentially
important, but under-studied, role antibiotic inputs have on terrestrial
ecosystems. Additionally, this research seeks to better understand the
susceptibility of particular soil communities and ecosystem function to
antibiotic perturbation. The results gained from this research will lead to a
more complete understanding of the potential impact antibiotic inputs have on
soil community structure and function, and the implication of these inputs in
the future. In addition to training a graduate student and postdoctoral
researcher, the educational component of this project will expose middle school
students -- a student population that is at a critical juncture in deciding
their lifetime career objectives, but often not actively engaged in science --
to multiple curricular modules that aim to increase their knowledge of soil,
microbial, and ecosystem ecology. These young students will also be active
participants in the project by collecting data and conducting research directly
related to the scientific objectives of this project. Overall this project will
elucidate the environmental implications of antibiotics while also providing a
foundation in scientific discovery for middle school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.