* 1845686
* CAREER:  Maintenance of Variation in a Developmental Pathway as a Result of Environmental Heterogeneity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Richard Meisel, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/29/2024
* USD 1,187,478.00

Whether an animal develops into a male or female depends on either environmental
cues or genetic differences between males and females. The environmental cues or
genes that initiate this male/female-determination differ across species, and
they can even be variable within a species. It is not well understood how
ecological factors contribute to the maintenance of genetic variation in
male/female-determination within species. To address this shortcoming, this
research uses the house fly as a model system because this species has
substantial variation in how the male/female decision is made. Notably, there
are two common ways that male development can be initiated, and they differ in
their geographical distributions. One male-determining variant predominates at
northern latitudes, and the other is more common in the south. The researchers
are investigating if the two different variants are both maintained because they
are beneficial at different temperatures. In addition, female development can be
initiated independently from the male-determining variants in house fly. The
researchers are also investigating if the variants that initiate male
development have deleterious effects in females. These antagonistic effects
could further explain why variation in male/female-determination is maintained
in house fly populations. Undergraduate students training to be high school
teachers will contribute to this research. Those students will work with the
researchers to provide continuing education training to current teachers. They
will also lead middle and high school classrooms in exercises that use house
flies to illustrate core concepts in genetics and evolution. These activities
will impact students from under-served communities that are under-represented in
the sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To determine how natural selection can
maintain variation in male/female-determination, the researchers are combining
laboratory experiments, surveys of natural populations, and genomic techniques.
Specifically, the research tests the hypothesis that male/female-specific
genotype-by-environment interactions affect selection pressures acting on Y
chromosomes to maintain variation in male/female-determination in house fly. The
environment-dependent phenotypic effects of very young Y chromosomes will be
assessed using laboratory experiments and high throughput gene expression
profiling. Predictions about allele frequencies in laboratory populations and
over seasons in the wild will be tested, and fitness effects will be modeled.
The hypothesis that suppressed recombination maintains linkage between male-
determining genes and other genetic variation with male/female-antagonistic or
environment-specific effects will be evaluated using recombination mapping,
genome sequencing, and population genetic data to test for X-Y differentiation.
This research connects ecologically relevant selection pressures and male-female
conflict with the evolution of an essential developmental pathway, joining
population genetics and the evolution of development in a single
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.