* 1845020
* CAREER:  Neuropeptidergic and cAMP-mediated regulation of stress-induced sleep in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Matthew Nelson, St Joseph's University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 08/31/2024
* USD 651,287.00

Sleep is essential for life and has been observed in all animals closely
studied. Surprisingly, the function of sleep remains one of nature's greatest
mysteries. During sickness, sleep is enhanced by the immune system. Thus, one
function may involve the redistribution of resources allowing for cellular
repair following damage that occurs during injury or infection. The genes that
regulate sleep are becoming better understood; interestingly, these genes are
conserved among distantly related animals from invertebrates, like nematodes, to
humans. By identifying novel sleep genes and their interactions in cellular
pathways in relatively simple animals, one may gain insights into sleep
regulation and function in more complex animals, like humans. This project uses
a combination of genetic and behavioral approaches in the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans, including genetic manipulations, live monitoring of
neural activity and animal video analyses, to manipulate and characterize sleep
at the cellular and organismal level. Notably, the gene discovery approaches
used in this study will be incorporated into college physiology teaching labs
and Philadelphia public school science classes, to provide unique STEM
experiences for students focusing on genetics, whole-genome sequencing and
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;C. elegans display sleep following exposure to
environmental stressors that may damage their cells, a behavior called stress-
induced sleep (SIS). The proposed function of SIS is defined as a period of
behavioral quiescence dedicated for cellular repairs that occur following insult
or injury. Out of the 302-celled C. elegans nervous system, SIS is largely
induced by a single interneuron, the ALA. The ALA releases neuropeptides, which
induce different aspects of behavioral quiescence. Recently, neuropeptides
encoded by the gene nlp-14 were identified to be central regulators of SIS and
are likely thought to be released from the ALA. NLP-14 peptides are both
necessary and sufficient for SIS. These sleep-promoting peptides may function by
facilitating the reduction of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate
(cAMP) in a subset of cells that contain high levels of cAMP during times of
wakefulness. This project will elucidate the connections of the ALA and NLP-14
peptides to downstream circuitry. This will be examined via the measurement of
cAMP levels in sleeping animals using an in vivo biosensor. Additionally, novel
downstream cells will be identified through the activation of a red-light
activated adenylyl cyclase, IlaC22, in groups of cells. It will investigate the
mechanism(s) of activation of adenosine monophosphate-activated kinase (AMPK), a
metabolic master regulator that diverts cellular resources from growth to
repair, which functions downstream of SIS. Also, this project will determine
specific roles for the NLP-14 peptides in a three-part process: (i) the removal
of individual peptides using CRISPR-Cas9, (ii) over expression of individual
peptides in new transgenic strains, and (iii) a forward genetic suppressor
screen to identify NLP-14 receptor(s). The genetic screen will be incorporated
into high school outreach laboratory exercises to enhance STEM education in the
Philadelphia community. This will be accomplished through field trips and the
establishment of a webcast behavioral platform called
WormCam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.