* 1845436
* CAREER: Building an Online Learning for Mastery System That Creates a Student-centered STEM Learning Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2025
* Zhongzhou Chen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 03/31/2025
* USD 756,409.00

The project addresses three major challenges facing STEM higher education in the
United States today: educating an increasingly diverse and non-traditional
student population, producing at least 1 million additional STEM graduates, and
reducing the cost of higher education. The goal of the project is to create a
student-centered online learning system that has the the potential to allow
every student to select and engage with learning resources that best suit their
own backgrounds and learning needs. In this way, the online learning system
could provide a personalized learning experience at a large scale. In addition,
by enabling instructors to collaboratively design, create, share, and improve
instructional resources, the project aims to develop the personalized online
learning system without increasing (and possibly reducing) the cost of higher
education for students. This online learning system may be most beneficial to
first-generation college students, students from rural communities and from
groups that are underrepresented in college, adult learners, and others who may
be less prepared to succeed in college and who face significant financial or
other difficulties in pursuit of higher education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the
core of the project is creation of an Online Learning for Mastery (OLM) system,
which will be designed by combining the latest online learning technology with
the concept of "mastery learning" design. Mastery Learning breaks down a topic
into a sequence of learning modules that each contain formative assessment,
instruction, and practice. This approach enables students to move through the
material at their own pace. The OLM system will consist of multiple sequences of
learning modules, with each module combining instructional resources with
formative assessment, allowing students who have already mastered the content to
quickly move ahead, while providing struggling students ample support and
opportunities to catch up at their own pace. The OLM system has the potential to
produce a large amount of data on each student's learning process. These data
have better interpretability than what is collected from conventional online
learning platforms. The project aims to develop analysis algorithms to extract
rich information about student learning behavior and learning difficulties from
the data. The data, in turn, will guide instructors and researchers in
developing new instructional materials and platform features to help students
become better self-regulated and motivated learners. The process is akin to
civil engineers designing highway systems and safety features based on analysis
of traffic data collected from GPS systems. The data collection capability of
the OLM system serves as such a "learning GPS" for both instructors and
students. Results from the project have the potential to contribute significant
new knowledge to our understanding of student learning behavior in a self-paced
online STEM learning environment, and to inform effective instructional designs
to facilitate a student's learning process. The project proposes to create two
online courses. The first course will be an online introductory college physics
course serving as the online component of multiple blended format courses at the
University of Central Florida. This course could potentially be shared between
multiple institutions including six local state colleges in the Orlando area.
The second course will be a development course designed for instructors,
introducing them to the latest online learning technologies and research
findings related to OLM and mastery learning, while attempting to build a
community of instructors for creating, improving, sharing, and reusing OLM
modules. This project has the potential not only to increase knowledge about
effective online education but also to broaden participation in STEM fields by
reducing education cost, increasing accessibility, and supporting multiple
pathways to a STEM degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.