* 1845349
* CAREER: Pseudorandom Objects and their Applications in Computer Science
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Xin Li, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

One of the most successful paradigms in computer science since the 1970s is the
use of random bits (coin flips) in computation, which can be demonstrated from
several broad aspects. For example, many simple randomized algorithms perform
better than sophisticated deterministic algorithms, and random bits are widely
used in modern cryptography to ensure security. Moreover, in certain
applications regarding designing combinatorial objects (such as highly connected
sparse networks), simply choosing a random object often achieves the best
parameters. However, the use of random bits comes at a price: in practice high
quality random bits are often too costly to obtain, and many applications such
as the example of designing a sparse network require deterministic constructions
rather than randomized ones. The overarching goal of this project is to
understand the fundamental question of when and how one can replace the use of
random bits or randomized objects by pseudorandom objects, which are objects
that are deterministically constructed but behave like random ones. This will
lead to a deeper understanding of the nature of random bits in computation, as
well as more efficient and secure solutions to important questions both in
theory and in practice. Examples of benefits include faster algorithms for
handling large data sets, more robust networks, and more reliable communications
in hostile environments. The project also involves plans for mentoring PhD
students, integration of the research topics into courses and books that appeal
to students from a variety of different backgrounds, and support of under-
represented groups of students in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project contains three sets of specific goals. The first set of goals seeks to
understand how to reduce the quantity or quality of random bits in computation
generally, using two kinds of pseudorandom objects known as pseudorandom
generators and randomness extractors. A pseudorandom generator is a function
that stretches a short random seed into a long string that looks random to
certain functions, and it can be used to reduce the quantity of random bits
required. A randomness extractor is a function that transforms imperfect random
sources into high quality random bits. The second set of goals investigates the
connections of these pseudorandom objects to computational complexity theory.
Specifically, the goal is to use the random-like property of these objects to
give new constructions of deterministic objects that circumvent barriers in
long-standing open problems, such as the question of sequential computation
versus parallel computation. The third set of goals involves development of new
techniques for constructions of error-correcting codes, which can be used both
to protect against various tampering attacks from adversaries, and to achieve
privacy or security in cryptographic systems. The study of these topics is based
on techniques from several related areas such as probability theory, information
theory, cryptography, combinatorics, and harmonic analysis, and will further
foster the interactions among these areas towards
breakthroughs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.