* 1845931
* CAREER: Coordinating climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies across the energy-water nexus: An integrated research and education framework
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Kelly Sanders, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2024
* USD 507,490.00

This research will develop conceptual models (1) to quantify how climate
influences the operational and environmental performance of electric power
generation resources within the power sector; (2) to evaluate the opportunities
and challenges associated with emerging consumer demand, and (3) to develop
quantitative metrics to compare tradeoffs across these diverse supply and demand
resources, particularly as they relate to climate mitigation, adaptation, and
environmental sustainability priorities. Each objective leverages insights and
methods established through past energy-water nexus work by the Principal
Investigator (PI). The project will build a foundation for the PI's long-term
goal of creating more robust, adaptive, and sustainable power systems by
coordinating the behavior of power suppliers and power consumers through market
structures and automation to maximize the power sector's environmental
sustainability, resilience to disruption, and
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project utilizes physics-based
modeling techniques to build a statistical framework that offers probabilistic
insight into how climate change might affect the operation and environmental
externalities of the power sector across a continuum of historical through
extreme climate change projections. Frameworks are designed to compare
conventional and emerging supply-side and demand-side resources through the lens
of the challenges imposed by future warming. In the energy sector, the knowledge
developed through this CAREER project promises to be an important step to enable
new methodologies to inform and assess tradeoffs for electric infrastructure
build-outs, DSM interventions, future electricity market structures, and real-
time pricing strategies that consider regional and environmental conditions
(rather than reliability and cost alone). The project's generalized statistical
framework could also be applied to assess how other critical infrastructures,
such as water, agricultural and transportation systems, vary in terms of their
climate vulnerability, mitigation, and adaptation tradeoffs. This framework also
allows analysts to present stakeholders with anticipated performance tradeoffs
across a probabilistic distribution of climate conditions, rather than a single
projection that might be contentious in some stakeholder groups. Annual outreach
events leveraging the PI's role as a Resident Faculty at USC will connect
underserved K-12 groups with freshmen in the PI's dormitory, creating a spirit
of mentorship, while empowering underserved minorities with the knowledge to
advocate for their own environmental justice. These events will utilize the
Parkside Interactive Sustainability Laboratory, a community gardening space
built by the PI to introduce students to sustainability through activity-based
environmental programming. The themes, data, and models generated through this
project will be incorporated into the PI's existing undergraduate and graduate
classes, where students will be challenged to create web-based educational
content for younger students to facilitate knowledge sharing. In the broader
context, drought and heatwaves have already prompted significant power
curtailments across the world. Considering that installed generation capacity is
projected to grow by 140% globally by 2040, generalized frameworks to improve
and protect the performance of the power grid within the context of regional
climate will be critical for making wise investment decisions. By connecting
K-12, undergraduate, graduate students and their broader social and policy-
making communities, progress will be made in educating a diverse workforce,
prepared to address society's critical challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.