* 1845431
* CAREER: The evolution of female alternative reproductive tactics in a cooperative bird
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Christina Riehl, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Renn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 570,015.00

Individual variation in behavior is widespread in the animal kingdom and it is
still unclear how this variation in behavior impacts reproduction and survival
in animals. The greater ani is a tropical bird that nests in groups: several
females lay their eggs in a shared nest and help to raise the mixed clutch of
nestlings. However, some females act as reproductive parasites, laying their
eggs into a group's nest but providing no parental care. A female ani can
therefore use two alternative tactics for reproduction: she can nest in a
cooperative group and help to raise her own young, or she can act as a parasite
and let another group do all of the work. But why do some females nest
cooperatively, whereas others, in the same population, act as parasites? One
goal of this project is to understand whether this behavior difference is due to
underlying genetic differences, or whether it results from differences in the
females' histories (for example, their body condition or the nutrition that they
received during development). A related goal is to understand how a female's
reproductive behaviors affect her male mate. Are males more successful if they
pair with a parasitic female, or a cooperative female? Conversely, does a male's
behavior affect whether his mate acts as a parasite or a cooperator? This
research can provide significant insight into why reproductive behavioral
variation occurs and how males and females coordinate behavior for maximal
reproductive success. Field work for this project will take place in Panama,
creating opportunities for formative research experiences for low-income high
school and college students in the U.S. Finally, it will enable participation in
a New Jersey state prison teaching program that serves one of the most neglected
and under-served populations in the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Individual variation in behavioral
strategies poses an enduring evolutionary puzzle. When should selection favor
divergent solutions to the same problem, instead of a single optimum? Disruptive
selection, in which intermediate behavioral phenotypes have lower fitness than
extreme alternatives, is thought to play a crucial role in the evolution of
alternative reproductive tactics (ARTs) in male animals. However, the
evolutionary dynamics and proximate mechanisms influencing female ARTs remain
poorly understood, although such strategies are widespread. The greater ani
(Crotophaga major), a tropical bird that nests in social groups, provides a
unique opportunity to answer fundamental questions about the evolution of female
ARTs. Females typically lay their eggs in communal nests and share reproduction
and parental care; however, a small minority of females consistently act as
reproductive parasites, laying their eggs into the nest of a host group but
providing no parental care. The co-existence of widespread parasitism and non-
kin cooperation offers an ideal system in which to test long-standing hypotheses
about the evolutionary origins and maintenance of female ARTs. The goals of this
project are to 1) evaluate whether disruptive selection on reproductive
investment favors discrete parasitic and communal tactics; 2) investigate the
environmental and genetic mechanisms determining the expression of these
strategies; and 3) understand evolutionary feedbacks between alternative female
strategies and male fitness. Data on individual reproductive behaviors will be
collected from a long-term field site in Panama, enabling direct estimates of
heritability, reproductive output, and reproductive investment from a color-
marked population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.