* 1845508
* CAREER: SHF: Debugging Mental Models
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Thomas LaToza, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 530,962.00

When software fails to behave as intended, a software developer working to
address this issue engages in the activity of debugging. Debugging is often
challenging, as developers must generate possible hypotheses about a failure's
cause, laboriously test hypotheses by reasoning about the behavior of complex
code, and use debugging tools to generate and identify relevant runtime state.
These challenges may be manifest to software users as software with unfixed
defects and increased software cost. In addition, expert developers have
knowledge which, if extracted, would be valuable in helping to debug more
easily. Experts have long been shown to do even simple programming tasks over
ten times more quickly than non-experts, largely because they have seen similar
situations before. This project addresses the question of the nature of mental
models of debugging and the creation of a scientific foundation for
understanding, externalizing, and sharing expert insight into the runtime
behavior of programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project encompasses a
comprehensive set of activities for conducting studies of software developers
and designing new forms of debugging tools. A broad sample of developers will be
observed to collect sketches capturing mental models from debugging tasks,
abstract common building blocks, and count the frequency of these building
blocks. New types of debugging tools will be designed which enable developers to
externalize their mental models by recording, abstracting, and replaying queries
over program executions and visualizing relationships between elements within
program executions. New debugging tools will be evaluated through user studies
to understand if and how developers may externalize and share their debugging
mental models. Together, these activities will deepen the scientific
understanding of how developers debug and create new techniques for developers
to work more effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.