* 1845915
* CAREER: ABI-Innovation: CiliaWeb: Integrated platform for foundational and reproducible ciliary beat pattern analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Shannon Quinn, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2024
* USD 964,099.00

Cilia are microscopic hairs that protrude from nearly every cell in the human
body, including those in the throat, nose, lungs, kidneys, and brain. Cilia move
in regular, rhythmic patterns in order to transport materials outside the cells.
These movements of the cilia are important at every stage of life, from early
embryonic development to reproduction and regular healthy maintenance; in short,
healthy cilia are a critical component of overall health of an organism.
Consequently, when cilia move abnormally, numerous debilitating conditions can
result, encompassing disorders ranging from developmental shortcomings in the
embryo to adult pathologies such as infertility and lung scarring. Therefore,
the key question this proposal seeks to answer is: by observing the motion of
cilia, is it possible to predict whether the morphology or behavior is abnormal,
and if so, whether that particular abnormality is associated with a specific
condition? The answer to this question has implications not only in human
health, but also in building fundamental knowledge of the biology around how
cilia are constructed and maintained. To address this question, we are building
the CiliaWeb platform, which will include new algorithms for analyzing videos of
cilia and shedding light on the statistics of ciliary motion. The algorithms
will take advantage of the regular back-and-forth movements of cilia and be
built to incorporate crowdsourced feedback from users to improve the models of
ciliary motion. As its name implies, CiliaWeb will be internet-accessible for
researchers and clinicians to upload datasets, conduct analyses, and visualize
results. The ultimate goal of CiliaWeb is to provide a standardized platform for
ciliary motion analysis that can be reproduced and validated by others,
encouraging collaboration and catalyzing new discoveries in fundamental cilia
research as well as connections to health and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cilia are microscopic hairs that protrude
from eukaryotic cells and are critical components in development, reproduction,
and homeostasis. Cilia beat in synchronous waves to generate fluid flow and
clear particulates; disruptions of these motions result in a spectrum of
pathologies. However, no quantitative, reproducible, and validated method exists
for assessing ciliary motion from high-speed videomicroscopy. Without such a
method, beat pattern phenotype cannot be used to conclusively advance our
understanding of the fundamental biology of cilia (construction and
maintenance), nor the precise role of beat pattern in organismal health
(examples being signaling, development, fertility). This proposal aims to create
the CiliaWeb framework to establish an objective measure of motion phenotypes,
enable new lines of inquiry into biophysical mechanisms of ciliary motion and
discover the biological roles of specific motion phenotypes, as well as make
possible cross-institutional collaborations, large-scale genotype-phenotype
association studies, and longitudinal biomedical studies. The CiliaWeb platform
will incorporate tightly-integrated and openly-available tools for processing
ciliary motion, including: a novel unsupervised dynamic texture segmentation
algorithm for automatically identifying cilia in high-speed digital videos; a
hierarchical encoding scheme for quantifying ciliary motion at multiple
spatiotemporal scales; a crowdsourcing module to solicit targeted feedback on
the learned motion patterns that are fully interactive and automated. CiliaWeb
will contribute methodological advancements in computational bioimaging and
establish baseline data through the release of open source code and validated
datasets, in addition to hands-on outreach and training for students in the form
of workshops and hackathons. Project updates:
https://quinngroup.github.io&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.