* 1845190
* CAREER:  Empirical Studies on the Impact of Public Policy and Incentive Design in Insurance for Health-Related Risks
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Marika Cabral, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 476,000.00

Many of the large financial risks individuals face are related to adverse health
incidents, such as costly medical bills, lost work time, and permanent
disability. Insurance can reduce the financial impact of health shocks, and
government intervention in health insurance markets can have large effects on
the health and broader wellbeing of individuals. It is therefore important to
understand the most efficient design of incentives and the consequences of
government intervention in these markets. This CAREER research project will
combine several administrative data sets with modern research strategies to
analyze many aspects of insurance market design for health risks. The research
results will inform public policy on health insurance markets which serve in an
important way to improve the lives of millions of individuals in the United
States. The results of this research project will contribute to lower healthcare
cost, improve health, and ultimately increase worker productivity and economic
growth in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research project consists of
a series of empirical studies on the impact of public policy and incentive
design within two health-related insurance settings: workers' compensation
insurance and health insurance provided by Medicare and Medicaid. The first
component investigates the setting of workers' compensation insurance. This
study will analyze the importance of coverage mandates in addressing insurance
market failures such as adverse selection and externalities, utilizing variation
and administrative data. The aim of this component is to leverage datasets
created by linking administrative data sets on workers' compensation policies,
worker labor market outcomes, and claims. The second project investigates
incentive design within Medicare and Medicaid. This study investigates the
impact of physician incentives for providing health care to beneficiaries dually
eligible for Medicare and Medicaid leveraging a sharp change in physician
payment rates for selected services provided to dual-eligible beneficiaries with
the introduction of the ACA. The final component is an integrated education
plan, which focuses on developing a mentoring workshop in health economics for
advanced graduate students and recent PhDs. The result of this research project
will provide important health insurance policy inputs that will improve
efficiency in the sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.