* 1845540
* Conference on Equity for Discipline-Based Education Researchers in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Geraldine Cochran, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 12/31/2021
* USD 49,990.00

Equal access in discipline-based education research and within institutions of
higher education is important for our nation. Recently, STEM discipline-based
educational research communities have increased their attention to inequities
within their disciplines. This invited conference will be the first of its kind
to bring together experts in discipline-based education research from chemistry,
mathematics, and physics to discuss equity issues. The conference will include
participants from a different disciplines and types of educational institutions
to share their insights about equity questions and potential solutions. The
conference has three goals. The first is to articulate the most pressing equity-
related needs within these fields. The second is to formulate strategies for
addressing these needs. The third is to set up collaborations across
institutional and disciplinary boundaries to address these
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports a two-day conference at
Rutgers University for about 75 invited participants in May 2019. The conference
will include thought-mapping sessions to explore questions including: What is
equity in discipline-based education research? What research is being conducted
at the intersection of various identities? What are the takeaways from the
conference? and What are the next steps to move the ideas further? It will also
include poster presentations, keynote speakers, and collaborative group
discussions. The conference will produce a conference proceeding that will
include the agenda, abstracts and presentations from keynote talks, and
abstracts and posters from poster sessions. The PI will also produce a
conference report that will include an annotated bibliography of current work on
equity in the selected disciplines. This conference could provide a significant
starting point for an accelerated discussion of ways to improve equity within
the disciplines of mathematics, physics, and chemistry in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.