* 1845464
* CAREER: Reprogramming Transcriptional Regulation by Chemical Stabilization of Repressive Homodimers
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Angela Koehler, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 04/30/2024
* USD 799,997.00

Genes are the genetic information that defines who and what we are at the
cellular level. The ability to turn genes on or off can determine the fate of a
cell. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, with cofounding from the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences is supporting Dr. Angela Koehler from the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Dr. Koehler is designing and synthesizing
new chemical compounds that can change the "master program" that turns genes on
and off in a cell. One such compound acts as a molecular glue that holds two
molecules of a gene regulator together and, in doing so, turns off a set of
genes that have been implicated in human disease. The studies in this project
capture atomic level snapshots of the genes and complex together. These pictures
allow the design of new molecules that can serve as stronger molecular glues.
The results from these studies may provide researchers with molecular tools to
reprogram cells and change their activity. The research program is integrated
with an education plan to train graduate students and visiting undergraduates
(including those from groups that are under-represented in STEM) in advanced
biochemical methods. These methods include X-ray crystallography (used to
develop atomic pictures of molecules), computer modeling (to help design new
molecules), and chemical synthesis (to create the newly designed molecular
glues). Dr. Koehler participates in the Broad Institute Summer Research Program,
which provides research opportunities to students from under-represented groups
from various colleges and universities. She leads an outreach project to develop
an interactive game and coloring books as resources to teach the concepts of
"good" and "bad" molecular interactions (through analogies to comic book type
characters) at the K-12 level. The research group also participates in the
Cambridge Science Festival Cancer Program at the Boston Museum of Science, in
which the concepts of small molecule-protein binding are presented through
analogy to interactions among people. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research
project applies chemical approaches to reprogram gene expression networks by
targeting master regulator transcription factors. Molecular compounds that
reprogram transcription and alter the fate of cells are tools in synthetic
biology, and facilitate the study of cellular development or causes of human
disease. The focus of this project is to design molecular compounds that act as
glues that can stabilize the repressive homodimeric form of the MAX
transcription factor. A published chemical probe (KI-MS2-008) that binds to and
stabilizes MAX serves a starting point for structure-guided design of new
molecular glues with different chemical core scaffolds. The crystal structure of
KI-MS2-008 with MAX elucidates details for how this asymmetric binder stabilizes
the homodimeric protein. Structures of the MAX/KI-MS2-008 complex in the
presence or absence of DNA guides the design of new molecular glue chemotypes
with improved chemical properties and enhanced cellular activity. These new
chemotypes are characterized for their effects on the binding of MAX to
chromatin and subsequent effects on global patterns of transcriptional activity.
General principles resulting from this study aid in the development of molecular
glues for other transcriptional homodimers. The project provides graduate
students and visiting undergraduates from under-represented groups with
opportunities to acquire specialized training in X-ray crystallography,
molecular modeling, and synthetic chemistry. The project also contributes to a
module in an undergraduate lab course focused on cutting-edge methods in
molecular-level engineering of protein interactions and perturbation of cellular
systems. Finally, the project forms the basis of a "small molecule detectives"
effort for K-12 students interested in perturbing cellular
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.