* 1845877
* AON: Continuation of long-term observations of the Beaufort Gyre environmental changes in 2019-2020 to enhance understanding of the Arctic's impact on climate variability
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Andrey Proshutinsky, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 02/28/2023
* USD 1,927,194.00

The Beaufort Gyre (BG) is a unique circulation component within the Arctic
Ocean's physical environmental system reflecting a set of specific atmospheric,
sea-ice, oceanic and bio-geo-ecological conditions that have significant
interrelationships with the Arctic-wide and global climate system. One of the
most striking Arctic observations in the 21st century has been a reduction in
both sea-ice extent and thickness, and an increase of freshwater content in the
BG region. At present, there are insufficient observations or theories to reach
a consensus among the different opinions about these changes and their impact on
climate. The BG summer freshwater content has increased by 6,600 km3 since 2003.
Not only does this have important consequences for Arctic sea-ice, ocean
thermodynamics, and ecosystems, but a possible fresh water release from the
Arctic of this magnitude is enough to cause a salinity anomaly in the North
Atlantic with a magnitude comparable to the Great Salinity Anomaly of the 1970s,
which could influence global climate by reducing the ocean meridional
overturning circulation and result in cooling. Thus, the BG system is a
potential source to force significant climate changes, likely at decadal time
scales. Data returned from this project and distributed freely via the project
website and archived with the NSF Arctic Data Center will continue to advance
our understanding of the physical, chemical, and biological drivers of
environmental change in the Arctic, their relationship to the climate system,
and linkages to global processes. Long-term time series of project data will
facilitate numerical model initialization and validation and stimulate general
interest in Arctic science issues. The knowledge gained under this project will
continue to be vital to a wide variety of Arctic processes and climate studies,
to operational forecasting and other Arctic research programs, and will spur
further valuable investigations of the Arctic Ocean. This project will continue
to expand international cooperation and promote widespread access to Arctic for
both researchers and the general public. Educational activities will include
training of graduate students providing them the opportunity to participate in
BG cruises and advising them in BG data analysis. The project data will continue
to be used by the Forum for Arctic Modeling and Observational Synthesis (FAMOS)
project and Arctic community to validate and improve Arctic regional and global
models, test hypotheses, and answer scientific
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Beaufort Gyre Observing System (BGOS) will
be continued throughout 2019-2020 to observe a set of environmental parameters
using bottom-anchored moorings and shipboard measurements to continue the long-
term time-series at standard locations. Ship-based synoptic sampling covering
the entire BG will continue to be performed each summer in collaboration with
Canadian scientists to observe reversal of the climatic circulation regime that
has been persistent in one sense over the observation period. Temperature,
salinity, oxygen, nutrients, barium, CFCs and carbon tetrachloride, alkalinity,
total CO2, dissolved inorganic carbon, tritium/3-He and delta-O-18 will continue
to be measured and analyzed along sections at 140W, 150W, ~75N and ~78N using a
shipboard CTD/rosette. Between CTD/rosette casts, expendable CTDs that profile
to 1100m depth will continue to be used to increase spatial resolution of the
temperature and salinity fields. Three BGOS moorings redeployed in 2018 will
acquire precise data on the variations of the vertical distribution of seawater
properties, bottom pressures, and sea ice draft at the same scientifically
important sites within the BG system and will be retrieved in
2020.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.