* 1845203
* CAREER: Muscle-Inspired Load-Adaptive Actuation for Compliant Robotics
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Matthew Bryant, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will advance the
national health, welfare, and security through scientific advancements in the
field of biologically-inspired robotics favorable for wearable technology and
exoskeletons. The research will make important contributions to society by
increasing robot energy efficiency and performance while simultaneously
improving human-robot interaction compatibility and safety through the use of
inherently soft actuators. Actuators are critical component of a machine or
robot that are responsible for moving and controlling a mechanism or components
of a system. Current robotic actuators are poorly suited to wearable or human-
assistive applications because they are inefficient when used in slow, variable-
speed motions like moving an arm or leg. In addition, they create human safety
hazards due to their stiffness and rigid motions. This research will create a
new type of actuator that is inspired by human muscle tissues, which contain
thousands of fibers that are selectively recruited to provide only the amount of
force needed for a given task. Engineering artificial muscles to incorporate
this concept of selective recruitment will allow the robot to consume less
energy, therefore increasing battery life and range. It will also allow the same
actuator to generate both gentle, precise motion as well as high-force, high-
speed motion, depending on the task, while also incorporating soft construction
and controllable stiffness. This new approach will help make assistive robotics
safer, more comfortable, and more compatible with human physiology, all of which
will provide more rapid and effective recovery for those suffering from
debilitating injuries or disabilities. This research lends itself well to
outreach opportunities to work with young people who suffer from disabilities;
the outreach activities will help inspire them and show them how engineering can
be used to improve their lives and the lives of those around
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improvements in actuator efficiency and performance
can be made by implementing the biologically-inspired concept of orderly
recruitment to create an integrated fluidic artificial muscle tissue that
contains selectable actuation elements of different sizes. This tissue can
dynamically adapt to changes in load by recruiting different combinations of
actuators. This orderly recruitment scheme conserves energy by reducing working
fluid consumption and minimizing throttling losses. It also allows for a wide
gamut of force generation and fast response time due to reduced flow rate
demand. The goals of this research are to (1) understand the relationships
between recruitment state, pressure, force, contraction, and velocity for
selective-recruitment fluidic artificial muscle tissues; (2) establish the
effects of topology on performance and create a framework for optimizing tissues
to robot operating tasks and requirements; (3) understand implications of
recruitment control architecture; and (4) demonstrate bandwidth improvements,
variable compliance, and energetic savings on a walking robot
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.