* 1845799
* CAREER: Scalable Approaches for Large-Scale Data-driven Bayesian Inverse Problems in High Dimensional Parameter Spaces
* CSE,OAC
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Tan Bui-Thanh, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 12/31/2023
* USD 525,714.00

Inverse problems are contemporary tools in cyberinfrastructure and mathematical
research, especially in inferring knowledge from observational and experimental
data together with simulations and models. They are pervasive in scientific
discovery and decision-making for complex, natural, engineered, and societal
systems, and thus are of paramount importance across many disciplines including
engineering mathematical and physical sciences. For inverse problems that serve
as a basis for design, control, discovery, and decision-making, their solutions
must be equipped with certain degree of confidence. Though the past decades have
seen advances in both theories and computational algorithms for inverse
problems, quantifying the uncertainty in their solution remains challenging and
an open problem facing the computational science and engineering community. The
drastic increase in the quantity of measurements and data holds promise for
data-driven scientific discoveries. However, much data remains unused as
inversion - a systematic tool to infer knowledge from data - is unable to scale
up to the quantity of data being generated. This proposal develops computational
and data scalable strategies to tackle the challenge of large-scale data-driven
statistical inverse problems in order to continue the pace of scientific
discoveries and to promote the progress of science, aligned with NSF's mission.
The proposed integrated research and education program contributes uncertainty
quantification (UQ) skills to modern education and training of future STEM
workforce; provides scalable inverse/UQ mathematical algorithms/software that
potentially advance the frontiers of computational science and engineering;
provides inverse/UQ cutting-edge algorithms/software that can potentially
improve oil/gas discovery in order to meet the ever-increasing demand in energy;
constitutes the PI?s ongoing contribution to the pipeline of US scientists,
engineers, and innovators to maintain the US global leadership in technology and
sciences; and educates and supplies additional leaders/experts from
underrepresented minorities to Big-Data/UQ research
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops an integrated education
and cross-disciplinary research program that tackles big-data-driven large-scale
uncertainty quantification (UQ) problems in high dimensional parameter spaces.
The project rigorously develops a randomized misfit approach that exploits
extreme computing systems to efficiently reduce the amount of ever-growing
observational data. It develops a comprehensive ensemble transform approach that
has potential to solves large-scale statistical Bayesian inverse problems in a
scalable manner using current and future NSF computing infrastructures. The
novelty of the proposed interdisciplinary approach is to bring together advances
from stochastic programming, probability theory, parallel computing, and
computer vision to produce a new and rigorous data reduction method for
inverse/UQ problems; justifiable efficient sampling approaches for large-scale
Bayesian inverse problems; and open-source software implementing these
approaches. These products can enable mathematicians, scientists, and engineers
in sensing-based disciplines to address challenging inverse/UQ problems that can
lead to new scientific discoveries. Inverse seismic wave propagation is chosen
as the demanding testbed for the developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.