* 1845649
* CAREER:  Pachyderms to pathogens:  the cascading effects of megafauna loss on tropical tree recruitment
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* John Poulsen, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2024
* USD 898,383.00

Worldwide, human activities such as hunting and farming are reducing the
populations of the largest animals, also called "megafauna". A declining species
of special concern is the African forest elephant. These animals help create and
maintain forests throughout much of central Africa by dispersing tree seeds and
recycling and spreading nutrients in their dung, and by eating vegetation and
trampling or uprooting small trees, thus allowing more light to penetrate to the
forest floor. It is still unknown how the loss of these ecological engineers
will change the region's forests or if, in their absence, smaller mammals,
insects and fungi that consume seeds and seedlings might more strongly determine
the types of trees that grow there and consequently alter the ecosystem
services, such as timber, medicine and food, that the forests provide to humans.
The overarching goal of this research is to broadly define the impact of
megafauna in general, and the African forest elephant specifically, on closed
canopy forests. The project seamlessly integrates research with education and
training of graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tests the
hypothesis that the depletion of megafauna has cascading effects on the
remaining plants and animals. The research objectives are to: assess the
relationship among trees and the organisms with which they interact; quantify
the degree to which loss of elephants alters these plant-animal interactions and
tree recruitment; and simulate population dynamics of elephant-dispersed tree
species to compare extinction probability in simulated populations with and
without elephants. The researchers will undertake three major experiments that
correspond to the objectives. First, to measure the relative effects of plant
enemy groups (such as fungi) on tree recruitment in intact forest, they will
combine caging experiments and observations to monitor seedlings, saplings,
juveniles and adult trees over the course of the study. Second, to evaluate how
defaunation affects the relative importance of plant enemy groups and forest
structure, composition and diversity, they will expand the caging experiments
across a gradient of defaunation to evaluate how reductions in animal
populations affect tree populations and communities. Third, they will forecast
the population- and community-level effects of defaunation by building
individual based models for specific tree species and modeling the effects of
elephants on forest composition and structure. The research will determine
whether, in elephant-reduced forests, the loss of large herbivores shifts the
relative strengths of herbivory to alternate plant predators, and if this
changes forest dynamics and ecosystem services.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.