* 1845683
* CAREER: Expandable sol-gel nanomaterials as therapeutic tools and imaging agents
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Jesse Jokerst, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 543,136.00

Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this research is to develop
novel biomaterials for medical imaging and therapy and to educate the public and
future materials scientists about biomaterials research. The research objective
is to create novel biomaterials with both imaging and therapeutic capabilities.
Here, the PI will synthesize P2O5-CaO-Na2O phosphate sol-gel nanoparticles and
will modulate the concentration of cations to control the structure-function
properties including biodegradation time. One surprising feature of these
materials is that they swell up to 500% larger during their biodegradation in
aqueous environments. Thus, the PI hypothesizes that one can control this
swelling by coating the nanoparticles with a responsive hydrophobic shell and
use this size change to ablate cancer cells. By building the shell with site-
selective cleavage sites, the nanoparticle core would be exposed to the cytosol
and swell only in the presence of defined chemical cues. This swelling would
then mechanically destroy the cells of interest. These materials also have an
acoustic impedance mismatch with tissue and can report the cell killing process
via ultrasound. The educational objective is to disseminate the research
findings to the scientific community, graduate and undergraduate trainees, as
well as high school students via focused seminars and hands-on training with a
portable ultrasound scanner. The broader impacts of this CAREER award will focus
on LGBTQ students who typically lack visibility and community in the STEM
fields. The PI will offer mentorship connections, networking opportunities, and
professional/leadership development for our LGBT STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is creating a biomaterial based on phosphate ions, which are a very
common type of salt in the human body. The PI will create very small particles
of this phosphate-based biomaterial and use it to image and treat cancer. The
remarkable feature of this biomaterial is that it swells when it degrades-size
changes up to 5-fold were shown in preliminary data. This is useful because when
these materials swell inside of cancer cells, they will destroy the dangerous
tissue. This project will design the particles such that they only swell in the
presence of biomarkers found on the surface of the cancer cells to prevent
damage to other cells. A second important feature of this idea is that doctors
can image the location of the particles with ultrasound. This is because sound
waves will echo off the surface of the particles. Importantly, as the particles
swell, even more sound waves will be reflected. Thus, doctors can use the images
to understand the location of the particles and whether they have been activated
by the cancer cells or not. The benefit to society will be a less traumatic and
more effective cancer treatment, which includes an imaging signal physicians can
use to customize treatment. These efforts will also educate the next generation
of engineers and scientists using hands-on ultrasound modules in the teaching
labs at UC San Diego.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.