* 1845638
* CAREER: Visual Database Interfaces
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Eugene Wu, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 566,000.00

As access to data becomes more widespread, more and more people want to benefit
from the ability to analyze data. Unfortunately, the dominant database interface
? SQL ? is very complex and inaccessible. It is possible to design and develop
custom interactive form and visualization interfaces that are easy to understand
and efficient to use, however, they are out of reach for all but the most
widespread (general-purpose) or highest value tasks due to the considerable time
and resources to build them. Unfortunately, this overlooks a long tail of simple
analyses that may never see millions of users but are still crucial towards
making scientific progress, reaching individual goals, and seizing commercial
opportunities. Thus, there is a need to drastically reduce the costs to build
new interfaces. The proposed research will develop scalable techniques to
automatically generate interactive visual analysis interfaces that are
customized to the user?s analysis needs and preferences. This research can have
a transformative impact on data-driven fields such as earth sciences or
bioinformatics, and help democratize access to data. Finally, the focus on data
interfaces is naturally suited as an educational tool to introduce data analysis
to students and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops scalable
techniques to generate Visual Database Interfaces (VDIs), each tailored to
specific analysis tasks. Rather than conform to the interface defined by SQL or
a generic database exploration tool, users can use VDIs that are more accessible
to non-technical users, more efficient for performing tasks, and reduces user
reliance on technical experts. To bootstrap the interface generation process,
the PI proposes to leverage logs of existing analysis queries and workflows that
users have previously attempted. Using these logs, the PI will develop two novel
and complementary systems. The first system scalably extracts analyses from
query logs, and automatically generates interactive analysis interfaces that are
customized to the queries in each analysis. The second is a human-in-the-loop
interface design tool that helps designers further improve the interaction
design of VDIs with consideration of the optimizations and systems modifications
need to ensure the interactions are responsive. It does so by bridging the
divide between interaction design requirements that affect the end-user?s
experience, and data structure and system architecture decisions that affect
resource requirements. The project will evaluate VDIs based on the ability for
users to complete analysis tasks as compared to using legacy or manually
designed interfaces. The PI will also evaluate VDIs in university courses on
Data Science, and share the curricula publicly along with the
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.