* 1845845
* CAREER: Microbial controls on wetland carbon stabilization and storage
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ariane Peralta, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 669,065.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------&lt;br/&gt;While wetlands only occupy about 7% of Earth's land surface,
they are estimated to hold about 40% of its carbon (C). Wetlands are effective
at storing C due to their high rates of vegetation growth and generally low
rates of soil C losses from decomposition by microbes. Like many ecosystems,
wetlands are subjected to nutrient enrichment via fertilization from
agricultural runoff. Often, fertilization effects can increase microbial
activity, leading to higher rates of C loss through microbial decomposition.
Thus, wetland C storage is vulnerable to changes in the environment, which, in
turn, can result in a reduced capacity for wetlands to compensate for change.
Wetland C storage potential could be overestimated when impacts of nutrient
enrichment and microbial physiology are not incorporated into the earth-system
context. This research will provide insights into microbial controls on soil C
processes, which have implications for broad national interests in energy,
natural resources management and conservation. This research will advance the
fields of ecosystem science, ecology, and microbiology by examining the
relationships among microbial diversity, microbial metabolisms, and C-cycling
functions. It will also benefit society through classroom educational content
focused on microbial diversity and processes at the K-12, undergraduate and
graduate levels that will reach under-served populations, enhancing diversity of
the STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will test the hypothesis
that inorganic nutrient enrichment causes shifts in microbial communities from
slow growing oligotroph- to fast growing copiotroph-dominated assemblages,
resulting in changes in microbial processing of C and nutrients in soils. An
altered ecosystem may lead to soil organic matter (SOM) destabilization, due to
decreased mineral-protected SOM and increased respiration rates, thereby
reducing soil C storage in wetlands. The specific objectives of this project
include: (1) determine how variation in above- and below-ground plant biomass
relates to SOM buildup in a historically nutrient-poor wetland now experiencing
nutrient enrichment; (2) relate microbial resource-use strategies to atmospheric
gas exchange (methane, carbon dioxide), and soil organic matter pools under
ambient and nutrient-enriched conditions; and (3) examine how shifts in
microbial biomass, community structure, and metabolic diversity affect SOM
stabilization and C storage potential due to long-term fertilization. Since
2003, replicated fertilization and disturbance (by mowing) treatments have been
applied to a nutrient-poor wetland ecosystem in the North Carolina coastal
plain. This new project will leverage the field experiment to determine whether
ongoing fertilization influences plant-microbe relationships and soil C storage
potential. If nutrient enrichment disrupts wetland C storage, then predictions
for wetland C pools may be overestimated since wetlands experience both human
and temperature-induced nutrient enrichment. This study will also determine
whether physiological assessments of microbial communities (used to characterize
oligotrophic and copiotrophic taxa) provide a better predictor of ecosystem
responses than taxonomy or biomass-based metrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.