* 1845783
* CAREER: Leveraging Hydro-climatic Processes to Advance Season-ahead Cyanobacteria Prediction and Beach Management
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Paul Block, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2024
* USD 634,136.00

Eutrophication is the excessive accumulation of nutrients in bodies of water
leading to overly dense blooms of plants and algae. Intensification of
agricultural and urban practices in recent decades has led to the eutrophication
of many inland lakes and streams. Cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae)
often thrive in such nutrient-rich waters. Excessive growth of cyanobacteria can
cause ecological, aesthetic, and health hazards, and may cause disruptions to
drinking water systems, foul beaches, and produce toxins dangerous to human and
aquatic life. Lake managers would like to predict the intensity of cyanobacteria
abundance and overall ecosystem health prior to the summer season, but current
methods for doing so are limited, often leading to only reactive lake management
and recreational and beach safety. This research and education project will
explore methods to better predict cyanobacteria abundance from hydroclimatic
variables (such as temperature, precipitation and streamflow) to enable better
lake management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
answer four questions: Q1. How well can season-ahead prediction models
conditioned on hydroclimatic variables (explicitly or in conjunction with
biological factors) anticipate cyanobacteria abundance? Q2. Can physically-based
models coupled with prediction models further enhance predictability and lead
toward an improved understanding of local environmental and biological
mechanisms? Q3. Can prediction models be extended to describe expected bloom
formation and seasonal beach closings to inform beach planning and management?
Q4. Is the prediction framework transferable and how well does it perform for
various eutrophic lakes, particularly ones that are less well monitored?
Research themes will be integrated into educational objectives designed to
promote learning and development across several age groupings to: 1) foster
citizen science participation, training, and analytical skills; 2) excite and
prepare students and teachers from middle school through graduate school; and 3)
enhance local agency decision-making capacity. These goals will be accomplished
by introducing new water quality tests for citizen science monitors, developing
new games and simulations targeting middle and high school students for delivery
at science fairs and after school programs, hosting research retreats, and
providing models, tools, and trainings to local
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.