* 1845444
* CAREER: A Sequential Learning Framework with Applications to Learning from Crowds
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Xi Chen, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 02/29/2024
* USD 497,835.00

While traditional machine learning usually deals with given static data, many
online data are collected via a sequence of interactions with agents such as
crowd labelers or customers. The motivating applications of the project include
crowd labeling tasks (which is a powerful paradigm for utilizing human wisdom to
collect data labels), sequential product recommendation, and online multi-
product pricing. For all these applications, online learning and sequential
decision-making are indispensable to each other. The objective of this project
is to develop new sequential learning algorithms with rigorous theoretical
guarantees. The developed framework will not only make fundamental technical
contributions but also facilitate many important applications. For example, it
will greatly improve the aggregated answers from crowd labelers with a
significantly reduced cost. It can enhance the revenue of business while
improving the customers' satisfaction by providing accurate recommendations. In
addition, this project also facilitates the development of new courses on
machine learning for business school students, which helps bring the knowledge
from data science to future business leaders, and provides training to K-12
students, with an emphasis on those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project strives to develop a unified learning
and decision-making framework, which serves as an intellectual bridge connecting
machine learning, stochastic optimization, and decision theory. In particular,
there are three complementary research thrusts. The first thrust creates a suite
of efficient algorithms that deal with complex task structures, such as ranking
with transitivity structures or product recommendation with combinatorial
structures, in a non-stationary environment. The algorithms will extend the
bandit learning with finite independent arms into the setting with a complex
correlation structure among potentially infinite number of arms. The second
thrust seeks a cost-effective paradigm that either incorporates "optimal
stopping" rule under a certain budget constraint or minimizes the sample
complexity. The third thrust systematically evaluates the algorithms and
theories on real problems coming from both crowdsourcing and other business-
related applications. Moreover, since the computational efficiency and
scalability is an important focus, the project will also advance the distributed
statistical learning and stochastic optimization
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.