* 1845348
* CAREER: Robust Identification and Multi-Objective Control Methods for Neuronal Networks Under Uncertainty
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Sabato Santaniello, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Overview: The control of biological neural networks underpins the development of
minimally-invasive brain therapies as well as adaptive learning for cyber-
physical systems, but it remains challenging because of the irregular dynamics
involved. These systems also have sparse and weak connections and a range of
dynamics that cannot be fully probed. There is an urgent need to determine the
impact of unmodeled dynamics on the controllability of these networks and
develop robust controls accordingly, otherwise controllers will remain
underperforming, fragile, and hard to calibrate. This is the case for deep brain
stimulation (DBS), which follows a conservative "one-size-fits-all" paradigm and
remains underutilized despite having the potential to treat millions of people
worldwide. The objective of this CAREER program is to develop identification
methods that estimate the impact of unmodeled dynamics on neuronal circuits and
a robust control framework for these circuits. Brain circuits targeted by
Parkinson's disease and DBS will be considered to maximize the impact of the
research. The work will be paired with educational plans that address current
limitations in the training of neural engineers and broaden the presence of
first-generation college students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merits: This research will fill critical gaps in the knowledge base that
provides linkage between global dynamics of a neural network and dynamics of
individual neurons under control. It will also contribute a robust control
framework for neural populations and brain circuits. Educational activities will
fill critical gaps in the training of neural engineers by integrating modeling
and control in the design process of neural prostheses. Applied to DBS, this
research will help personalize DBS to PD populations who are currently excluded
from this treatment, thus enabling new options for chronically ill
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts: The research will benefit the
well-being of Parkinson's disease patients, including patients who are now
excluded from DBS. The training of neural engineers will also be improved, thus
helping the formation of a better-trained and more globally-competitive
workforce. The integration of research and outreach will finally create a
pipeline to attract high-school students towards STEM fields and facilitate the
learning of engineering principles at the pre-college
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.