* 1845446
* CAREER: Data-Driven Debugging of Complex Program Changes
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Na Meng, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

After the initial release of a software application, developers continue
changing it by adding new features, fixing software defects, or improving the
implementation of existing features. As the application becomes older and
larger, program changes become more complex. It becomes more difficult for
developers to change or maintain the software efficiently and correctly. Slowly
and incorrectly evolved software systems negatively impact both software
producers and consumers; these systems can cause tremendous economic costs, put
customers' data and privacy at risk, and even threaten people's lives. This
project addresses this problem by helping computers and developers better
understand, check, and apply complex changes. The project's novelty is in new
methods and tools to characterize, model, validate, and suggest code
modifications. The project's impacts are increasing programmer productivity,
improving software reliability, reducing software cost, and protecting people
and privacy data from issues caused by problematic software upgrades.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will conduct empirical studies of software
projects (in the GitHub repository) to understand and characterize multi-change
edits "in the wild" to discover frequently co-changed patterns among code and
non-code entities. Using these inferred patterns, the project will classify
multi-change edits into different types such as bug fixes, refactorings, and
feature enhancements. Techniques will be devised to make multi-edit changes, to
ensure their correctness, and to automatically repair programs' multi-change
edit sequences. These capabilities will be combined with delta debugging and
dynamic patch validation in a a prototype editing and testing tool called Oedit,
which will automatically recover programs from erroneous software updates and
upgrades. The long-term vision is to provide a programming environment that
supports complex, multi-change edits, with attention to their correctness, and
with self-healing capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.