* 1845355
* CAREER: Opposing roles of cortical input to dorsal striatum
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* David Margolis, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 02/29/2024
* USD 900,003.00

In order to feel, think, move, and learn, different areas of the brain must
communicate with each other through synaptic connections. The interactions
between sensory and motor areas of the brain are particularly important for
interacting with and reacting to the world around us. However, it is still
unknown exactly how neural signaling from the sensory areas of the brain
directly influence brain areas related to movement. The goal of this
neuroscientific study is to understand how signals from sensory and motor areas
of the cerebral cortex combine within a important subcortical area called the
striatum to influence decision-making behavior in mice. Conducting the studies
in mice allows for the use of innovative neuroscience technology for discovering
the mechanistic basis of brain function on the level of synapses, neural
circuits, and behavior. Classroom and outreach components of the project are
designed to build on the technological and scientific themes of the research. A
university course based on open source neurotechnology will enable students to
achieve fluency in modern experimental neuroscience and skills they can use
throughout their careers. The outreach program will strengthen ties with
underrepresented minorities through international exchange with researchers in
Mexico and through bilingual publications in a scientific journal for kids.
Together, this project will advance our understanding and appreciation of brain
function on multiple levels, from cutting-edge research and education to
beneficial societal outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of sensory
and motor information is critical for discriminating between different stimuli
and making appropriate actions. This projects investigates how single neurons
and neural circuits within key brain areas, such as the dorsal striatum,
dynamically process sensory and motor input during behavioral performance and
during learning. In the mouse whisker-related somatosensory system, axonal
projections of primary sensory cortex (S1) and primary motor cortex (M1) combine
at the level of the dorsal striatum, a structure known for its role in behavior
through influence on the motor thalamus. The role of S1 in striatal function,
and how S1 and M1 inputs combine, is unknown. Most previous work has focused on
frontal cortex inputs to striatum, and therefore, our understanding of how
sensorimotor integration takes place in striatum, and what its role is during
behavior and learning are incomplete. The goal of this CAREER project is to
determine the neural circuitries underlying S1 and M1 input to dorsal striatum,
and to define their roles in behavior. The results will provide important
knowledge of the distinct roles of S1- and M1-corticostriatal signaling in
behavior. The education component promotes expertise in neurotechnology for
undergraduate and graduate students, while outreach to underrepresented
minorities builds on essential elements of the research program through
international exchange and youth-focused bilingual
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.