* 1845300
* CAREER: Enhancing Mobile Authentication by Measuring the Authentication Life-Cycle
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,09/30/2024
* Adam Aviv, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 747,998.00

This CAREER research focuses on human factors in authentication using mobile
devices. Mobile authentication is a crucial component of authentication,
especially as mobile devices become ever more connected to the broader security
ecosystem. A major concern is how users authenticate as they use their devices
over months or years. This research will involve empirical studies of the
choices and actions users take over time. Qualitative and quantitative measures
will be employed to better understand user mental models, perceptions, and
behaviors related to mobile authentication. The overall goal is to understand
the life-cycle of authentication on mobile devices. The outcomes of this work
will drive the design and implementation of mobile authentication, and policies
surrounding mobile authentication. The research will help to mitigate or prevent
security attacks on mobile devices, and lead to better security and privacy of
data in mobile devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Empirical measurements and
improvements to mobile authentication have the potential to provide significant
intellectual impact and lay the ground work for transformative technologies that
improve the way we choose and use authenticators on our mobile devices. This
project will accomplish that in two key ways. First, the research makes
contributions to the study of user behavior as it unfolds over time, and how
that behavior is affected by device use, context, and perceptions. Second,
measures of life-cycle events in mobile authentication will be used to
understand how behavior shifts over time. The research will also expand the
typically-tested populations of students and online users to understand how
other user populations, such as older adults, approach authentication and may
require different solutions or interventions. The outcome of this work will fill
important knowledge gaps regarding the upgrade cycle of mobile devices and our
understanding of mobile authentication selection, leading to the design of new
policies, procedures, and systems for mobile authentication. Students will be
involved at all stages of the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.