* 1845841
* CAREER:  Black Youth Development and Curricular Supports for Robust Identities in Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Maisie Gholson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steele
* 04/30/2024
* USD 995,282.00

Student success in mathematics correlates with positive identities,
dispositions, and relationships towards the subject. As mathematics education
research strives to understand historic inequities in mathematics for Black
learners, small-scale research has described the relationships between identity,
subjectivity, and positionality in Black learners as it relates to their
achievement and interest in mathematics. This study builds on that descriptive
work by seeking to describe trajectories that describe the ways in which Black
learners develop as particular kinds of mathematical learners. The study takes
place in the context of an established, multi-year college bridge program that
has as its goals to increase the representation of historically marginalized
groups in the university community. Students in the bridge program from three
communities in the greater Detroit area with strong academic achievement in
mathematics will be recruited. Their experiences in the bridge program will be
traced to identify trajectories that describe the development of Black learners
relative to mathematics, and document the design features of classroom
activities that support learners in moving through those trajectories.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the center of the project is the study of cohorts of
students in grades 8-11 as they move through the summer bridge program. The
bridge project's current curriculum features a series of lessons focused on
identity development related to mathematics. These lessons will be implemented,
studied, revised, and redeployed across the duration of the project across the
summer sessions. Teacher focus groups and surveys will assess the implementation
of the activities and aggregate feedback on the design. Three cohorts of
students will be recruited to participate in the broader project activities from
three metro areas with distinctly different demographic profiles. Student
mathematical efficacy will be assessed for all participating students. Within
each of the three metro areas, students will be recruited that represent
differing levels of mathematics efficacy to ensure that focus students are
likely to experience different trajectories through their engagement with the
study. The students will be interviewed three times in each academic year to
describe their trajectories. Student achievement data will also be collected for
all participating students along with narrative descriptions and autobiographies
about the messages students receive about mathematics. These messages include
their own internal thinking about how they see themselves as mathematics
learners, and messages that are sent to them by other students, teachers, and
the community. Products of the study will be case studies that describe
trajectories of identity development in Black mathematics learners, and a
disseminated curriculum for a mathematics identity-focused bridge program
supporting Black learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) proposal awarded under the Discovery Research
PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. The Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.