* 1845219
* CAREER: New Methods for the Synthesis of Nitrogen-Containing Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Michael Hilinski, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 03/31/2024
* USD 675,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry is supporting the research of Professor Michael Hilinski of the
University of Virginia. Professor Hilinski is working with graduate and
undergraduate students to develop new chemical reactions that allow for
reductions in the cost, time, and waste associated with preparing chemical
compounds. The targeted compounds have structural features that are found in the
majority of Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs, as well as in other
types of chemicals such as natural products, agricultural chemicals, and dyes.
In addition to improving the ability to make known structures, the Hilinski
laboratory is making structures that were previously unable to be made. This
allows other scientists to explore potentially, societally-beneficial
applications of these new compounds. The scientific approach being employed
focuses on ways in which petroleum by-products react with other inexpensive
chemicals to form ring structures containing at least one nitrogen atom. The use
of catalysts to promote these reactions allows for predictable control of the
products and for the synthesis of different ring sizes. The educational
activities prepare students to communicate with non-scientists about their
research and broader scientific implications. Professor Hilinski is creating and
implementing a new science communication workshop for graduate and undergraduate
students. He is also establishing a yearly Chemistry department open house
event, and he is developing a new outreach activity for an audience of school-
age children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to the frequency with which nitrogen-
containing heterocycles are found in pharmaceuticals, natural products,
agrochemicals, and other bioactive or otherwise useful compounds, overcoming
challenges in their synthesis is considered a key goal with broad potential
impact. Professor Hilinski is developing new methods for saturated or partially
saturated nitrogen-heterocycle synthesis that employ nitrenes as one-atom
components in cycloaddition reactions. Several catalytic approaches are being
pursued to achieve this underexploited strategy, including two-component formal
cycloadditions initiated by nitrene transfer to olefins followed by spontaneous
ring expansion or rearrangement, and multi-component formal cycloadditions
between olefins, nitrenoid precursors, and a third component. Multiple classes
of heterocycles of different ring sizes are being accessed using this strategy.
The broader scientific impacts of this synthetic methodology research include
the wide potential applicability to the synthesis of a variety of different
compound classes. Other broader impacts include an enhancement students' skills
in the area of science communication via establishment of a training workshop,
and, through the education plan, the exposure of people in the local community
to scientific research in a way that is accessible to a non-
expert.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.