* 1845416
* CAREER: New Methods and Applications for Smooth Rigidity of Algebraic Actions
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Zhenqi Wang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The field of dynamical systems originated from differential equations and
celestial mechanics. It studies the long run behavior of a system subject to
laws of motion. The study of rigidity phenomenon is one of the central themes in
dynamical systems, with applications to number theory, geometry, and
mathematical physics. Roughly speaking, an action is rigid if various properties
of the system are preserved under appropriate modifications. So far, systems
with strong chaotic properties have been well understood. In many systems of
interest however, only weak chaotic behaviors can be observed. The goal of this
project is to develop new tools to study such systems and then apply these
results to study other areas of mathematics, such as number theory and
representation theory. The research plan is complemented by educational and
outreach activities involving the training of undergraduates, graduate students,
and postdoctoral associates, and fostering collaborations among female
researchers in different areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research plan
consists of several coherent projects, ranging from dynamical systems, harmonic
analysis for Lie groups, representation theory and number theory. The principal
investigator plans to establish cocycle rigidity and to study (twisted)
cohomological equations for a large class of algebraic partially hyperbolic and
parabolic actions by using representation theory. The results and techniques
from the study of parabolic actions will be applied to number theory for the
study of effective equidistribution for certain unipotent flows and maps on some
homogenous spaces of semidirect product groups. The principle investigator will
also combine KAM approach and representation theory to general partially
hyperbolic and parabolic algebraic actions to study local rigidity. A large
class of new examples whose geometric properties are distinctly different from
existing examples will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.