* 1845227
* CAREER: Topological Planning in Information Space for Intelligent Robotic Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Geoffrey Hollinger, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 02/29/2024
* USD 505,523.00

This project envisions mobile robotic systems capable of retrieving streaming
information about any physical location in the world for the benefit of
scientists, first responders, and the general public. In the past decade, a
number of marine and aerial systems have emerged in applications such as
environmental monitoring, search and rescue, surveillance, and scientific
exploration. However, currently an operator either teleoperates these vehicles
directly or pre-specifies waypoint locations in a fixed plan. These approaches
lead to severely limited performance by restricting the capabilities of robotic
vehicles to (1) continue operating effectively as their environment, mission,
and teammates change and (2) incorporate high-level goals given by human
operators. This project seeks to bridge the gap between current systems that
naively follow waypoints and intelligent systems capable of adapting to their
environment, their team's capabilities, and to the goals of the operator.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate objective of this project is to develop
topological planning techniques based on homotopy and persistent homology that
reason over a compact semantic representation of environmental conditions (e.g.,
informative areas, disturbances, and risky areas). By reasoning over concise
semantic maps, the proposed methods will enable teams of autonomous vehicles to
make decisions regarding information collection, cost minimization, and goal
achievement in the physical world. The developed algorithms will be made
publicly available through open source distribution and transitioned to field
tests through ongoing collaborations with ocean scientists. The educational
component of this project will integrate robotic vehicle planning into the
graduate curriculum at Oregon State University through a Marine Robotics
Certificate program and into Oregon high schools through an underwater robot
programming module designed by the Oregon State University undergraduate
Robotics Club.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.