* 1845977
* International Conference Travel: Unity and Disunity in Science: International; 14-17 September 2018, London, England
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Marsha Richmond, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 24,174.00

This project will support participation of US scholars in the international
conference, "Unity and Disunity' in science, which is the 8th International
Conference of the European Society for the History of Science held in
conjunction with the British Society for the History of Science. The sessions
will take place on 14-17 September 2018 mainly at University of College London's
Institute of Education, though some sessions will be held at the Royal
Institution and the Science Museum. The participation of US scholars in this
European conference will serve to foster international relations and to ensure
that early-career and independent scholars, as well as senior scholars, are able
to participate, thus helping to diversify and expand the perspectives at the
conference, and the collaborations that may be expected to materialize as a
result of the US participation, which promises to add dimensions to the
discussion of the unity and disunity of science, and the other topics that will
be discussed in the 67 accepted symposia. All the US participants are appearing
in sessions with European scholars, and such intellectual interactions are
expected to lead to intellectual collaborations that may include new projects as
well as future publications. In addition, reports of the conference proceedings
will be disseminated among a wide variety of US-based society newsletters, such
as those of the History of Science Society as well as the International Society
for the History, Philosophy, and Social Studies of Science, and notices will
also appear in various social media outlets, with the aim of leading to a
broader public awareness of the fruits of studies of science, technology, and
society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring together historians of
science from many regions of the world to consider the conference theme, broadly
construed. Symposia will address, among other topics, unity and disunity within
science, technology, and/or medicine across diverse sciences, nations and blocs,
periods, and historiographies; unity and disunity as ideals and realities; and
unity and disunity as characterizing relations between the sciences and
politics, technology, economics, and the arts. This grant will promote US
scholars' contributions in the international exploration of these topics, with
particular attention given to the promotion of forming new scholarly
relationships among different nationalities, new collaborative projects, and
inclusion of participants with limited institutional support, with special focus
on graduate students and independent scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.