* 1845434
* CAREER: Active Machine Learning for Automating Scientific Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Roman Garnett, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 02/29/2024
* USD 497,693.00

It is often much easier to collect and catalog features of data than to analyze
data to determine properties of interest. Such settings are pervasive in the
natural sciences and engineering, where in-depth investigation can require human
intervention, expensive computer simulation, or costly laboratory experiments.
Humanity is at the tipping point of a data revolution, and our ability to
collect and store information will likely outpace our capacity to extract useful
knowledge from data. Active machine learning provides a solution to this
dilemma: we adaptively design expensive experiments guided by statistical models
of the underlying process to make the most-effective use of limited resources.
Numerous studies have established active machine learning as a promising tool
for automating scientific discovery; however, modern procedures are currently
difficult for practitioners to adopt. Considerable expertise is required to
effectively use the available tools, especially as the field of machine learning
continues to develop rapidly. This project will transform the application of
active machine learning to problems from science and engineering, developing
novel experimental procedures and pioneering new paradigms of scientific
discovery. This project will also dramatically increase the availability of
these methods to non-experts through automation, facilitating the further
integration of machine learning into practice across disciplines. All research
will be motivated by problems and validated on data from applications across
science and engineering, including materials science, drug discovery, astronomy,
and robotics. The project's research objectives will be accompanied by a
comprehensive education plan designed to introduce active machine learning to a
broad range of future scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will entail two broad themes of inquiry, corresponding to the two critical
components of an active learning pipeline: (1) experimental policies and (2)
modeling. (1): The core of an active learning procedure is its policy, which
decides which data to analyze. A primary challenge when building an active
learning system is developing a computationally efficient and empirically
effective policy for the given learning objective. This is not a straightforward
task: the optimal procedure is computationally infeasible and natural
approximations can suffer from myopic, greedy behavior. This project will
improve the performance and theoretical understanding of policies for automated
scientific discovery, developing and studying both established and novel
paradigms for active scientific discovery. A theme throughout this investigation
will be nonmyopic decision making, where one reasons about the impact of each
decision on the entire learning task. Algorithmic development will be
accompanied by extensive theoretical study, establishing fundamental learning
bounds and seeking efficient approximation schemes when possible. (2): The
second thrust of the investigation will be on modeling complex processes from
data, as a policy's success hinges on being guided by an informative model.
Model selection for active learning is rendered difficult by inherently limited
training data, and accounting for model uncertainty is often critical. The
project will investigate automated model selection inline with active learning,
advancing the nascent field of automated machine learning to create robust,
fully automated active learning systems that do not require expert design or
tuning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.