* 1845795
* CAREER: Exploring Chemistry at Graphene Oxide Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Revati Kumar, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2024
* USD 550,710.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Revati Kumar from
Louisiana State University is investigating how liquids interact with a material
called graphene oxide or "GO". At the molecular scale, GO can be described as a
sheet of carbon atoms linked together, with oxygen atoms attached to carbon
atoms in a few places. The sheet-like structure of GO is similar to graphite,
another carbon material which is used in lubricants and pencil leads. The
"slipperiness" of graphite derives from the tiny sheets of carbon material
sliding past each other. Professor Kumar's interest in GO is not for its
lubrication abilities, but because it can be used to adsorb other molecules and
ions (for example impurities in water), or be used in other technologies like
batteries, fuel cells and catalysts. An interesting feature of GO is that its
chemical properties are "tunable." That is, by varying the number of oxygen
atoms attached to the carbon sheet, different reactivities result. Professor
Kumar and her students are developing computer models to simulate the properties
and behavior of various kinds of GO, and their interactions with different
molecules and liquids. Graduate and undergraduate students working on this
project are being trained in theoretical and computational chemistry ranging
from fundamental concepts in statistical mechanics and quantum mechanics to
computational algorithms and modeling. Professor Kumar develops molecular
simulation modules as part of the undergraduate physical chemistry curriculum at
her university. This course provides a basis for her international course on
computational methods targeting graduate students and postdoctoral students to
help them understand the state-of-the-art computational methods used in the
field. Professor Kumar is also involved in K-12 science activities such as Super
Science Saturday and Martin Luther King, Jr. Day initiatives. She develops "Fun
with molecules", a series of presentations and hands-on learning modules for
high school and middle school students that introduce underrepresented minority
students to STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on chemical
reactivity and dynamics at solid-liquid interfaces. Graphene oxide (GO) is model
surface system because it contains both hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains.
This nano-scale heterogeneity leads to asymmetrical solvation environments, and
a general condition where chemical adsorption and reactivity differ from one
interfacial site to the next. The oxygen content of GO can be varied over a wide
range, making GO a "tunable" material. This project uses computational molecular
dynamics tools to explore the effect of oxygen content on interfacial structural
and dynamical heterogeneity. Three specific themes that are critical for GO-
based technologies are being explored, namely, the competition between
hydrophobic and hydrophilic domains on solvation environment and dynamics,
reactivity at these interfaces, and structuring at the electrode-electrolyte
interface. The development of accurate yet efficient many-body, all atom force-
fields as well as molecular interpretations of experimental data are key aspects
of this project. Reactive force-fields based on the chemically intuitive
empirical valence bond approach to model acid-base reactivity of GO membranes
are also being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.