* 1845974
* CAREER:  Rapid phenotypic divergence and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) signaling in a widespread songbird
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Britt Heidinger, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,298,729.00

In many organisms, body size increases with latitude. This pattern occurs
because larger individuals are better at retaining heat in cold environments,
but worse at dissipating heat in warm environments. This idea predicts that
organisms will get smaller in response to rising temperatures. Although many
organisms fit this pattern, the underlying physiology and contribution of
genetic changes or environmental conditions is poorly understood. The research
will examine the role hormones play in rapidly changing body size in house
sparrows. As part of these studies, breeding nest-box populations of house
sparrows will be established at two tribal colleges and three additional sites
along a latitudinal gradient. An important goal of the study is to provide
Research Experience for Undergraduate (REU) opportunities for American Indian
students at tribal colleges. Students that participate in REUs experience
numerous benefits including increased problem solving skills and enhanced
retention in STEM disciplines. However, typical REUs require undergraduates to
relocate for extended periods of time, which often conflicts with other family
and community commitments. The study seeks to overcome this barrier by creating
local REU opportunities at tribal colleges, which will be assessed to inform
future educators interested in using similar approaches. In addition, house
sparrows will be re-sampled at sites throughout the U.S. and a tissue bank will
be created and both historical and contemporary datasets will be published to
serve as a permanent benchmark for future studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hormonal mechanisms commonly influence suites of traits
and are expected to play an important role in shaping life-history strategies in
response to environmental change. The research will test the hypothesis that
variation in the insulin/insulin-like signaling hormonal network is a mechanism
that mediates rapid shifts in body size along a latitudinal gradient in house
sparrows using a combination of historical and newly collected data and samples,
a reciprocal transplant experiment, a hormonal manipulation, and
transcriptomics. The research will greatly extend what is known about the role
of hormonal mechanisms in mediating rapid phenotypic variation in life history
traits. Knowledge of how micro-evolutionary and plastic responses contribute to
variation in hormonally mediated life history strategies is essential for
predicting long-term evolutionary responses to environmental change. If among
population variation in hormonally mediated traits is primarily due to micro-
evolutionary changes in hormone levels, this is expected to facilitate the rapid
evolution of a suite of traits sensitive to the ligand, but to simultaneously
limit the independent evolution of these traits. Alternatively, if population
level variation is primarily due to micro-evolutionary changes in trait specific
receptor densities, traits may evolve independently. If instead, most of the
variation is due to developmental plasticity, long-term responses are expected
to be more limited. This integrative study spans levels of analyses from gene
expression to population level variation in life-history traits and in doing so
will enhance our understanding of the mechanisms that underlie a long standing
ecological pattern.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Integrative Ecological Physiology Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.