* 1845184
* CAREER:  Synthesis of Hierarchically Structured Polymeric Materials Enabled by Polymerization-Induced Branching
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Mingjiang Zhong, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 687,110.00

Polymers have a wide range of applications in our daily life. Polymers with
branched structures, instead of linear chains, give rise to unique properties
that are critical for their utility in a broad spectrum of applications. While
synthetic methods have been developed to prepare polymers with branches,
controlling where they are branched sites and the number of branches remains
challenging. In this project funded by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and
Nanochemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Mingjiang Zhong of
Yale University develops a novel approach to synthesizing polymers with well-
defined and desirable branching structures. The fundamental discoveries may have
a broader technological impact on next-generation applications, including
matrices for cellular and tissue engineering (human health), membrane materials
for water treatment (environmental sustainability), and photolithography
(semiconductor industry). Students participating in this program are trained in
synthetic and physical chemistry, as well as polymer science and engineering.
Professor Zhong teaches a new course, the first one in polymer science at Yale.
The research team hosts high school summer interns and teachers from several
different states (Connecticut, New York Rhode Island and Massachusetts) enabling
students to learn from role models about the importance of science. Finally, by
maintaining relationships with industry, the results of this research are
disseminated to a broad scientific and technical community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team is developing a site-specifically
initiated controlled/living hyperbranching polymerization (CLHP) for the
production of HPs with tailored structures and high livingness through the
rational design of novel inimers, i.e., monomers tethered with an initiator
group. The degree of branching as well as the chemical nature of HPs is well-
tuned under copolymerization conditions. The site-specific initiation enables
the precise incorporation of HP motifs into other materials to synthesize
hierarchically branched structures, providing a comprehensive understanding of
structure-property relationships in branched polymers. The research activities
include: the development of chain-growth type CLHP; the optimization of CLHP
conditions to improve livingness and quality of control; and the design and
synthesis of higher-order HP-containing macromolecular architectures with target
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.