* 1845093
* CAREER: Stochastic capacity scheduling and control of distributed energy storage enabling stacked services
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Johanna Mathieu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 01/31/2024
* USD 516,053.00

The PI's long-term research objective is to develop approaches to ensure the
reliability of electric power systems with massive amounts of fluctuating
renewable energy resources by leveraging flexibility from distributed energy
resources. As battery costs have decreased, more small-scale distributed
batteries have been connected to the network to provide local services. These
resources could be aggregated and used to provide grid services when not needed
for their local service. Similarly, flexible loads can be aggregated and
coordinated to behave like storage and provide multiple services simultaneously.
Stacking services improves storage utilization and economics in addition to the
ability of the grid to accommodate more renewables, improving its environmental
and health impacts along with energy security. The research objective of this
proposal is to develop a suite of computationally-tractable optimization and
control algorithms that will enable aggregators to optimally coordinate
thousands of highly-heterogeneous and distributed small-scale storage resources
and loads to provide stacked services. The findings will impact energy policy,
specifically the regulations surrounding stacked services. The PI's overall
educational objectives are to inspire students to tackle the grand challenges of
climate change and energy security, develop curricula that simultaneously
teaches electric power systems and builds students' fundamental STEM skills, and
increase public awareness and understanding of modern challenges and
opportunities in power systems. To this end, the education plan includes four
activities: i) international education and outreach in Liberia; ii) public
education and outreach via the development of an online energy storage game
highlighting the opportunities and challenges associated with distributed energy
storage; iii) graduate and undergraduate education; and iv) outreach to
practitioners, researchers, and policymakers via short courses, webinars, and
talks. The educational activities will promote workforce development through
curricular innovation at University of Michigan and the University of Liberia,
and outreach to Liberian K-12 and undergraduate women. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective is challenging because the power system is uncertain,
nonlinear, and high dimensional; sensing and communication systems required for
storage coordination are imperfect; and coordination must not negatively impact
the distribution network. The research will develop i) stochastic optimization
approaches to schedule aggregations of distributed storage to provide stacked
services, while managing storage nonconvexities; ii) robust predictive nonlinear
control approaches to coordinate aggregations of distributed storage to provide
stacked services, leveraging novel aggregate storage models capturing
degradation dynamics; iii) aggregate load models (identified with experimental
data) representing load flexibility as storage, including the efficiency and
degradation associated with load coordination actions and the model error
resulting from the use of approximate storage-type models; and iv)
optimization/control approaches to coordinate highly-heterogeneous storage and
load aggregations. The results will be validated in high-fidelity simulation
environments and the most promising approaches will be implemented in a
realistic physical test bed. Methodologically, the research will develop i)
novel stochastic dual dynamic programming (SDDP) methods for nonconvex models,
leveraging emerging extensions of SDDP to integer programming problems, and ii)
novel robust predictive control methods that integrate sliding mode control and
model predictive control. While past work has proposed methods of combining
sliding and model predictive control, they require online optimization whereas
we seek a control policy for fast online computation. In summary, the research
will benefit the power systems, operations research, and control systems
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.