* 1845406
* CAREER: Fast and Accurate Algorithms for Uncertainty Quantification in Large-Scale Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Arvind Saibaba, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 322,827.00

The need to visualize regions that are impossible to see with the naked eye is
pervasive in everyday life. For example, in medicine, accurate visualization of
tissue is needed to diagnose and treat tumors. A key step in imaging
technologies requires one to solve an inverse problem in order to transform
measured data into detailed image reconstructions of the quantities of interest.
However, image reconstruction is inherently uncertain, in part, due to noisy
measurements from sensors. Ignoring the uncertainty in the imaging process can
lead to undesirable outcomes, such as misjudging the location and spread of a
suspected tumor. Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) in imaging is in its infancy
and hence, the potential for impact in research contributions is high. UQ for
imaging is computationally challenging since thousands of inversions are needed
beyond the initial inversion to generate accurate statistics of the uncertainty.
Current approaches for UQ are inadequate because they either fail to deliver
solutions in a reasonable computational time or they lack the applicability
across a broad range of imaging
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is on the development
of fast algorithms for UQ in large-scale inverse problems that are applicable to
a broad range of imaging technologies. These algorithms are expected to bring
down the computational cost by at least an order of magnitude while maintaining
the accuracy of the solutions. More specifically, the project will (1) Advance
image reconstruction and UQ techniques for incorporating prior information based
on fractional partial differential equation (PDE) and Bayesian level set
approaches; and (2) Develop new algorithms and analysis for data-driven
dimensionality techniques for UQ in Bayesian inverse problems, using randomized
and Krylov subspace methods. The algorithms developed here will be rigorously
analyzed and validated on several model problems and applications, including
diffuse optical and photoacoustic tomography (in biomedicine) and hydraulic
tomography and satellite data fusion (in geoscience). The algorithms developed
here are also applicable to other imaging-based inverse problems in biomedicine,
geophysics, materials science, etc. Outside of imaging applications, these
mathematical advances will be of interest to scientists working in many areas of
computational science, for example, fractional partial differential equations
(PDEs), model reduction, tensor decompositions, and principal component
analysis. Lastly, the PI's education and outreach activities will make UQ and
imaging technologies more modular, accessible, and easier to understand for pre-
service and early career K-12 educators, undergraduate students, and graduate
students. Specifically, the educational program of this project will: (1)
Strengthen STEM education through teacher training workshops and practical
research experiences for pre-service and early career K-12 teachers, which will
result in reproducible teaching modules for use in K-12 education; and (2)
Enhance undergraduate and graduate curriculum at North Carolina State University
by creating accessible seminar talks and new course
content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.