* 1845076
* CIF: CAREER: Robust, Interpretable, and Efficient Unsupervised Learning with K-set Clustering
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Laura Balzano, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 620,792.00

Modern machine learning techniques aim to design models and algorithms that
allow computers to learn efficiently from vast amounts of previously unexplored
data. These problems are called 'unsupervised' because no human-provided
information about the data is available to guide the machine learning process.
Arguably the two most important unsupervised machine learning tools are
dimensionality-reduction and clustering. In dimensionality-reduction, the
algorithm seeks a simple low-dimensional structure that captures the interesting
behavior in the data. In clustering, the algorithm seeks to group data points
together into meaningful clusters. As increasingly higher-dimensional data are
collected about progressively more elaborate physical, biological, and social
phenomena, algorithms that aim at both dimensionality reduction and clustering
are often highly applicable. However, joint formulations in the literature are
often ad-hoc and fundamentally unable to operate on real data that have missing
elements, corruptions, and heterogeneity --- critical machine learning
challenges for modern data problems. This research project is expected to have
broad applicability in data science, and will be demonstrated in two
applications: genetics and computer vision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The joint
clustering and dimensionality reduction formulation used in this project, called
K-set clustering, seeks K "central sets" constrained to have some low-
dimensional representation, each of which represents one of K clusters in the
data. The formulation is a generalization of K-means, K-subspaces, and principal
component analysis, and it naturally leads to several novel problem instances.
Given a defined set geometry, the corresponding problem instance is approached
from two perspectives: understanding the geometry of that instance of the
problem formulation, and learning those geometric models from data. Three
specific examples of the problem formulation will be studied: subspace
clustering, variety clustering, and polyhedral set clustering. While each
example presents intrinsic and unique challenges, these are just examples of a
larger paradigm that is limited only by one's ability to define sets amenable to
modeling the geometric structure in data. The formulation allows for
interpretable data analysis, with a framework that can readily incorporate
missing data and heterogeneous data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.