* 1845009
* CAREER: Van der Waals material integrated ultra-low power nanophotonics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Arka Majumdar, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 03/31/2024
* USD 555,000.00

Non-Technical Description: Information processing and communication are at the
heart of many technologies that enable modern life. These technologies have
experienced exponential growth over the past several decades, thanks to the
aggressive scaling of electronic devices. Next-generation information
technologies, however, cannot be supported by only scaling transistors, and will
rely heavily on data centers and cloud computing to drive performance
improvements. We are already experiencing this trend with the increased
investment from large technology companies in these sectors. To support this
architecture, we need to bring optical interconnect technology (i.e., fiber
optics), which is the backbone of the modern internet, to shorter length scales.
Going beyond classical computing and communication technologies, quantum
mechanics presents an opportunity to realize a paradigm shift in information
technology. All these technologies, however, require ultra-low power
optoelectronic devices; the power requirement is almost four orders of magnitude
lower than that of existing devices. In my research, I aim to create these
devices using atomically thin materials integrated with silicon nitride photonic
circuits. Specifically, we aim to develop an optical modulator and optical
switch, that can change light transmission using minimal power. These devices
will be fabricated using well-developed semiconductor manufacturing technology.
Along with developing new technology, the proposal aims to incorporate a design-
build-test module in existing lecture-based nanophotonics courses to provide
hands-on experience to the next-generation knowledge workers in the field of
integrated photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Ultra-low-
power tunable and nonlinear optical devices hold the key for numerous optical
technologies including optoelectronic information processing, communication, and
photonic quantum simulations of strongly correlated materials. Currently, the
power required to modulate the light transmission through photonic devices or to
observe a nonlinear input-output response is too high. This power can be reduced
by spatially confining the electronic and photonic wave functions to a
nanometer-length scale for an extended period of time. Nanophotonic resonators
integrated with emerging low-dimensional materials present an attractive
platform to create ultra-low-power optoelectronic devices. To that end, this
proposal aims to integrate van der Waals (vdW) materials (e.g., graphene or
transition metal dichalcogenides) and their heterostructures with silicon
nitride nano-resonators. The choice of silicon nitride is motivated by its large
bandgap and compatibility with large-scale semiconductor manufacturing. The vdW
materials are chosen for their unique quantum properties, large exciton binding
energies, and atomic thinness that enable extremely small active volumes and
unprecedented material compatibility; they can be transferred onto any substrate
without requiring explicit lattice matching. Combining numerical simulation,
device fabrication, and optical characterization, three research aims will be
pursued: (i) develop an experiment-driven model for vdW material?cavity
coupling; (ii) demonstrate optical nonlinearity at the few photon level in a
coupled cavity array, and (iii) create an electro-optic modulator with attojoule
electrical energy per switching. While the initial applications of these devices
will be in ultra-low-power classical optical information science, the same
platform can be used for developing quantum technologies, including quantum
many-body simulations and quantum signal transduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.