* 1845258
* CAREER: Partitioning of Rare Earth Elements (REE) Between Minerals and Aqueous Fluids in Ore Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Alexander Gysi, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis Geist
* 08/31/2020
* USD 287,565.00

The rare earth elements (REE) have similar but slightly different ionic radii
and atomic masses, which permits studying the fundamental behavior of chemical
elements and their incorporation in mineral structures in natural systems. Their
magnetic properties make them important components in permanent magnets used in
wind turbines, batteries of hybrid cars, and phosphors in energy efficient
light. The REE composition of minerals is also used in geosciences to trace
geological processes in the Earth's crust. Ore deposits commonly form at depth
through the mobilization of metals in aqueous fluids and the mineralization in
hydrothermal veins. The properties of both, the fluid and the minerals, will
affect how the different REE are fractionated. Currently, we have much to
discover about how to quantify systematically the trace element signatures of
minerals with regards to fluid-rock interaction and ore-forming processes. This
CAREER proposal explores how REE fractionate between aqueous fluids and minerals
in ore deposits using laboratory experiments, numerical modeling and fluid
inclusions trapped in natural minerals. The THERMO fluids project will be
initiated with the preparation of a Fluids & Minerals summer school for
undergraduate students, an open access booklet, and a dedicated hands-on
thermodynamics tutorial webpage. A major aim of this project will be to provide
an education platform and demonstrate the broader significance of thermodynamics
in geosciences.

Calcite, fluorite and apatite are common gangue minerals associated to REE and
other mineral deposits. These minerals record geochemical signatures that may be
used to determine temperature, fluid chemistry and potentially fluid pathways
associated to ore-forming processes. This research involves a comprehensive
series of hydrothermal experiments at 100 to 350 degrees C for determining the
partitioning of REE between aqueous fluid-calcite, -apatite and -fluorite as a
function of temperature and fluid composition (i.e., salinity, pH and ligand
activity). The experimental data will be used to develop a new thermodynamic
model for predicting and quantifying REE signatures in these hydrothermal
minerals. To test the model, a set of mineral trace element compositions and
fluid inclusions will be studied in peralkaline, carbonatite, and iron oxide-
apatite hosted ore deposits in North America. The objective of the proposed
research is to provide a framework for simulating the partitioning of trace
metals associated to fluid-rock reactions in ore deposits and advance our
capabilities of modeling and interpreting ore-forming processes.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.