* 1845978
* CAREER:  The Small RNA Biology of Lophotrochozoa
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Alex Flynt, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,153,292.00

This project will develop RNA interference (RNAi) technology in lophotrochozoans
(mollusks and segmented worms) with the specific goal of aiding the Gulf of
Mexico's imperiled oyster fisheries. RNAi is a popular method for affecting an
organism's genes, but is relatively untested in this group of animals. The
project will identify the distinct ways RNAi works in lophotrochozoans. The
insights gained from this research could guide biotechnological strategies to
develop and generate desirable traits, such as disease resistance, in a manner
that does not create genetically modified organisms (GMOs). Industry players and
communities will be engaged to discuss how an RNAi-based approach can support
and benefit oyster aquaculture. The research will involve graduate students,
postdoctoral fellows and aquaculture specialists as well as students in
undergraduate classes at the University of Southern Mississippi. A course series
will be offered that explores the project's questions in a semester-spanning
format, providing students with bona fide research experiences in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary experimental strategy
involving biochemistry, genetics, and computational biology approaches will be
employed in the project. A cornerstone of the research will be high-throughput
sequencing-based characterization of small RNAs - the effectors of RNAi.
Analysis of sequencing data will be used to determine mode of production,
targets, and the fate of foreign RNAs. Preliminary analysis found that oysters
have dramatically divergent small RNA populations compared to well-studied
animals, suggesting potential for a wholly new RNAi strategy. Subsequent
experiments will characterize small RNA behaviors using fractionation, metabolic
labeling, and enzymatic treatments. Together these efforts will elucidate an
unexplored biology in a diverse clade of animals, with a broader impact goal of
developing genetic technology in oysters - an economically and culturally
significant species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.