* 1845623
* CAREER: Whole-tissue chemical and transcriptional profiling
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Aaron Streets, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 04/30/2024
* USD 553,046.00

The ability to probe the molecular state of biological samples at the single-
cell level has drastically advanced our understanding of the complex network of
cellular interactions in our organs and tissue. However, most single-cell
genomic measurements require dissociating cells from their native environment,
thereby destroying information about cellular context. The spatial and chemical
context of a cell are critical parameters in both developmental and disease
states as chemical and physical interactions with neighboring cells can
influence signaling pathways that determine cell fate. This research aims to
transition from cataloging cellular identity in tissues and organs to mapping
cellular distributions by developing a platform to profile the chemical
composition and transcriptional state of intact tissue specimens with single-
cell resolution. The project involves combining advanced microscopy to image the
position of cells in a tissue, and automated fluid handling to collect genomic
material from single cells for analysis. This technology compliments
international efforts to create a comprehensive human cell atlas by aiding in
the production of cell-level maps of developing and diseased tissue for both
fundamental and translational biological research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will leverage recent advances in microfluidics, non-linear optical
microscopy, and high-throughput DNA sequencing to develop a novel approach for
spatial-transcriptomic analysis of unfixed tissue. Specifically, stimulated
Raman scattering microscopy will be used to perform label-free histological
imaging of tissue slices. A microfluidic platform will then be implemented to
precisely and systematically capture individual cells from dissected tissue and
molecularly encode RNA from each cell with its position of origin. High-
throughput sequencing will then reveal both the transcriptional state and
original location of each cell. High-resolution transcriptional maps of
interrogated tissue samples will be accessible through a public database,
providing a resource for developmental biologists and biomedical researchers. In
addition to these research goals, the principal investigator of this project
will also direct an undergraduate research program, focused on enhancing
recruitment of historically underrepresented minority students and first-
generation college students to the UC Berkeley Bioengineering department. This
program will provide academic mentorship and fund early undergraduate research
to strengthen the pipeline for a more diverse biological research community.
Results of this project can be found at
streetslab.berkeley.edu/publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.