* 1845663
* CAREER:  Dissecting Neural Mechanisms of Behavioral State Control in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Steven Flavell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 03/31/2024
* USD 763,594.00

Many animal behaviors are organized into long-lasting states, perhaps most
strikingly in the three main arousal states in mammals: wakefulness, non-REM
(rapid eye movement) sleep, and REM sleep. Although behavioral states are
pervasive throughout the animal kingdom, the fundamental mechanisms that allow
animals to initiate, maintain and terminate these states are poorly understood.
To address this problem, the researchers examine the brain mechanisms that
underlie behavioral state generation in a simple animal model, the roundworm C.
elegans. Specifically, they examine how groups of interacting neurons --or
neural circuits-- contribute to the generation of behavioral states. C. elegans
is an attractive system for these studies because its nervous system consists of
just 302 neurons. Moreover, the connections between these neurons are already
known. Thus, fundamental principles of neural circuit function can be rapidly
discovered in this animal and then applied to more complex animals. The specific
goals of the research plan are to (1) fully characterize behavioral states in C.
elegans, (2) examine how groups of neurons interact during behavioral states,
and (3) use new optical approaches to characterize brain-wide activity during
behavioral states. These studies will yield new insights into how animals
generate behavioral states, with implications for human well-being, public
policy, and more. This research plan is integrated with an educational plan
centered on developing an undergraduate laboratory course where students learn
and apply modern neuroscience methods to study neural circuits. The course
materials will be made freely available to other
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A full understanding of neural circuit function
requires detailed knowledge across many scales of analysis: from molecular
events in single neurons to large-scale patterns of neural activity to emergent
animal behaviors. This research project bridges these scales of analysis in the
context of neuromodulatory control of long-lasting behavioral states. Although
almost all animals display long-lasting behavioral states, the neural mechanisms
that allow animals to generate these states are poorly understood. The goal of
this project is to dissect these mechanisms in the simple nervous system of the
nematode C. elegans, linking specific sites of neuromodulator release to large-
scale activity patterns and behavior. Aim 1: First, a novel imaging platform
will be used to determine how all C. elegans behaviors co-vary over time as
animals switch between behavioral states. Aim 2: Targeted mechanistic
experiments will then be used to examine how specific neuromodulators allow for
state-dependent coupling between premotor circuits to coordinate behaviors as
animals switch states. Aim 3: Finally, a whole-brain calcium imaging approach
will be used to examine brain-wide activity patterns during behavioral states.
These studies will reveal fundamental neural mechanisms that allow animals to
coordinate and structure their behaviors. This research plan is complemented by
an educational plan, which is centered on the development of a new undergraduate
laboratory course in which students learn and apply modern neuroscience
techniques to dissect neural circuit function. The course has an emphasis on the
use of diverse experimental approaches to probe neural circuit
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.