* 1845796
* CAREER: Predicting cell fate from cell history: theory, experiment, and outreach
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Jeremy Purvis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This research project will lead to a better understanding of how cells -the
building blocks of all living organisms- grow, divide, and pass on traits to
other cells. Just as human traits, such as height or eye color, are transmitted
from parents to their offspring, cells can also show observable patterns of
inheritance. The specific goal of this project is to understand how a cell's
inherited traits affect its future behavior; for example, whether it will stop
dividing or become a more specialized type of cell. As such, this work addresses
a fundamental, unanswered question in biology that could impact multiple
disciplines across the life sciences. The research goals are deeply integrated
with community outreach activities designed to educate and engage a diverse
group of students including underrepresented minorities. The project will
produce an online game in which students from an urban elementary school will
create 'family trees' for cells by tracing images of cells over time. Students
will earn points for each successfully tracked cell while learning the basic
principles of cell biology. In addition, the investigator will host an open
competition in which local high-school students compete to develop the most
accurate models of cell behavior using data sets produced by the project. Thus,
this project addresses a fundamental problem in cell biology and provides
opportunities both to teach underrepresented groups and to draw on their
emerging interest in, and talent for, science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching hypothesis of this study is that, in addition to environmental cues,
an individual cell's fate is strongly influenced by the sequence of events that
occurred both within that cell's own lifetime as well as during the lifetimes of
its ancestor cells. This hypothesis will be pursued by developing a
computational model of single-cell lifetimes and lineage relationships and
applying these models to understand, in quantitative terms, how a cell's
individual and family history influences its fate decisions. The project will
employ fluorescence time-lapse microscopy to quantify inheritance patterns
across thousands of related cells spanning multiple cellular generations. Cells
will be challenged with environmental stresses or developmental signals and the
fates of individual cells and their offspring will be determined. With these
data in hand, mathematical models will be used to: (i) understand how the
lifetimes of individual cells are regulated; (ii) quantify how single-cell
traits are inherited; and (iii) determine how molecular events in a cell's
history determine its fate. The project focuses on the inheritance patterns of
two single-cell traits: DNA double-stranded breaks (that generally slow
progression through the cell cycle); and expression of a canonical pluripotency
factor, OCT4 (that generally inhibits differentiation of cells and keeps them in
a pluripotent state). Quantitative predictions will be validated through
targeted experimental perturbations. Successful completion of the work will lead
to the development of a new theoretical framework for understanding how critical
events occurring throughout a cell's history shape its functional
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.