* 1845805
* CAREER: Cationic Chemical Vapor Deposition of Lithium Battery Gel Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Wyatt Tenhaeff, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 03/31/2024
* USD 561,325.00

The use of advanced lithium-ion batteries for vehicle transport and renewable
electricity grid storage applications could improve domestic energy security,
but their use is limited by high cost and limited battery lifetime. The main
cause of battery failure is undesirable chemical side reactions within the
device that are difficult to quantify and to understand. Because of this lack of
fundamental understanding, engineers are less able to design materials and
devices that can withstand side reactions for longer times. In advanced battery
designs such as hybrid lithium batteries, gel electrolytes have been favored
because they allow high liquid-like conductivities of conventional electrolytes
yet favorable mechanical properties and enhanced safety like solid polymer
electrolytes. This CAREER project will conduct fundamental research on polymer
processing methods to efficiently deposit gel electrolytes inside a battery's
porous electrode to form thin protective coatings that improve resistance to
unwanted side reactions and provide structural stability. Beyond electrochemical
energy storage applications, these studies will enable scalable, rapid polymer
depositions that have general relevance in many other applications such as
corrosion protection coatings, barrier and dielectric layers, and optical
coatings. As educational benefits, this project will train student researchers
in critical thinking skills, and in the disciplines of reaction engineering,
polymer science, advanced semiconductor processing, and electrochemical energy
storage. The PI has also partnered with the Rochester City Public District to
introduce chemical engineering principles to high school students using
interactive service-learning inspired projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The polymer
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process in this project is based on
heterogeneous cationic polymerizations. The central hypothesis is that strong
acid molecules, which are introduced into the deposition chamber as vapor-phase
precursors, react with surface-adsorbed vinyl monomers, generating carbenium
ions that then undergo polymerization. The overarching research objective is to
understand the fundamental transport and reaction processes that constitute
cationic polymer CVD in order to establish synthetic and morphological control
of polymer gel electrolytes deposited within porous lithium ion battery
electrodes. This project is divided into two thrusts, where the first thrust
seeks to establish the reaction mechanism and understand the material properties
of the deposited films. The second thrust will research the processing
conditions that effectively balance the rate of surface reaction with mass
transport to achieve conformal coatings inside porous structures. Novel gel
electrolyte materials will be synthesized within electrode porosity using
cationic CVD. These two thrusts are highly integrated and will be conducted in
concert to discern structure-property relationships and the effects of
processing conditions in these novel gel materials. To establish foundational
understanding of the gels' electrochemical behavior in relevant lithium ion
battery cells, electrochemical characterization of the gels is emphasized
including Li ion transport and oxidative stability. Initially, the gel
electrolyte composition will be based on crosslinked poly(vinyl pyrrolidone)
swollen in conventional alkyl carbonate liquid electrolytes. Over a longer term
as both the project and energy storage field advance, additional novel gel
compositions will be developed to address material challenges in future lithium
battery technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.