* 1845146
* CAREER:  Pushing the Theoretical Limits of Scalable Distributed Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Benjamin Moseley, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2024
* USD 398,890.00

Science and engineering are becoming more reliant on analyzing data sets that
have massive size. Processing these data sets typically requires using many
machines, such as on the cloud, meaning that algorithms and software for data
processing need to be redesigned to efficiently use a large number of machines.
This project will give algorithmic techniques for distributed computing models
(aka frameworks) such as Spark. Such a framework enables programmers to easily
deploy algorithms on tens to thousands of machines as long as the algorithm fits
into the computational restrictions of the framework. The algorithmic primitives
developed will be tools that algorithm designers and programmers can leverage to
analyze large amounts of data on many machines. This will impact industry,
science and the economy that is increasingly reliant on large data analysis.
Research outcomes will be integrated with education by including the latest
research on data analytics in the undergraduate and master of science in
business analytics programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Massively distributed
frameworks such as Spark and MapReduce are a key technology for processing large
data sets. These systems have traditionally been used to solve relatively simple
problems. Recent investigation has shown they are potentially useful for a
richer class of applications. With this potential as a proof-of-concept, this
project will discover algorithmic techniques tailored to these frameworks to
unlock their underlying power and broaden their applicability. A recently
developed theoretical model of computation will be used to drive the development
of algorithmic techniques designed to leverage the unique features of the
frameworks. The new algorithms and techniques will be used to offer scalable
solutions for key problems arising in graph processing, data mining, and
bioinformatics. Specifically, the project will develop algorithms to compute
shortest paths on massive graphs, algorithms for local alignment of biological
sequences and some of the first provably scalable algorithms for hierarchical
clustering. Achieving these goals can influence practice and theoretical
research similarly to successes in other areas such as streaming
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.