* 1845465
* CAREER: Statistical methods and algorithms for the analysis of combinatorial mass spectrometry data
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Oliver Serang, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 02/28/2022
* USD 358,241.00

Mass spectrometry is a crucial modern research tool that allows analysis of the
components of samples at several scales: nuclear, small chemicals and biological
molecules. In biological research, mass spectrometry is used in the analysis of
protein ("proteomics") and metabolic ("metabolomics") data, while in non-
research areas it is deployed, for example, to detect bomb-associated chemicals
in routine airport security screenings. This research addresses three unmet
needs in the processing of the data from mass spectrometry machines: The first
is statistical identification of proteins in a biological sample; this is
important for understanding what makes cells different, e.g., what makes a skin
cell different from a blood cell. The second is identification of which
biological species are in a sample; this is crucial in applications such as, for
example, enabling accurate and automated disease diagnostics. The third is
finding the "alphabet" of basic molecular ingredients in a sample. This research
addresses these aims by developing new algorithmic and statistical methods that
can correctly separate the basic elements of a complex mixture. The researchers
working on this project create mathematical tools that are implemented as
researcher-friendly software tools for solving the listed problems. To help make
the ideas more accessible to both scientific and non-scientific audiences, the
researchers will create teaching modules and podcast episodes to explain how the
algorithms work, and what math tricks were developed to break down the
complexity of the problem so it is amenable to a useful
solution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Problems with combinatorial
dependencies are ubiquitous in mass spectrometry. Symmetries in combinatorial
dependencies can be exploited to construct special dynamic programming
algorithms: convolution trees, fast numeric max-convolution, and other
approaches, all of which were invented and developed by the researchers. The
researchers will use and improve these symmetry-exploiting algorithms to
implement superior mass spectrometry-based protein identification, species
classification, and small molecule analysis. Convolution trees can be used to
solve these problems in quasilinear time, and so they can be applied to a very
large number of proteins, species, or small molecules (or to a large number of
spectra from any of these problems). The researchers will construct a library of
software implementations of these algorithms with permissive open source
licensing for unrestricted academic and industrial use. As they further develop
these combinatorial methods, the researchers will create a combinatorics
curriculum for intuitively teaching these concepts to K-12 students and create
podcast episodes explaining these ideas in an accessible manner.The fruits of
this research will be freely available at https://alg.cs.umt.edu/nsf-career.html
.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.