* 1845576
* CAREER: Social Aggregate Measurement from Text
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Brendan O'Connor, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2024
* USD 477,930.00

With rapidly expanding digitized text archives such as social media, news, and
medical records, researchers are eager to measure the composition, behavior, and
worldviews of diverse human populations through their linguistic expression. But
it is still unknown how to construct robust and fair aggregation of text-based
signals for downstream analysis. This Faculty Early Career Development project's
goal is to develop fair and uncertainty-aware text analysis methods to measure
socially relevant topics, sentiment, and events across bodies of text, in order
to infer their relationships with variables such as author demographics, health
outcomes, and political conflict. These methods will be more accurate - and be
self-aware when they make mistakes - for applications such as tracking events in
the news, or understanding sentiment from social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods for text aggregation are
systematically biased towards idiosyncrasies in their training data, and are
confounded by variability in natural language processing errors across social
variables of interest. Furthermore, new probabilistic inference methods may aid
insight by incorporating more richly structured natural language analysis, such
as entity coreference, event parsing, or structured sentiment analysis. Through
a series of case studies in the social and health sciences, this project will
develop better statistical and linguistic models that combine probabilistic
generative and discriminative approaches to text modeling. These methods will
more accurately measure social variables' effects on topics, sentiment, and
events, while inferring confidence intervals and other important statistical
measures of uncertainty. Finally, this project will support education and
training in interdisciplinary computational social science, through workshops at
both undergraduate and graduate levels, targeting students from areas including
computer science, linguistics, political science, and African-American
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.