* 1845165
* CAREER: The Instrumentalization of Law Through Veterans Treatment Courts
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Jamie Rowen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 499,999.00

Beginning in 2008, Veterans Treatment Courts (VTCs) emerged as one response to a
growing concern that veterans are disproportionately represented in the criminal
justice system and have unique, unmet, needs. Each of the more than 500 VTCs
around the country seeks to connect qualifying veterans with substance use and
mental health services. This project examines why these courts have emerged and
how they operate. Researchers examine the origins and practices of three
distinct VTCs, one in Florida, California, and Massachusetts. Each address
different community needs, with different rules related to participation, legal
outcomes, and treatment plans. This project involves veteran students from
different academic institutions in research focusing on how these courts seek to
aid a uniquely vulnerable population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By examining the
purpose and practice of VTCs, the project addresses why and how local legal
innovations emerge to address entrenched social and political problems such as
drug use, mental health disorders, poverty and war. Further, the research
addresses how these innovations integrate logics from disparate institutional
fields related to medicine, criminal justice, and social welfare. Finally, the
analysis will reveal how authorities encourage compliance in legal institutions
with contradictory goals related to punishment and rehabilitation. The project
involves team-based, comparative, ethnographic analysis, including long-term
observation of court hearings, interviews with VTC founders and personnel
working locally and nationally, and the collection of legislative histories and
institutional documents that explain the purpose and practice of each VTC, as
well as national level initiatives to promote VTCs. Researchers use a grounded
theory approach to analyze the data, drawing on theories related to therapeutic
jurisprudence, procedural justice, and social welfare decision-making to explain
why these courts are being created and how they fulfill their
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.