* 1845922
* CAREER: Search-Based Optimization of Combinatorial Structures via Expensive Experiments
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Janardhan Rao Doppa, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 549,727.00

Many design-optimization problems in science and engineering applications
involve performing experiments that are expensive in terms of the consumed
resources (computational or physical). These experiments are often guided by
intuition and performed by human engineers and scientists in an series of
investigations informed by results of prior experiments. This experimental
design process can be very challenging when the design space is combinatorial
with rich structure among the design variables (e.g., sets, sequences, and
graphs). This five-year project is an integrated research, education, and
outreach program focused on transforming the practice of optimizing
combinatorial design spaces by developing new artificial intelligence (AI) based
algorithms for such experiments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this
project is to develop a new search-based learning and optimization framework to
address the challenges associated with optimizing combinatorial design spaces
consisting of discrete and hybrid (mixture of discrete and continuous design
variables) structures. This framework tightly integrates advances in machine
learning and AI search to intelligently explore the design space by reasoning
about the available resource budget and the usefulness of potential information
the experiments may provide. The search-based framework will be extended to two
novel settings towards the goal of improving the resource-efficiency for design
optimization. First, the side-information generated by the experiments will be
modeled and exploited appropriately. Second, multi-fidelity experiments that
trade off accuracy and consumed resources will be leveraged based on their
availability. The project will apply the developed algorithms to revolutionize
the areas of electronic design automation, design of materials, and design of
synthetic microbiomes via close collaboration with domain experts from these
application areas. The techniques developed in this project will be made
available to academia and industry through open-source software. Results will be
disseminated widely through research papers, conference presentations,
tutorials, and short courses to maximize the benefits to the scientific
community. Educational and outreach activities will include a novel Ambassador
program to improve the interest of community college students including under-
represented minorities in computer science careers; involving undergraduate
students in research projects; a short summer-course on data-driven design
optimization for engineers and scientists at WSU; and recruiting and mentoring
under-represented minority groups in computer science and engineering through an
existing program called LSAMP at Washington State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.