* 1845801
* CAREER: Dynamic phase-sensitive optical coherenence microscopy to quantify activity in retinal cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jeremy Rogers, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Stem cell technology has the potential to provide a pathway for reversing sight
damage that occurs with age. A crucial element of reversing sight damage is
developing techniques to quantitatively assess the structure as well as the
activity and function of individual cells within the retina. Without this
monitoring capability, treatments would rely on structure alone, which is not
comprehensive. The overall goal of this research project is to develop clinical
imaging tools that could provide such features before, during, and after drug
and gene therapies. The project's educational activities include development of
innovative optics curricula and educational outreach events designed for
students of all ages. Outreach activities will be also performed with the
Wisconsin Institutes for Discovery (WID). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
approach calls for advancing phase sensitive optical coherence tomography to
study cellular motion in three-dimensional cell cultures. The motivation is that
this approach will help develop tools for assessing success of transplanted
retinal cells.&lt;br/&gt;The core advancement proposed here is to determine if
dynamic phase-sensitive optical coherence microscopy will enable imaging of
cellular function. This will be done by developing a high resolution dynamic
phase-sensitive optical coherence microscope, quantifying phagocytosis in
retinal pigment epithelium as a model of disease, and characterizing
photoreceptor activity in stem cell-derived organoids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.