* 1845487
* CAREER: Learning from When, Where and by Whom Data is Generated for Advancing Public Health Studies
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Rumi Chunara, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Improving disease prevention through robust and high-granularity measures of
lifestyle, environmental and social factors from daily life will improve
healthcare by enabling precise and focused proactive interventions. This will
dramatically change the healthcare paradigm in this country and significantly
reduce costs and illnesses, more so than a solely reactive focus on disease
diagnosis and treatment. Public health is the study of these daily life factors
and prevention efforts. New person-generated data (PGD) from Internet and mobile
data sources, such as mHealth, social media, wearables, and data from smartphone
apps, offer unprecedented opportunity to provide sub-daily, as well as local,
neighborhood-level measures of lifestyle, environmental and social factors from
daily life. However, the impact of this data has yet to be fully realized for
public health efforts. In part, this is because existing research efforts on PGD
often focus on processing the content of data in isolation, and do not consider
human data sharing patterns, that is, who contributes the data, when it is
contributed and from where it is contributed. By accounting for these
attributes, this project aims to improve the validity and reliability of
measures extracted from PGD and enable improved understanding of high-
granularity health risks and outcomes. The project will also provide a highly-
integrated research and educational program for public health practitioners,
students, and community members in the context of PGD and public health by: (1)
preparing students to use computer science in today's job landscape via a
problem-based learning class; (2) increasing high-school students' exposure to
computer science in the real-world with a focus on applications of computer
science; and (3) disseminating scientific understanding of computer science in
the public health and general community. In conjunction, this work will improve
both computer science and public health practice and research through method
development and exposure of diverse community members and community-oriented
professionals to the utility of data mining and machine learning.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new machine
learning approaches motivated by the need to improve data management and
analysis in the public health domain. The research addresses critical
statistical and computational challenges due to human data sharing patterns.
These challenges represent an opportunity for contributions to health
informatics and machine learning by improving prediction efforts through
learning from person-generated data in combination with "when, where and by
whom" the data is generated. Using this information as an additional signal,
this project explores: (1) inference of temporal patterns (motifs) by accounting
for characteristic human data sharing patterns; (2) discovery of underlying
latent spatial representation of content from humans that is noisy, sparse and
inconsistently generated over space by using content jointly with geographic
information; and (3) prediction in data without labels using data for the same
task but from a different domain by including attributes of the population
generating the data in each dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.