* 1845634
* CAREER:  Microbiome regulation by amphibian skin peptides
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Douglas Woodhams, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,012,898.00

Microbes, including bacteria and fungi, are in constant interaction with the
immune system. Little is known about how this relationship helps prevent
disease. Thus host-microbe biology is an exciting frontier for discovery.
Amphibians are an excellent model system to study the symbiotic relationships
between animal hosts and microbes because their moist skin surfaces have
properties similar to the human digestive tract and lungs. The current award
will use this model to test whether peptides secreted onto the skin of the
northern leopard frog regulate skin microbiota by supporting the growth of
beneficial bacteria and by inhibiting the growth of pathogenic bacteria. The
results of this study will inform microbial therapies and contribute to
conservation efforts as well. Since one third of the world's amphibian species
are currently threatened, this research will also inform amphibian disease
management and conservation at a critical time when continued disease emergence
is harming biodiversity. Central to the NSF CAREER award, this project
integrates research with education by implementing a Mentored Research Lab
course on Microbiome and Disease Ecology to provide authentic research
experiences. In learning communities, graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers will give mentorship to undergraduates. An advisory board of
microbial and disease ecologists, professional education specialists, and
faculty will provide collaboration and training. The project will target
recruitment from underrepresented groups at all levels. In this collaborative
setting, students will be encouraged to design experiments on the cutting edge
of host-microbe biology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Emerging infectious diseases
threaten wildlife populations. Chytridiomycosis is one example of an emerging
infectious disease of amphibians, such as leopard frogs, and is caused by the
fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis. This project will describe key
interactions of host peptides and symbiotic microbes for defending the host
against fungal infections and identify a novel mechanism of microbiome
regulation by skin defense peptides. The central hypothesis is that amphibian
skin peptides regulate the skin microbiome, thus impacting host-pathogen
interactions. Specific objectives are: (1) Identify interactions between skin
defense peptides and microbiota under field and controlled mesocosm conditions
including comparisons among host life-history stages with different peptide
expression patterns, (2) test if host skin peptides support microbes isolated
from hosts (promicrobial function) and inhibit potentially invasive
environmental microbes (antimicrobial function), (3) examine the role of defense
peptides in regulating microbiome stability by experimentally reducing skin
peptides and testing for microbial dysbiosis under different environmental
conditions, and (4) test the role of microbial community phylogenetic diversity
prompting complexity of host defense peptide expression on the skin through
controlled experiments. Determining the trajectory of the microbiota through
time under different environmental conditions will provide insight on whether
microbiome assembly is stochastic, resilient, or adaptively shifts as defense
peptides regenerate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.