* 1845728
* CAREER: Engineered tumor models to study the recruitment and activation of Natural Killer cells
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Blanka Sharma, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2024
* USD 559,500.00

Despite advances in drug discovery and early diagnosis, cancer remains the
second leading cause of death worldwide. Recent breakthroughs have demonstrated
good clinical outcomes in a number of difficult-to-treat cancers, but response
rates have been variable and many treatments result in unwanted side effects.
Thus, there is an emerging interest in developing therapies that enhance the
ability of the body's own Natural Killer (NK) cells, which are immune system
cells that have the ability to recognize cancer cells and destroy them.
Unfortunately, tumors create a local environment, called the tumor
microenvironment, that suppresses the functions of the NK cells and thereby
allows the cancer to grow unchecked. The goal of this Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) project is to engineer three-dimensional models of
the tumor microenvironment and to interrogate the biochemical and mechanical
cues that impact how NK cells migrate into tumors and recognize cancer cells.
The knowledge generated by these studies could lead to new therapeutic targets
or strategies for NK cells to overcome the immunosuppressive tumor
microenvironment and attack cancer cells. The research project will provide
graduate and undergraduate students with interdisciplinary training at the
cutting edge of tumor biology, immunology, and tissue engineering. The education
goals of the project are to develop curricula and outreach activities that will
excite students at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels about the impact
of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) professions on their local
communities and society as a whole. In particular, outreach activities aimed at
increasing awareness of the breath of opportunities that a STEM education
provides will be targeted to middle school students and teachers in underserved
and economically disadvantaged schools in north-central Florida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop engineered tumor
microenvironments to interrogate the biochemical and mechanical cues that impact
Natural Killer (NK) cell migration and activity. Unlike T-cells, NK cells can
function in an antigen independent manner by recognizing "stress signals" and
alterations in cell surface ligands on nascent tumor cells that correspond to
activating receptors on NK cells. Adoptive cell transfer of NK cells has
demonstrated promise in eradicating certain hematological malignancies; however,
solid malignancies have proved more challenging. To exert their effector
functions in solid tumors, NK cells must migrate through the tumor stroma and
make cell-to-cell contact with cancer cells. While much research is focused on
enhancing NK cell activation at the NK cell-cancer cell synapse, without
sufficient NK cell infiltration these strategies may ultimately be
inefficient/ineffective. The first objective of the research plan is to engineer
a tunable 3-D culture system to investigate how NK cell-ECM interactions impact
NK cell recruitment. Various poly(ethylene glycol)-based hydrogels will be
engineered with tunable physical and biochemical properties such as stiffness,
cell adhesion sites, enzymatic degradation sites, and tumor-related
proteoglycans to interrogate the biochemical and mechanical cues that impact NK
cell recruitment. The working hypothesis is that ECM composition and stiffness
will impact NK cell migration and activation in response to chemotactic
gradients. The extent of NK cell migration, the mechanism of migration, and
cytokine production will be assessed in the engineered microenvironments. The
second objective of the research plan is to characterize how the extracellular
microenvironment impacts NK cell-cancer cell interactions. Tumor
immunosuppression mechanisms and NK cell-cancer cell interactions will be
examined in physiologically relevant 3-D systems. The working hypothesis is that
the composition and stiffness of the ECM influences the immunosuppressive
mechanisms in tumors and, consequently, NK cell-cancer cell interactions. The
results from these studies will advance the field of cancer immunotherapies and
lead to new strategies for NK cell therapies in solid malignancies as well as
new in vitro tools for evaluating their effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.