* 1845625
* SBIR Phase I:  Triumvi - A Rapidly Deployable, Energy-Harvesting Real-Power Meter
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Aaron Block, Allumia, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Benaiah Schrag
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a shift towards both accuracy and
affordability within the world of energy sub-metering. This metering system will
have a dramatic impact on the market for submetering commercial real estate. By
drastically reducing the cost and knowledge hurdles associated with accurate
submetering and bringing the costs of submetering in line with value, this
technology opens the door for a mass-market approach to circuit-level energy use
data. The market for this commercial submetering is expected to reach $2.5
billion annually within six years, but could grow substantially larger with the
introduction of low-cost, high-accuracy technologies. Additionally, it is
estimated that access to metering data alone can reduce energy consumption
within a building between 5% and 15%, meaning a wide deployment of these
technologies could have wide-reaching environmental and energy security
benefits.

The proposed project will advance the state-of-the-art in true power metering by
providing revenue quality AC power submetering using an energy-harvesting, as
opposed to plug-in, design. Doing so requires fundamental improvements in
circuit design, embedded software architecture and signal analysis. The result
is a self-contained system that drastically reduces deployment and installation
costs. This project will simplify the system implementation and reduce the cost
of production, and the ability for Triumvi meters to share data and, more
importantly, energy harvested. Specific key technical objectives include
creating a daisy-chain framework through which individual nodes within a
metering system can share energy and data, improving accuracy in the myriad of
potential field conditions, and creating a system of runtime-diagnostics to
identify, and fix, human error in real time. Study and pursuit of these
objectives will take place both in the lab, as well is in the field, where
installation and accuracy can be benchmarked against conventional hardwired
metering solutions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.