* 1845747
* CAREER: Quantum Dynamics of Photochemical Reactions in Solar Energy Conversions
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Pengfei Huo, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 11/30/2023
* USD 649,968.00

Pengfei Huo of the University of Rochester is supported by a CAREER award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry for theoretical research relevant to solar energy conversion. Huo and
coworkers develop new quantum dynamics approaches for investigating
photochemical reaction. These reactions are crucial for solar fuel production.
In solar-to-fuel reactions, a molecule is excited by absorption of light, and
this process allows the molecule to transfer of both electrons and protons to
another molecule. A quantitative and predictive understanding of these reactions
is hampered by the lack of efficient and accurate theoretical approaches. The
Huo group develops new quantum dynamics methods that aim to address these
theoretical challenges. They use computational tools to simulate coupled
electron and proton transfer reactions in photocatalytic conversions. Such
insights inspire new design principles and paradigms for next-generation
photocatalytic energy production. Dr. Huo's research program is integrated with
an educational component centered on theoretical chemistry, including the
'Journey to the Molecular World' summer school for high school students in the
Rochester City School District. This project aims to inspires student curiosity
and enthusiasm about molecular science and encourage high school students to
pursue higher education in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On-the-fly quantum dynamics simulation is one
of the most desirable approaches to investigate non-equilibrium photochemical
reactions. Accurately performing such simulations remains a significant
challenge in theoretical chemistry, due to a lack of efficient quantum dynamics
methods as well as the discrepancy between diabatic dynamics methods and
adiabatic electronic structure calculations. To address these long-standing
challenges, Dr. Huo and his team are developing new path-integral quantum
dynamics approaches that can accurately simulate non-adiabatic electronic
transitions and explicitly incorporate nuclear quantum effects through a
classical-like description for all degrees of freedom. They are also developing
new propagation schemes that enable a seamless interface between diabatic
dynamics methods and adiabatic electronic structure calculations, explicitly
avoiding additional efforts to reformulate diabatic dynamics methods to the
adiabatic representations. Combining the above two types of techniques, the Huo
group is performing on-the-fly simulations to investigate the fundamental
mechanisms of photoinduced proton-coupled electron transfer (PI-PCET) reactions
which are at the center of many solar energy conversion processes. His team is
exploring experimentally-testable mechanistic hypotheses that take advantage of
the non-equilibrium and quantum mechanical nature of PI-PCET to achieve new
chemical reactivities. These investigations may yield a set of general and
widely applicable theoretical tools that can significantly expand the scope of
quantum dynamics simulations, as well as provide fundamental knowledge and new
design principles to predict and control the reactivities of next-generation
photocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.