* 1845012
* CAREER:  Molecular evolution of antibiotic export by the SMR family of membrane proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Randy Stockbridge, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 02/29/2024
* USD 948,271.00

One way bacteria gain resistance to toxins (such as antibiotics or antiseptics)
is through the evolution of transporters that eject toxic compounds from the
cell. This adaptation mechanism utilizes protein assemblies in the membrane to
"pump" the toxins out, yet maintain the integrity of the impermeable membrane
barrier that defines the cell. Such proteins undermine antibiotic treatment
because they actively remove these drugs from the cell. This project will
investigate the evolution of antibiotic and antiseptic resistance in bacteria,
focusing on a particular class of membrane proteins known as the "small
multidrug resistance transporters." This project will reveal fundamental
knowledge that will inform the fight against drug-resistant bacteria. In
addition, this research will elucidate how transport of select compounds across
cell membranes evolved in nature. This knowledge will impact bioengineering
strategies, with potential applications in biofuel production, bioremediation,
and nutritional fortification of foods. This project will also provide training
opportunities for undergraduates to learn cutting-edge scientific techniques. It
will also include development of an augmented reality app that will engage
undergraduate students and the general public in learning how molecular machines
function and can be exploited in biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching scientific objective of this project is to gain insight into two key
evolutionary events for membrane proteins: a) duplication of a progenitor
single-domain protein to generate the two-domain architecture found in a
plurality of transporters; and b) evolution of novel substrate specificity of
such transporters. The PI has recently identified and functionally surveyed a
family of microbial membrane proteins that is an excellent model for both of
these processes, the SMR (small, multidrug resistance) family, which comprises
two subtypes: exporters of guanidinium ion, and exporters of bulky hydrophobic
antimicrobials. Objective 1 will characterize, in atomic detail, the structure,
mechanism and mutational robustness of representative SMR proteins that, because
of their position in the phylogenetic tree, will be particularly informative for
evolutionary analyses. Objective 2 will test hypotheses about the evolutionary
mechanism by which drug export function emerged in the SMR family. To do this,
we will use a multidisciplinary approach combining evolutionary techniques such
as phylogenetics, ancestral reconstruction, and direct coupling analysis with
membrane protein biochemistry, electrophysiology, and crystallographic
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.