* 1845958
* NCS-FO: Using fMRI to revise psychological variables
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Ralph Adolphs, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 296,437.00

One of the greatest challenges to understanding variability in human behavior
and cognition, in both health and disease, is the relative disconnection between
scientific psychology and neurobiological knowledge. Not much is known of how
personality, intelligence, and other variables are related, and we do not know
how they arise from brain activity. The overarching, high-risk goal of this NSF-
EAGER project is to use neuroscience data to discover the architecture of the
mind: can we build a new psychology from knowledge about the brain? The starting
point of this work is the notion that instead of personality, intelligence,
positive mood, attention and other current psychological constructs, none of
which were derived based on neuroscience data, one might end up with a very
different inventory if these psychological variables were derived in a data-
driven fashion from neuroimaging data. This project is exploratory, since there
are no extant paths for approaching this issue. The project will use approaches
from the field of causal discovery, essentially asking if we can identify
features in neuroimaging data that best explain new, revised psychological
variables. The results will be a proof-of-principle that such an approach could
yield new psychological constructs, and if successful will provide an initial
direction in which this new field could evolve. The project will also use open
science practices throughout its activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER
project investigates individual differences in psychology and brain function to
address a high-risk, high-payoff question: can we use neuroscience to revise
psychology? It will focus on probing two domains of utmost importance to
functioning in the real world: personality and intelligence. There has been
success in predicting classical derivations of personality dimensions and
intelligence from neuroimaging data, but this approach is inherently limited by
the particular psychological constructs used in the first place. The further
step taken here is to optimally combine test results in light of neural
predictability, based on causal graphs that are estimated from resting-state
fMRI data. The project will also use a novel, entirely data-driven approach,
Causal Feature Learning (CFL), to automatically derive candidate causal
variables from the fMRI measurements that may explain the behavioral and
psychometric measures used to determine personality and intelligence. CFL has
been used successfully in this fashion to analyze climate data, but it has never
been applied to neuroscience. The project intends to make substantial
contributions to philosophical and psychological conceptualizations of mental
variables and cognitive architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.