* 1845962
* CAREER: A Parallel and Efficient Computational Framework for Unified Volumetric Meshing in Large-Scale 3D/4D Anisotropy
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Zichun Zhong, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/29/2024
* USD 448,112.00

This proposal develops a computational framework that helps the domain
scientists who employ advanced cyberinfrastructure ecosystem (e.g., for
engineering, manufacturing, healthcare, etc.) to realistically and efficiently
reconstruct, visualize, and analyze 3D and 4D (space-time) volumetric objects
with complex geometric structures and highly anisotropic properties (such
properties are characterized by the presence of specified orientations and
aspect ratios in the system). For example, in mechanical engineering, it is
necessary to interactively design and model mechanical parts with user-required
high-quality measures and standards. The computational framework enables
fabrication of such mechanical parts with specified microstructure that can be
efficiently produced to sustain much stronger stress and strain compared with
those without endowing such properties, which leads to significant impact on the
next-generation mechanical component design. As an integral part of the PI's
career development, the educational plan emphasizes on the integration of
education and research in different aspects through the PI's new "3D hands-on"
education philosophy for K-12, undergraduate and graduate students. This project
thus serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the
progress of science; to advance the national health, prosperity and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project focuses on a
computational framework for anisotropic volumetric meshing, a foundational as
well as translational research impacting a broad range of scientific domains.
The capability and usability of the meshing framework are evaluated by
investigating fabrication of objects with internal microstructures and
construction of anisotropic volumetric models to capture the organ and tissue
shape. This work has the following primary components: (1) Computing high-
dimensional geometric embedding based on Nash theorem in parallel: the
computational realization of high-dimensional geometric embedding makes modeling
complex objects with multiple tensor features being built and solved in parallel
in a large linear system. (2) Modeling multi-shape of mesh element in a unified
particle framework: the particle system flexibly and effectively generates high-
quality honeycomb, tetrahedral, and hexahedral (grid) patterns, which are
exactly designed for meshing structure. The optimization procedure is easily
formulated for parallelism in the high-dimensional space. (3) Generating 3D/4D
anisotropic mesh in parallel: the final multi-shape anisotropic meshes are
computed in parallel in the high-dimensional space with simple Euclidean
computations under the isotropic metric. The primary outcome of this project is
a 3D/4D-ParaAnisoMesh system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.