* 1845225
* CAREER: Multi-Agent Decision Making and Optimization using Communication as a Sensor
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2021
* Stephanie Gil, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sandip Roy
* 04/30/2021
* USD 162,108.00

The goal of this project is to achieve coordination and localization among
robots, even if some of the robots are behaving in an untrustworthy way. The
approach is to use communication signals, and to control the motion of some
robots, to learn about the environment and other agents in a way that provably
supports coordinated behaviors. Multi-agent Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) are
poised for impact in society as self-driving cars, delivery drones, and disaster
response robots. The results from this project will lead to improved mission
intelligence for robotic platforms with significance across many areas: from
Search and Rescue (SAR) tasks, to CubeSats and space exploration. The project
includes tight integration between research tasks and educational activities,
including participation in Hack for Humanity where students will explore SAR
tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will derive the algorithmic foundations
of robust and secure contextual awareness for coordination of multi-agent CPS by
bridging robotics and communication. A core enabling capability for these
systems is secure, robust, contextual awareness and coordination. Agents must
know their state, others' states, and how best to use this information to
coordinate and complete mission-level goals. However, while this need is
universal, the CPS themselves are not. Thus, there exist technological barriers
to obtaining this critical information across heterogeneous platforms. An
algorithmic and mathematical framework will be explored to 1) combine
communication and mobility control of CPS agents to enable communication-as-a-
sensor that unlocks a new understanding of interactions with the world and 2)
capture the impact of this information on reliability, robustness, and security
of multi-agent tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.