* 1845324
* CAREER: Audio RESCUE: Realistic Audio for RESponders in Complex Undetermined Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Kyla McMullen, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2024
* USD 549,999.00

First responders save lives in hazardous conditions such as hurricanes,
tsunamis, earthquakes, fires, and terror events, and their role is more
important than ever. For firefighters, the greatest challenges in search and
rescue tasks are low visibility, disorientation, and tracking other team
members. Despite methods to overcome these challenges, firefighters are still
plagued by getting lost in buildings, miscommunication of locations and spaces,
and not being able to identify paths. This project investigates using spatial
(or 3D) sound to represent targets of interest (for example, a lost child) in
order to allow first responders to use sound to navigate to specific points that
they are unable to see. Using 3D sound in this context is a promising solution
because responders' hands are often occupied, and a visual display can increase
cognitive load. In addition, the present work will develop supplemental
augmented-reality modules for firefighter emergency medical service (EMS)
training. This training will allow firefighters to practice EMS skills in a
realistic environment outside of the classroom. The PI and team will engage a
diverse pool of underrepresented minority students through recruitment from the
Distributed Research Experiences for Undergraduates (DREU) program and the
Institute for African American Mentoring in Computing Sciences (iAAMCS).
University of Florida (UF) undergraduate students will also be recruited through
the Emerging Scholars Program to participate in the proposed work. Furthermore,
firefighters will receive more interactive educational training as a direct
result of their collaboration in this research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will pursue a novel research program
to create a fundamental understanding of how to move 3D audio research out of
the laboratory into the real world. Working closely with Gainesville Fire Rescue
(GFR) as the testbed application domain, the project team will evaluate using 3D
audio to support a search and rescue mission. The PI and team will evaluate
firefighters' performance and use the results to inform data-driven and
empirically validated 3D sound design guidelines that address the following
challenges: Realistic 3D sound rendering - this is challenging due to the
individualistic nature of 3D sound filters, sound delivery hardware, and
perceptual qualities of sounds; Change detection - in real-world contexts, a
user must be able to quickly detect 3D sound changes, however, limited
literature exists in this area; Effects of competing sounds - real-world
scenarios are filled with background noise that may hinder the listener from
accurately distinguishing a 3D sound of interest. Project outcomes will help
first responders unobtrusively perceive the 360 degree world around them and
maintain awareness of their surroundings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.