* 1845107
* CAREER: Mechanisms of Sound Change in Continental West Germanic
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Bjoern Koehnlein, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 08/31/2024
* USD 438,377.00

Understanding how and why the sounds of natural languages change over time is a
key topic in phonology, the study of sound systems. This project investigates
interactions of vowels and consonant voicing (such as voiced 'd' versus
voiceless 't'). In English, for instance, vowels before voiced consonants (e.g.
'feed') are longer than vowels before voiceless ones (e.g. 'feet'). Despite a
long research history, such interactions are still poorly understood. The
empirical focus of this project is on two understudied language varieties,
Franconian (spoken in parts of Belgium, Germany, and the Netherlands) and Low
German (spoken in Northern Germany). In Franconian, vowel-consonant interactions
have led to a tone contrast, comparable to Chinese languages; Low German has
developed 'extra-long' vowels alongside long and short vowels, which is
exceedingly rare across languages. This project will document and explain these
developments, with important implications for linguistic typology and the study
of cognitive underpinnings of language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
consists of an empirical, a theoretical, and a typological part. The empirical
part investigates how speakers of modern dialects produce and perceive the
vowels and consonants. The results form the basis for the theoretical studies.
These studies aim to explicate the mechanisms at play and illuminate how
understanding them furthers our knowledge of mechanisms of sound change. The
typological part of the project relates the empirical and theoretical findings
to comparable phenomena in other languages, which will improve our understanding
of interactions between vowels and consonant voicing cross-linguistically. The
combined empirical, theoretical, and typological studies will help broaden our
knowledge of central issues that are at the heart of current debates in the
field of phonology, viz. the structure of phonological representations, the
interaction of such representations with the production and perception of
phonological contrasts (phonetics), and the role of sound change in shaping
phonological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.