* 1845366
* CAREER: Novel expansion strategies for biomanufacturing of natural killer cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Samira Azarin, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 514,082.00

Engineered T cell therapies were recently approved by the Food and Drug
Administration to fight cancer. These therapies harness the body's immune system
to more effectively attack advanced stage cancer. Natural killer (NK) cells are
a promising immune cell population for the treatment of blood cancers and solid
tumors. Safe, large-scale NK cell production is needed to effectively treat
large numbers of patients. Immune cells are complex, so producing NK cells in
large quantities is difficult. Guaranteeing that each cell has a high level of
activity adds a level of complexity to therapeutic cell manufacturing. One
challenge is to develop a process that does not require the introduction of
other cells to activate the NK cells. The investigators propose to develop an
artificial lipid vesicle that will activate the NK cells. This approach will be
useful in the production of a variety of therapeutic cells. Education and
outreach activities are also planned. Women and underrepresented minorities will
be actively recruited to pursue STEM careers. This will be supported by videos
and other curricular material developed to bolster competency in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale growth of NK cells currently
requires multiple rounds of stimulation with artificial antigen-presenting cells
(aAPCs). These are most often derived from the K562 leukemia cell line. The use
of these feeder cells leads to regulatory concerns in clinical biomanufacturing
processes and hinders therapeutic adoption. This project will develop feeder-
free approaches for large-scale NK cell expansion. By elucidating the mechanisms
through which co-culture with aAPCs stimulates NK cells, processes for expansion
of NK cells without cellular aAPCs can be developed. NK metabolism will be
characterized during multiple rounds of stimulation. Understanding how aAPC
stimulation induces NK growth is of particular interest. RNA-seq analysis will
be performed before and after each round of stimulation to identify pathways
that are modulated. These results will inform the design of synthetic
phospholipid vesicles that present critical activating signals to the NK
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.