* 1845910
* EAGER: Increasing bandwidth to the brain via effective stimulation of the peripheral retina in virtual image displays
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Erik Viirre, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 219,570.00

This project will explore ways to increase bandwidth to the brain though optimal
spatial-temporal simulation of the far peripheral retina. There are many
questions related to the functionality of the far periphery and how it engenders
of a sense of place and presence within a virtual environment. To address these
questions this project will develop: (1) a state-of-the-art retinal image
projection system that can generate and position spatial patterns of light
encompassing the complete retina; (2) methods for measuring the effect of that
stimulation on the brain wave activity, balance and task performance; and (3)
new approaches for organizing and portraying information over the complete
retina that increase throughput of data to the brain. The research from this
project can lead to development of better virtual reality components that unlock
the power of human intelligence and link minds globally. This line of research
is essential as the industry presses for optimizing the utility of 5G cellular
bandwidths in servicing wireless and ubiquitous virtual and augmented displays
via WebVR and related systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate how to input the autonomic nervous system to enhance the cognitive
behavior of users. A key component in the research agenda is to design and build
an experimental system that generates and positions patterns of light stimuli
onto the various regions and eccentricities of the entire visual field of the
participant. This system must allow for the precise generation of the spatial,
temporal and spectral properties of these stimuli. These factors constitute the
independent variables in the research. Similarly, this research apparatus must
also collect the voluntary and involuntary behavioral response of the
participant to these stimuli using direct methods that include event-related
cortical potentials, oculomotor behavior and involuntary movement of the body
(e.g., posture platform). Voluntary or performance-based tracking and
manipulation of the virtual world experience will also be included in the
experimental apparatus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.