* 1845026
* CAREER: Deep Learning Empowered Nonlinear Deformable Model
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,01/31/2020
* Yin Yang, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/2020
* USD 104,744.00

Everything in the world deforms, so modeling high-quality deformations becomes a
core algorithmic ingredient for serious and realism-driven visual applications
such as high-fidelity animation, virtual reality, medical data analysis,
surgical simulation, and digital fabrication/prototyping, to name just a few.
While deformation has been studied for decades, deformable simulation is
notorious for its costly computation. With the rapid development of
sophisticated sensing devices and acquisition techniques, the complexities,
scales and dimensionalities of the data have grown exponentially, and large-
scale geometries are becoming ubiquitous in modern 3D data processing. Even with
state-of-the-art hardware, a massive deformable simulation can still take hours,
days, or even weeks. In this era of data explosion, increasing demands on both
computing efficiency and simulation realism impose unprecedented challenges on
this classic computing problem, so game-changing algorithmic techniques for
large-scale, complex, and nonlinear deformable models are needed to empower
future graphics applications. If successful, this project will not only expand
the frontier of physics-based simulation technologies, but also profoundly
inspire broader computing communities beyond graphics and enable a variety of
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During a deformable simulation, a
nonlinear system needs to be repetitively solved in order to track the
continuous shape evolution of the deforming body. A deformable object with
complex geometry could house a large number of unknown degrees of freedom, and
the resulting high-dimensional integration becomes prohibitive. To overcome this
problem, this project will develop a re-branded deformable model which
systematically integrates advanced simulation techniques and deep learning (DL)
tools, specifically deep neural networks (DNNs). The hypothesis is that digital
simulation provides us nearly unlimited noise-free training data, which should
be fully exploited and leveraged to benefit unseen yet difficult simulation or
computing challenges. Unlike existing data-driven methods that interpret the
data with a closed-form formulation (e.g., using a convex interpolation), DNNs
provide a universal mechanism to extract intrinsic features hidden behind the
raw data in an end-to-end manner, and have already demonstrated significant
outcomes in many long-standing computer vision problems like object detection,
classification, and annotation. However, harnessing DL in physics-based
simulation is not easy. While in theory one may still encode all of these
parameters using a very high-dimensional input vector, the corresponding network
would be extremely large and complex. Even if we manage to collect sufficient
training data to optimize this net, a single forward pass of it may be slower
than a conventional simulator, making DL completely unprofitable. In this
project, we will thoroughly investigate those grand technical challenges, forge
a collection of data structures and algorithmic techniques for the data-driven
deformable simulation, and thereby pave the way for DL-based physics simulation
to next-generation computer graphics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.