* 1845858
* CAREER: Automating the measurement and management of the radio spectrum for future spectrum-sharing applications
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Mariya Zheleva, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 04/30/2024
* USD 592,414.00

A growing number of domains that drive economic growth and humanity's well-
being, including healthcare, emergency management and national defense, hinge on
wireless network connectivity. This has created a market potential of $640.9
billion, which cannot be realized as existing networks operate at capacity.
Despite this potential, only 8% of the radio spectrum is allocated to wireless
communication technologies. This minimal allocation creates artificial scarcity
of frequency resources, whereby popular bands are saturated, while others are
under-utilized. In response, wireless technologies have begun to incorporate new
hardware and software to boost their spectrum efficiency through opportunistic
frequency reuse. While promising, this trajectory of innovation cannot be
sustained unless we establish a framework for principled spectrum measurement
and management that can embrace unforeseen network and sensor capabilities in
support of future spectrum policy, policing and technology. This project
develops a long-term, integrated program of research, education and outreach to
(i) establish a scientific and technological framework for automated spectrum
measurement in support of shared-spectrum access, and (ii) to train the next
generation of wireless specialists at the intersection of networks, digital
communications and machine learning. The project will work closely with industry
and standardization efforts to ensure broader adoption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be carried out in three thrusts at the confluence of signal
processing, digital communications, machine learning, graph mining, and large-
scale measurement. First, it will study the effects of real-world scan
imperfections on signal features. Following these insights, the project will
contribute algorithms for spectrum cognizance and transmitter fingerprinting
from imperfect scans. Second, it will enable application-driven measurement by
creating an analytical framework that links sensor properties with data quality
and algorithm performance. Third, models and algorithms will be integrated in an
open system accessible to the community. This project will lay the foundation
for future-proof and application-driven spectrum measurement that leverages
wide-band and heterogeneous sensing for end-to-end support of emerging wireless
networks. It will contribute data-driven and platform-aware abstractions, models
and algorithms that produce domain-informed features for automatic spectrum
analytics. The outcomes will bridge the existing gap between measurement
capabilities and algorithm requirements while tackling realistic scenarios with
rogue or incompletely scanned transmitters. The project will produce a cost-
utility framework to explore tradeoffs between sensor price, bandwidth,
computation and power; and algorithm accuracy, stability and confidence. The
integration of research outcomes into an open system will allow systematic and
reproducible research and education, while complying with and informing
standardization efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.