* 1845081
* CAREER: Real-World Networks: Modeling and Analysis of Signed Networks with Positive and Negative Links
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Jiliang Tang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 02/29/2024
* USD 507,747.00

In many real-world social systems, in addition to positive links, relations
between people can be negative (e.g., foes, blocked and unfriended users, and
distrust). These relations can be represented as networks with both positive and
negative links (or signed networks). Signed networks have substantially
different properties and principles from unsigned ones, which poses tremendous
challenges to traditional network analysis and requires dedicated efforts. Thus
a systematic and comprehensive investigation on signed networks is desired. The
results of this project can have an immediate and strong impact on improving the
performance of various network analytical tasks, enabling the analysis of
networks with negative links, and thus positively impacting the overall value of
various data/information areas. The developed new algorithms for signed network
analysis will have impact on various disciplines, including computer science,
social science, health informatics, and education as signed networks are very
common in these domains. This project will play an integral part to attract
undergraduate and K-12 students especially underrepresented groups to careers in
engineering, to inform them about crucial but highly unavailable network
analysis technologies and to encourage and train computer science and
engineering graduate and undergraduate students to address research issues in
network analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The added complexity of negative links in
signed networks has manifested unprecedented research challenges and
opportunities. This project will comprehensively investigate the primary
directions of signed networks from modeling and measuring to mining. Each
direction will dramatically extend the frontier through not only developing
innovative solutions, but also studying original problems. The core intellectual
merit lies in the fact that the project offers the first systematic
investigation on this emerging research area and the designed advanced
methodologies and novel tasks will deepen our understanding on how negative
links can be synergized to advance the field of network analysis; improve our
knowledge of real-world networks; and contribute to real-world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.