* 1845469
* CAREER: Beyond Approximate Computing: Enabling Full-System Energy-Quality Scalability in Embedded Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Younghyun Kim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2024
* USD 528,364.00

Energy efficiency is a daunting challenge in embedded systems that run on
limited energy budgets. Better performance, longer battery life, and smaller
environmental footprints - improving energy efficiency will be the key enabler
of applications and services that have not been possible in the past.
Approximate computing has recently emerged as a promising approach to the
energy-efficient computing of intrinsically error-tolerant applications like
image processing, where small deviations from the exact results in the
underlying computations do not substantially degrade the resulting application-
level quality. For such applications, approximate computing can produce "just
good enough" results to save energy at the cost of only minor or no quality
loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop design methodologies for
taking advantage of approximate computing in embedded systems, where the
contribution of non-computing subsystems (e.g., sensors, actuators, user
interfaces, and network interfaces) to energy consumption is at least as
significant as that of computing subsystems (e.g., microcontrollers and memory).
In embedded systems, both computing and non-computing subsystems must be
holistically considered to take full advantage of approximate computing and
accomplish full-system energy quality and scalability. The project scope
includes characterization, optimization, and design toolchain development, with
the focus on embedded systems design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.