* 1845491
* CAREER: Timely Insights: Interpretable, Multi-scale Summarization of Networks over Time
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Danai Koutra, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 04/30/2024
* USD 571,401.00

Evolving network data occur in almost all disciplines. For example, knowledge or
facts are often structured into knowledge graphs, brain activity is represented
via functional networks, and neural networks can be seen as evolving graph
structures. This project aims to develop computational methods and models to
summarize, explain, and provide insights into massive data (and their underlying
dynamic processes) at multiple scales in a broad range of domains. Focusing on
knowledge graphs makes it possible to achieve on-device and privacy-preserving
analytics (e.g., on intelligent assistants). Modeling neural networks is
expected to give insights into their interpretability and reduce their massive
training computational cost. Through collaborations with experts in
neuroscience, this research will contribute to decoding the brain, with a
potential impact on mental development and disease detection. A significant part
of this project is a plan for integrating research with education. Its
overarching theme is to increase diversity in computer and data science, and
engage students in graph mining research and its real-life applications via:
introducing undergraduate and graduate data mining classes; mentoring students
on data science projects for social good; organizing a workshop to attract
undergraduates from diverse backgrounds to graduate school; and organizing a
high-school data science summer camp centered around social media and networks,
a theme that is a successful introduction to network
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network summarization, which identifies structure
and meaning in large-scale data, so far has mostly focused on non-complex,
static data. This project aims to bridge the gap between network summarization
research and real-world problems by introducing novel problem formulations in
summarization (including for tasks that have not been previously viewed as graph
problems) as well as theoretical analyses, unifying theories, and a suite of
new, interpretable methods and scalable algorithms. It pursues three research
tasks related to network evolution at different scales. At the network scale,
the first task focuses on efficient, supervised or semi-supervised summarization
of evolving and semantically-rich graph data (e.g., heterogeneous). At the
multi-network scale, the second task introduces interpretable methods for
modeling and understanding collections of evolving networks and their joint
underlying physical processes, which is an under-studied problem in data mining.
Via academic and industrial collaborations, the third task explores new
applications in knowledge graphs, neuroscience, deep neural networks, and social
sciences. The project is expected to advance the foundations of exploratory
analysis of evolving data. Its outcomes will be disseminated through
publications, tutorials, workshops, as well as open-source tools, code and
datasets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.