* 1845706
* CAREER: Rethinking Abstractions in Virtualized Architectures and Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jia Rao, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 06/30/2024
* USD 522,767.00

Recent advances in cloud computing have led to a wide adoption of virtualization
techniques in modern computer systems which allow better utilization of computer
resources. There is also a steady trend towards building future data centers and
high-performance computers with a software-defined architecture. However,
challenges remain in adopting virtualization in many critical domains. First,
there still exists a large performance gap between virtualized and physical
systems, especially for high-speed devices, scientific workloads and latency-
sensitive applications. Second, performance isolation and resource elasticity
are often contradictory goals under the current models, which leaves much of the
economic benefit of virtualization unexploited. Third, the additional system
complexity in virtualiation undermines stability and predictability. This
research addresses these issues and seeks to improve the performance, cost-
effectiveness, and predictability of virtualized systems. The research will be
tightly integrated into teaching and further broaden its impacts through
mentoring and recruiting minority students, and outreach activities in K12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will identify gaps in
the existing abstractions that cause performance degradation, inefficiencies and
unpredictability, as well as pinpointing the essence of current abstractions
that has enabled isolation, modularity and portability. The project entails
three research thrusts: First, it will design and implement augmented
abstractions for various types of virtualized systems, including virtual
machines, containers and virtualized networks, to bridge the semantic gaps.
Second, it will leverage the augmented abstractions to design efficient,
effective and elastic resource management schemes while retaining much of the
benefit of the existing abstractions. Third, it will increase the understanding
of abstraction in multi-tenant systems and apply the knowledge to studying the
inefficiencies of conventional systems and guide the design of new abstractions
in emerging architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.