* 1845451
* CAREER:  Establishing the Roles of Multi-enzyme Complexes in Metabolic Network Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Toshihiro Obata, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 746,955.00

Enzymes that catalyze sequential reactions in a metabolic pathway often form a
multi-enzyme complex. The complex allows intermediate metabolites to be
channeled between enzymes. Theoretical and test tube-based experimental studies
have shown that multi-enzyme complex formation is important in the regulation of
metabolic networks. However, despite 40 years of research, the function of
multi-enzyme complexes within a living cell are controversial and difficult to
demonstrate due to difficulties controlling highly variable subcellular micro-
environments, where these complexes reside. The goal of this project is to
address this controversy by characterizing the function and role of multi-enzyme
complexes as regulators of metabolic processes in living cells. The knowledge
gained will help scientists understand how organisms maintain their metabolic
homeostasis under fluctuating environments, and facilitate metabolic engineering
of key pathways for synthetic biology applications. As part of the broader
impacts of the project, the investigator will develop a creative paper craft
hands-on activity to teach principles of enzyme-based metabolic regulation to a
wide audience, including undergraduate and high school students, and adult
audiences. This novel broader impact activity will positively impact literacy in
metabolism and increase public engagement with metabolic research. In addition,
the investigator will train graduate and undergraduate students through the
project's research and educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Rapid,
flexible and coordinated regulation of metabolism is essential for all living
organisms to respond to their changing environments which fluctuate sometimes
within an order of seconds. Currently known molecular mechanisms cannot fully
explain this regulatory process. In this project, the functionality of the
malate dehydrogenase/ citrate synthase/aconitase multi-enzyme complex of the
yeast Krebs tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle will be investigated as a model
system. The overarching goal of this project is to experimentally establish the
roles of the TCA cycle multi-enzyme complex in metabolic regulation in yeast
cells. The hypothesis the investigator will explore is that the TCA cycle multi-
enzyme complex enhances and/or redirects metabolic flux relative to the ratio of
the associated enzyme complex. The bi-directional relationship between the rate
of enzyme association and metabolic flux dynamics within the TCA cycle will be
assessed through two research objectives: 1) assessment of the effects of
variations in multi-enzyme complex affinity on metabolic flux, and 2) assessment
of the effects of changes in metabolic flux dynamics on multi-enzyme complex
formation. Metabolic flux in the TCA cycle and adjacent pathways will be
analyzed using isotope tracer experiments and quantitative modeling methods.
Enzyme complex association will be quantified using multiple techniques,
including a novel bioluminescence-based real-time assay, which will be developed
as part of this project. Results of this work will enhance the fundamental
understanding of how enzyme kinetics couples with flux dynamics in a biochemical
system, and further clarify the impact of subcellular micro-environments on
systems level outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.