* 1845339
* CAREER: Computational Design for Robust Legged Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Cynthia Sung, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 02/29/2024
* USD 513,080.00

This project aims to democratize robotics by making engineering design intuitive
and accessible through computation. Currently robot design is a time and skill
intensive process requiring years of training and multiple iterations of
prototyping and testing. Unlocking the full potential of ubiquitous robotics
requires new intelligent design tools that support experienced and novice users
alike in the design process, from ideation to prototyping to validation stages.
The resulting methods will have the potential to revolutionize the way robotic
devices are created, increasing people's ability to design and use custom
devices while reducing the time spent on this customization. New flexibility and
availability of robotic systems will improve the integration of these
technologies into everyday society. Professional engineers will gain the ability
to perform systems-level analyses and verification of their designs,
streamlining their work, encouraging more creativity, and ultimately producing
more efficient and effective machines. In education, this project will inform
next generation scientists and engineers by providing intuitive tools for
exploring engineering concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will synthesize
ideas from mechanics, computational geometry, robotics, and data clustering and
compression to create a computational framework for designing, fabricating, and
controlling legged robots that are robust to task, environment, and fabrication
uncertainties. While the application will be legged locomotion, the work will
focus on computational frameworks and insights that can be generalized to
broader areas of robot design and customization. Unlike static objects, legged
robots rely on complex interactions with their surrounding environment to
locomote, and their performance is therefore very dependent on their physical
designs. Compared with existing computational design tools, which focus on
optimizing a single metric, this work will therefore evaluate the robustness of
a proposed design and its suitability for a practical locomotion task. The
project will produce 1) modular, graph-based representations for a robot's
combined geometry, kinematics, and joint motion, 2) new hierarchical data
clustering and compression techniques for semantic representation and evaluation
of a design, and 3) algorithms for design synthesis that provide explainable
designs based on evaluated efficiency-robustness tradeoffs. The integrated
education plan also brings together ideas from engineering and computer science
to incorporate numerical simulations and design techniques into courses at the
undergraduate and graduate level, form an open-source robot design community,
and encourage broader participation in STEM through outreach to K-12 students
and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.