* 1845577
* CAREER: QoS-aware Systems for Accelerated Datacenters
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Lingjia Tang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 07/31/2024
* USD 397,650.00

This project addresses the challenge of providing sufficient and efficient
infrastructure to meet the increasing computational demands of Artificial
Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) applications. To support the ever-
growing prevalence of ML and AI applications, data centers are incorporating
specialized accelerator hardware for computation as recent work has shown that
traditional CPU-based infrastructures are up to 100x less efficient than these
accelerator-based designs. However, while the community has largely focused on
hardware designs, currently there is very little research attention on designing
system software to manage the performance and efficiency for hardware
accelerated data centers. Current data center system software is mostly tailored
to CPU platforms. There are significant and fundamental differences between CPUs
and accelerators that impact the effectiveness of design decisions in the system
software stack. This work rethinks and redesigns the system software stack for
the emerging landscape of hardware acceleration in data centers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to redesign datacenter systems to support
acceleration at scale to meet the future computational demand. The project
designs system software to schedule and allocate resources among heterogeneous
platforms composed of both general purpose processors and various accelerators,
managing quality of service (QoS) and achieving high efficiency. To this end,
the project focuses on three pillars of innovation. First, the project designs
the cluster-level scheduler for heterogeneous accelerated infrastructures to
precisely predict the performance interference and maximizes the utilization
without violating QoS based on such prediction. Second, the project designs an
application-level acceleration manager that accurately identifies the bottleneck
service, estimates potential improvement using different acceleration strategies
and dynamically (re)allocates the accelerator resources across service stages,
resulting in significantly improved latency. Third, the project designs a node-
level resource manager for accelerated platforms that manages unique sharing and
reconfiguration behaviors on accelerators to ensure QoS and high
throughput.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.