* 1845141
* Conference support: DAWN-IV - Dawn of Gravitational Wave Astronomy and Astrophysics meeting
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2019
* Bangalore Sathyaprakash, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2019
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports the attendance of US scientists to the fourth workshop in
the DAWN series, DAWN IV - Global Strategies for Gravitational Wave Astronomy -
which will take place in Amsterdam, Netherlands, during August 30-31, 2018. The
meeting is hosted by NIKHEF, affiliated to the Virgo project, with an
international committee in charge of the scientific organization of the
workshop. The main goal of the meeting is to discuss the science and R&D
requirements for the next generation of ground-based gravitational wave (GW)
detectors and the different options for the governance of a global detector
network. Dozens of US scientists are now involved in a study commissioned by the
Gravitational Wave International Committee (GWIC) to assess the scientific merit
of building detectors on the ground that are 10 to 30 times more sensitive than
advanced detectors. DAWN IV is a critical meeting for people involved in this
study.

LIGO and Virgo discoveries of binary black hole and binary neutron star mergers
in the past three years have already begun to make a huge impact in our
understanding of fundamental physics, astrophysics and cosmology. Merging binary
black holes are test beds of strong field gravity; they are the only way to
understand dynamical horizons around black holes. In contrast, observation of
coalescing neutron stars has confirmed that they are the progenitors of short,
hard, gamma-ray bursts and sites where heavy elements are formed. Simultaneous
observation of GW170817 across the entire electromagnetic band and the GW window
has ushered in a new era in multi-messenger astrophysics and cosmology, enabling
the first ever measurement of the Hubble constant. This workshop will accomplish
three main objectives: (i) identify the broader community of physicists and
astrophysicists to facilitate infusion of new ideas in GW experiments, (ii)
discuss steps that are necessary to increase participation of minority groups
and hence enhance the diversity within the GW science, and (iii) determine
strategies for interfacing with funding agencies and governments, and public
engagements. The workshop will assure leadership of NSF-funded US scientists in
the emerging area of GW astronomy.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.