* 1845789
* CAREER: Towards Spatial Data Systems Support for the Internet of Things
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Mohamed Sarwat, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 549,997.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) represents a network of devices, each equipped with
a variety of sensors that collect data about the environment. The IoT has been
growing rapidly since 2012 with about 9 billion devices, including around 20
billion devices in 2018 and reaching more than 30 billion devices connected to
the IoT by 2020. An IoT device can be installed in a static location such as a
building or a traffic intersection to collect data about air pollution, water
quality, or traffic in a city. A device, such as a smart watch, can also be
attached to a moving object (human) to monitor a person's movement pattern,
heart rate, or calories burned. In both cases, data generated by an IoT device
possess spatial and temporal attributes that represent the geospatial location
and time of the sensed observation. Furthermore, various devices measure
different observations (e.g., temperature, sound, speed, etc.). The aim of this
project is to build innovative scalable technologies that seamlessly connect
data collected from various geographically distributed IoT devices that can
effectively manage and analyze the ever growing IoT data at various spatial and
temporal scales. The results of the project will provide a tool for policy
makers, scientists, businesses, and citizens to better utilize and extract value
from IoT data in a variety of applications, such as transportation,
environmental economics, public safety and health. To integrate research and
education and achieve societal impact, the project team will also kick off the
"Data Science for Cities Initiative" with a pilot chapter in the city of Tempe,
Arizona. The initiative aims to engage local communities and local students in
working on solutions to many urban problems by analyzing data collected from IoT
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to is to
develop graph database systems technology that can efficiently store, manage,
and execute real-time spatial / spatio-temporal graph queries on linked IoT data
and support scalable processing of large-scale IoT data. To achieve that, the
research effort in this project includes the design and development of novel
spatial data storage, indexing, processing and management techniques that scale
to the ever-increasing volume and fast rate of data collected from IoT devices.
As opposed to existing big spatial data systems and numerical frameworks, a
novel IoT data abstraction method will extend recently developed big spatial
data systems to provide an Application Programming Interface (API) for
development of IoT applications. The newly developed method takes into account
not only the spatial distribution of the data, but also the physical and
mathematical characteristics of signals generated by each sensor. Furthermore,
the new IoT abstraction method includes novel query operators as well as query
optimization strategies, which can efficiently evaluate a hybrid workload that
involves classic spatial and spatio-temporal data processing and digital signal
processing operations on IoT data. The new method also bridges the gap between
IoT devices and the spatial data system by designing a middleware that
integrates the IoT devices streaming data to the central system with the
requirements of applications accessing such IoT data. Another outcome of the
project is a graph query processor that can optimize and evaluate general-
purpose spatial predicates such as spatial range, join and K-Nearest Neighbors
(KNN) as well as temporal predicates in a graph query issued on linked IoT data
in real time even with new things and observations being regularly added to the
IoT graph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.