* 1845175
* CAREER: How SFR2 allows chloroplast envelope membranes to survive freezing, from initial signal to molecular mechanism.
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Rebecca Roston, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 847,731.00

Weather instability is predicted to be on the rise and it threatens crop yields.
Specifically, out-of-season frosts damage crops costing billions of dollars
annually, and restricting growing seasons to avoid potential frosts likely costs
in the tens of billions. Also important, the global population is expected to
rise and the need to grow more crops on the same land is immediate. Poor
understanding of freezing tolerance mechanisms constrains development of more
tolerant crops. This project will ultimately provide new knowledge that can
guide strategies to engineer freezing tolerance in crop plants. An enzyme named
"Sensitive to Freezing 2" (SFR2) is known to help plants survive freezing by
changing the building blocks of chloroplast membranes. Although SFR2's action is
known, the way that SFR2 is activated to respond to freezing conditions and the
way that its actions provide an advantage are only hypothesized. This project
tests the hypotheses using a unique blend of genetics, biochemistry, and
biophysical approaches. It is expected that the results will immediately enhance
efforts to generate cold-tolerant crops and will also impact research on
membrane temperature stability in other species and engineering systems.
Throughout the project, training of Nebraskan post-doctoral researchers and
graduate students in plant science will be improved to include public
communication and other convergent skillsets. In doing so, members of the
general public in Nebraska will also benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An enzyme
known as Sensitive to Freezing 2 (SFR2) remodels the chloroplast envelope
membranes by reducing monogalactolipids and increasing oligogalactolipids.
Plants expressing catalytically inactive point mutants of SFR2 are more
susceptible to freezing than wildtype plants. Recent evidence from the
investigator's lab indicates that SFR2 is activated during freezing by
cytoplasmic acidification. Acidification of the cytoplasm also occurs during
other stresses in which SFR2 is not active. This and other data suggest that
SFR2 activity is tied to a more global cellular response to freezing
temperatures in which it directly stabilizes the chloroplast envelope membranes
by altering their physical properties. This project will test this hypothesis
through the following objectives: (1) Define how membrane stability is affected
by SFR2-dependent changes to lipids. (2) Determine if SFR2 activity is repressed
by post-translational modification. (3) Define the diversity of chloroplast
envelope membrane freezing stabilization mechanisms. These objectives identify
mechanisms allowing membrane integrity during freezing temperatures and define
how they work (Obj. 1, Obj. 3), and they define a critical cellular freezing
signal (Obj. 2). Finally, they will also provide a comprehensive understanding
of chloroplast envelope stabilization mechanisms useful in multiple fields. The
following training and science literacy objectives are integrated with the above
research: (4) Provide comprehensive training for next-generation scientists to
be effective researchers and communicators. (5) Educate and engage the public on
the societal impact of plant science with innovative graphic novels and
interactive presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.