* 1845552
* SBIR Phase I:  Vulnerability-Agnostic Secure Systems
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Todd Austin, AGITA LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2019
* USD 224,725.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be safer and more secure IoT platforms that
will contribute to the growth of the IoT market. Current security technologies
in the IoT arena are either weak or expensive (usually both). The weakness in
conventional approaches lies in their impractical goal of finding and fixing all
security vulnerabilities. Modern systems have complexity that vastly outstrips
the capabilities of any human or verification tool to find all the security
vulnerabilities. The only way to somewhat mitigate this weakness is to throw
significant resources at the problem, which is very expensive and still yields
an imperfect result. The proposed technology developed in this SBIR Phase I
project will provide practical and strong security. It gains these important
properties by assuming that all systems are riddled with vulnerabilities, so it
builds in security by making IoT computing devices that are unsolvable puzzles
to attackers. In addition, it doesn't rely on IoT developers to deploy hand-
crafted defenses; instead, developers simply build their applications on the
proposed platform, and they receive all of its security
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a new direction in IoT security. Unlike the world
of IoT security today, where developers and tools are attempting to find and fix
every last security vulnerability (and always failing), the technology being
developed is a hardware-based secure IoT technology that is impractically
difficult to penetrate. It achieves this by engaging ensembles of moving target
defenses (EMTDs) on the runtime information that attackers need to build their
attacks. To overcome EMTDs, attackers must extensively probe the system to
acquire the run-time information obscured by moving target defenses. To stop
these probes, the technology utilizes a technology called churn to re-key moving
target defenses while the system is in operation. Once the churn mechanism is
engaged, attackers will have to start their attack over again from scratch. With
churn cycles of 50ms (or less), the proposed secure IoT platform becomes
impractically difficult to breach, across a broad array of attack classes. The
work proposed in this SBIR Phase I project will advance the technology from
simulation to a real hardware implementation, which will allow the technology to
be deployed into the IoT marketplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.