* 1845490
* CAREER: Bridging the Digital Accessibility Gap in STEM Using Multisensory Haptic Platforms
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Jenna Gorlewicz, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 07/31/2024
* USD 783,039.00

Consider learning visual subjects such as math, engineering, or science without
being able to see. Suddenly, the graphs, charts, and diagrams that provide a
quick way to gather information are no longer effective. This is a challenge
that students with visual impairments face in classrooms today as educational
materials are most often presented electronically. The current way that
individuals with visual impairments "read" graphics is through touch, feeling
raised dots and patterns on paper that represent images. Creating these touch-
based graphics requires extensive time and resources, and the output provides a
static, hard-copy image. Lack of access to graphics in STEM subjects is one of
the most pressing challenges currently facing individuals with visual
impairments. This is a concern given the low representation of students with
these disabilities in STEM fields and professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates how to use new touch technologies, like touchscreens, to
create graphics and simulations that can be felt, heard, and seen. Using readily
available, low-cost systems, the principal investigator will investigate how to
map visual information to touch and sound. This research builds on prior
research focused on representing the building blocks of graphics (points, lines,
and shapes) nonvisually. In this project, the investigator will determine how to
represent more challenging graphics such as charts, plots, and diagrams,
nonvisually. The project will then explore the role of touch feedback in
interactive simulations, which have moving elements that change with user input,
making nonvisual access challenging. Finally, the projects extends the research
to students with other disabilities, toward understanding the benefits and
changes necessary for touch technologies to have broad impact. The project
involves group and single-subject designs with approximately 65 students with
visual impairments and focuses on the following outcomes of interest: students'
graph literacy, percent correct on task assessments, time of exploration,
response time, number of revisits to particular areas of the graphic, and number
of switches between layers. Working closely with individuals with disabilities
and their teachers, this work seeks to bridge the current graphical
accessibility gap in STEM and raise awareness of universal design in technology
use and development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER program is a National
Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers awards in support of junior
faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars through outstanding research,
excellent education, and the integration of education and research within the
context of the mission of their organizations. This project is supported by
NSF's Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. DRK-12 seeks to significantly
enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers through research and
development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12
program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and
development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for
proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.