* 1845581
* SBIR Phase I:  Multichannel Resonators Enabling A Phenotypic Point Of Care Infectious Disease Diagnostic
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Danielle France, MICROBIAL PULSE DIAGNOSTICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2020
* USD 225,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will build technology to reduce the time needed to
identify effective antibiotics for urinary tract infections (UTIs) from 2 days
to 2 hours. Every year in the US, 13 million UTIs are treated with a physician's
best guess antibiotic, because antimicrobial susceptibility testing (AST) is too
slow. Up to half of first guesses are wrong, opening up the possibility for
infections to worsen into life-threatening sepsis and allowing antimicrobial
resistance to evolve. One quarter of 1.5 million sepsis cases and at least
250,000 deaths every year begin as UTIs. Rapid AST using biophysical sensing can
take guesswork out of UTI treatment, save lives, and avoid billions in
unnecessary healthcare costs. By sensing bacterial cell fluctuations associated
with the mechanically active processes of metabolism, motility, and growth, this
novel and fundamentally different measurement concept for AST enables almost an
order of magnitude increase in speed. This project will establish technical and
commercial feasibility of developing the underlying sensor technology for point-
of-care diagnostics that demand push-button technology operable in a hectic
clinical environment. Translating innovative federally-funded technologies like
this out of the laboratory and into medical clinics will build taxpayers' return
on basic research investments.

This project tackles a key technical hurdle for clinical implementation of rapid
biophysical AST at a meaningful scale: demonstration that the demanding
performance characteristics of the underlying resonating quartz sensor
technology can be reproduced using low cost materials for a disposable resonator
housing providing fluidic, thermal, and electrical control. The rapid
biophysical AST method takes the pulse of bacterial cells. Changes in mechanical
fluctuations of cells occur after exposure to an effective antibiotic, and can
be sensed in real time by detecting phase noise generated by cells on a
resonating crystal substrate. Key to the commercial success of this technology
are multichannel resonators that can be manufactured in large quantities to
perform with very low noise resonance characteristics. Best practices from low
cost microfluidics studies will dovetail with those from high-tech resonator
development to deliver the phase noise performance needed to pick up the
biological signal. Rapid prototyping tools including 3D printing will be used
for quick design iterations. If satisfactory, Phase II will optimize fabrication
methodologies for both resonators and housing modules interfacing with a fully
integrated clinical prototype instrument ready to support clinical trials of the
technology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.