* 1845853
* CAREER: End-to-End Network Design for Unified Memory Disaggregation
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Mosharaf Chowdhury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 578,228.00

Applications in modern cloud datacenters are deployed in resource containers to
isolate them from each other. Memory stranding is a pervasive problem in such
containerized datacenters, where many memory-intensive applications grind to a
halt even when free memory exists in other machines. This leads to low
utilization, memory fragmentation, and overall increased cost. Memory
disaggregation over ultra-fast networks can pool together such stranded memory
in theory, but making it practical faces novel systems design, algorithmic, and
integration challenges. They include bridging the still-sizable latency gap
between local memory access vs. Remote Direct Memory Access (RDMA),
transparently addressing network-wide fault-tolerance, load imbalance, and
performance isolation issues, scalability, and enabling support for
heterogeneous software and hardware technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching research objective of this proposal is to realize a Unified
Disaggregated Memory (UDM) abstraction over ultra-fast networks to expose
stranded memory across the datacenter as a pool of available memory to out-of-
memory containers in a fast, resilient, and scalable manner without any changes
to the applications. By designing a comprehensive solution to address host-
level, network-level, and end-to-end aspects of the aforementioned challenges,
this research aims to make memory disaggregation practical. Specifically, by
leveraging the unique characteristics of memory-intensive workloads, ultra-low-
latency networks, and multi-tenancy in modern datacenters, this proposal will
(i) design a low-latency host networking stack; (ii) enable performance
isolation throughout the network; (iii) provide resilience to network-wide
uncertainties such as failures and load imbalance; and (iv) incorporate support
for heterogeneous memory (e.g., persistent memory), networking technologies, and
resource management software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.