* 1845763
* CAREER: Parallel Algorithms and Frameworks for Graph and Hypergraph Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Julian Shun, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/29/2024
* USD 597,583.00

Graphs are a tool used to model the interactions between various entities.
Efficiently processing large graphs has attracted significant attention due to
its applications in various domains, such as biology, chemistry, and social
network analysis. With the explosion in the volume of data, graphs have become
very large and can contain hundreds of billions of vertices and trillions of
edges. Various applications also benefit from modeling the underlying data as a
hypergraph, which enables relationships among multiple entities to be
represented better than a graph. In addition, many of these data sets are
changing rapidly in real-time and applications require computing results on the
latest data. It is crucial to design high-performance parallel algorithms to
enable analysis to be done on graphs and hypergraphs in a timely fashion.
However, writing efficient parallel code is notoriously difficult. Furthermore,
many parallel algorithms used in practice today do not have strong theoretical
guarantees, causing them to perform extremely poorly on certain inputs. To
address these challenges, this project involves creating high-level programming
frameworks with highly-optimized backends to make it easier for non-experts to
write high-performance parallel programs for graphs and hypergraphs dealing with
static and streaming data. This project also involves designing parallel
algorithms that are efficient both in theory and in practice, so that they can
perform well under all possible inputs and across many machine parameters, and
scale gracefully to larger data sets. Using the resulting algorithms and
frameworks, scientists will be able to use high-level tools to perform graph and
hypergraph analytics on massive inputs much more efficiently than before, both
in theory and in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves designing
new parallel primitives and algorithms for many fundamental graph and hypergraph
problems that are fast and memory-efficient, both in theory and in practice. The
new algorithms are being evaluated on the largest publicly-available data sets
using large-scale multicore machines. The project also involves creating high-
level abstractions and programming frameworks to support the implementation of
theoretically-efficient algorithms on both static and streaming data. First, a
domain specific language for graph computations that generates efficient and
highly-optimized code from high-level specifications of algorithms and
optimizations will be designed. Second, a unified framework for streaming graph
analytics that can efficiently support parallel updates to the graph
(simultaneously running algorithms and updates), incremental algorithms, and
temporal analysis will be developed. Finally, a novel abstraction and framework
for hypergraph processing that will support theoretically-efficient
implementations of hypergraph algorithms will be designed. The results will lead
to fundamental advances in parallel algorithm design and programming frameworks
for graph and hypergraph analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.