* 1845980
* CAREER: Incorporating Decision-Dependent Uncertainty via Distributionally Robust Optimization: Models, Solution Approaches, and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Ruiwei Jiang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

A wide range of decision making problems in the service industries (e.g., power,
healthcare, and transportation) involve uncertain parameters, which partially
depend on the decision itself and hence are decision-dependent or endogenous.
Incorporating such dependency in the decision-making process is significant,
because otherwise these uncertain parameters may unexpectedly undermine the
system performance. Furthermore, such dependency provides an opportunity of
proactively maneuvering the uncertainty to reinforce the decision making. This
CAREER project will evaluate the potential benefit of incorporating decision-
dependent uncertainty and investigate new optimization approaches to maneuvering
such uncertainty. If successfully implemented in the service industries, the
research findings of this project will improve the sustainability of the society
and the well-being of the people. In addition, this project will develop new
educational materials including a power system simulation game and a graduate-
level course on stochastic and robust optimization, which help inspire the next
generation of engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As compared to the exogenous
uncertainty that is independent of the decision, endogenous uncertainty has
received much less attention in the applications. The goal of this CAREER
project is to holistically quantify, model, and maneuver the endogenous
uncertainty via distributionally robust optimization. The intellectual
significance of this research includes (a) providing provable out-of-sample
performance guarantee for making decisions under endogenous uncertainty and (b)
mitigating the computational challenges of incorporating endogenous uncertainty
in optimization problems. Specifically, the scope of the research includes (1)
quantifying the value of considering endogenous uncertainty when it actually
arises, (2) modeling the endogenous uncertainty by a family of decision-
dependent probability distributions, (3) proactively maneuvering the endogenous
uncertainty to improve system performance, and (4) applying the resulting
methodology in applications that involve endogenous uncertainty, e.g., do-not-
exceed limits, demand response programs, and off-shore oil
drilling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.