* 1845586
* CAREER: Using Computer Simulations to Understand Mate Choice
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Daniel Conroy-Beam, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 635,758.00

The choice of a romantic partner is the most significant decision most people
make in their lifetimes. Who people love often affects where they live and work,
with whom they have and raise children, who they call friends and family, how
they spend their time and money, who celebrates their successes, and who
supports them in times of need. As a result, the quality of romantic
relationships broadly affects physical health, mental health, and financial
success. Understanding how people form and maintain these important
relationships is central to understanding human social behavior. It is also a
clear means of improving human health, happiness, and well being. Yet gaining a
deeper understanding of the romantic partner choice process, and the role it
plays in human welfare, is one of the great challenges of social and behavioral
science. Romantic relationships develop within complex social environments. They
are influenced by interactions between individual preferences, competition
between romantic rivals, and mutual attractions that change over time.
Accounting for such complex and intricate social systems requires assessing
multiple, intertwined processes that are difficult to measure and observe. This
project approaches the problem by developing a new computer simulation
technique. The aim is to apply this technique to accelerate progress in basic
understanding of romantic partner choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new
technique ("couple simulation") compares theories of mate selection on their
ability to reconstruct actual romantic relationships within computer
simulations. Couple simulation will advance progress in mate choice research by
providing the first empirical metrics for comparing different models of human
mate selection. The method will help address questions such as: (1) what
precisely are the decision processes that connect abstract, ideal preferences to
real mate choices? (2) how do these early mate choice decisions relate to
longer-term relationship quality and dissolution? (3) is it possible to identify
those who are likely to have a fulfilling and supportive relationship? In
preliminary studies, this technique identifies accurate models of romantic
partner choice and predicts romantic relationship quality. This project will
further develop couple simulation by combining agent-based modeling with studies
of committed romantic couples, of change and stability in romantic relationships
over time, and of the dynamics of initial relationship formation. The scientific
aim is to produce computational models that more accurately describe romantic
partner choice and that can more effectively aid people in forming fulfilling
relationships. The project will also provide training in computational methods
for a diverse group of early-career researchers, and it will contribute a novel,
validated tool for relationship science to continue building on these successes
into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.