* 1845430
* CAREER: Small Data in a Big World: Balancing Interpretability and Generalizability for Data Integration in Clinical Neuroscience
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Archana Venkataraman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 04/30/2023
* USD 400,214.00

Neurological and neuropsychiatric disorders affect millions of people worldwide
and carry a staggering societal cost. Despite ongoing efforts, clinicians have a
bare-bones understanding of these disorders, and hence, a limited ability to
treat them. From an analytics perspective, clinical neuroscience is a field of
high-dimensional datasets, small sample sizes, massive patient variability, and
most importantly, an arguable lack of ground truth information. These challenges
have led to a trade-off between the interpretability of a given model and its
generalizability to new data. At one extreme, classical statistics allows us to
formulate and test interpretable hypotheses about the brain, but it cannot make
patient-specific generalizations. At the other extreme, conventional machine
learning algorithms are geared towards patient generalizability but rarely
illuminate a brain-basis for the prediction. This CAREER program will develop a
Coupled Network Optimization (CNO) framework that balances the two analytical
extremes. The resulting algorithms will reveal interpretable system-level
interactions in the brain that can predict the behavioral and cognitive deficits
of a given disorder. In parallel, the investigators have formulated a diverse
range of educational initiatives to train the next generation of
interdisciplinary data scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematically, the CNO
framework estimates a low-dimensional network manifold for functional
neuroimaging data. The elemental bases of this manifold will correspond to
interpretable group-level features, whereas the patient-specific projections
will capture predictive information. The technical exploration of this award
will unfold in three modular stages, each of which tackles an open challenge in
the field. Thrust I will improve the CNO interpretability by imposing a patient-
specific graph topology to guide the salient functional interactions. Thrust II
will advance the CNO generalizability by introducing nonlinear and nonparametric
regression models. Finally, Thrust III will leverage an equivalent Bayesian
representation to tackle the challenges of multisite analysis. The CNO framework
will be applied to two markedly different application testbeds: a large multi-
site repository of neuroimaging, behavioral and genetic data for autism, and a
focused clinical trial of functional electrical stimulation for spinal cord
injury rehabilitation. Beyond the scientific goals, this award includes a three-
pronged educational plan to build strong technical foundations, foster
interdisciplinary collaborations through engagement and communication, and
finally, motivate young women into the STEM fields. The investigators have
outlined a comprehensive schedule of activities, ranging from curriculum
development at the high school, undergraduate and graduate levels, to organizing
student networking events, to mentoring high school women through the Johns
Hopkins Women in Science and Engineering outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.