* 1845360
* CAREER: CIF: Theory and Applications of Geometric Deep Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Joan Bruna Estrach, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 453,782.00

Deep Learning has quickly become the gold standard for solving a multitude of
tasks in computer vision, speech recognition, and natural language processing.
In essence, appropriately designed artificial neural networks are shown large
quantities of labeled data-points, allowing their internal parameters to be
continually adjusted or 'learned'. Despite its apparent simplicity, such neural
networks require certain regularities in the input data domain in order to
become effective, which limits its application to areas beyond those described
above. For example, in natural images, pixels are arranged into regular squared
grids, whereas text and speech contains samples sequentially aligned. This
project aims at overcoming this important limitation, by allowing neural
networks to operate on far more general data domains, such as chemical compounds
or social networks. Its research outcomes have the potential to impact a broad
range of technological areas currently limited by lack of appropriate end-to-end
learning systems and/or computational scalability. Besides the prospect of
significantly increasing the efficiency of data-driven discoveries in physics
and chemistry domains, the methods studied in this project directly apply to
related disciplines such as weather forecasting or network science. This project
will foster cross-disciplinary collaborations between physicists, chemists,
computer scientists and applied mathematicians, and will support education and
diversity by creating novel courses and outreach activities integrating these
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop the
mathematical and statistical foundations of geometric deep learning---a family
of neural network models and algorithms that leverage geometric properties of
the data in order to solve complex tasks---and to demonstrate its effectiveness
in practical settings such as the physical sciences. This will be enabled by
addressing two important limitations of current deep learning methods. The first
is their ability to learn how to perform algorithmic or statistical inference
tasks with optimum computational complexity, which the second is their
application to domains that lack the regular sampling structure of images,
video, text or speech. Both objectives share a fundamental interplay between
geometry and learning that this project aims to elucidate. This project pursues
the notion of geometric stability, the mathematical foundation that underpins
the efficiency of deep learning architectures and facilitates its extension to
more general domains, modeled as graphs. This will be used to study the
optimization landscape and generalization error of geometric deep learning
models, where current learning theory struggles to explain its empirical
performance. Finally, the project will demonstrate the effectiveness of
geometric deep learning with applications to physical sciences. Most physical
systems---from atoms to galaxies---are governed by complex dynamical systems and
are defined over irregular, non-Euclidean domains, presenting a serious
challenge for existing deep learning architectures. This project seeks to
overcome these limitations by building 'physics-aware' geometric deep learning
models with adaptive computational complexity, applied to particle physics,
chemistry and cosmology, by incorporating prior knowledge of the physical
dynamics into the graph structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.