* 1845523
* CAREER: Integrated Dynamic State Estimation for Monitoring Power Systems under High Uncertainty and Variation
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Ning Zhou, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,030.00

To make well-informed decisions, power system operators need a robust accurate
real-time estimator of the state of the operational conditions of the power
grid. Up to the present time, conventional static state estimators have been
widely deployed in utility control centers to improve the estimation accuracy
and expand the monitoring areas. However, these estimators are no longer
sufficient for monitoring the modern power grid, which is experiencing
increasing uncertainty and variation driven by the high penetration of
intermittent renewable (especially solar and wind) generation. In fact,
conventional static state estimation methods for power grids often fail in
providing any useful information during transmission-line tripping and cascading
grid failures when the power system rapidly changes, and state estimation
results are crucially needed. There is a technical gap in modeling a complex
system, which is not fully understood, and whose behaviors can change rapidly.
To bridge the gap, the project team will develop a data-fusion framework for an
integrated dynamic state estimator (iDSE) that can not only estimate current
operational conditions but also predict their future trends, and quantify their
uncertainty. Because the framework addresses the fundamental issue in the
situational awareness of a complex system, the research results will shed light
on that research challenge in other complex infrastructures, which are time-
varying, and with high uncertainty. The project team will disseminate the new
theory and methods to industry and academia, train college students, and
historically underrepresented middle/high-school students. Thus the project will
increase diversity and improve the preparation of future power system engineers
so that the power grid can be modernized to host more renewable
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
develop a data-fusion framework for an integrated dynamic state estimator (iDSE)
to estimate and predict power system states by integrating signal processing
theory and statistical inference theory. Encouraged by preliminary results that
multiple-hypothesis filtering algorithms can track rapid variation in states,
and the observation that belief function theory can more efficiently handle the
uncertainty from incomplete and conflicting information than Bayesian
probability theory, the new iDSEs will be created by integrating belief function
theory and multiple-hypothesis testing with multiple models to assimilate
heterogeneous data and gain the following three capabilities: (1) Leveraging
dynamical models together with static power flow models, the new iDSEs will
achieve additional robustness through increased spatial and temporal redundancy;
(2) Leveraging the capability of belief function theory to explicitly model
incomplete and conflicting information, the new iDSEs will efficiently quantify
and mitigate the negative impacts of both aleatory and epistemic uncertainty
inherent in the power system; (3) Leveraging multiple dissimilar estimation
criteria and models, the new iDSEs will effectively deal with quick dynamical
changes in the power system and predict future states using multiple-hypothesis
testing. It is expected that the new iDSE will significantly increase the
situational awareness of an operator and lay the groundwork for transforming
state estimation and power system operations from the current static paradigm
into a future dynamic paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.