* 1845403
* CAREER:  Drivers of tropical tree seedling dynamics and species coexistence along environmental gradients
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Liza Comita, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 04/30/2024
* USD 619,999.00

The tropics contain the highest diversity of plants on earth, with hundreds of
tree species existing within a single forest. Understanding how such a diversity
of plants can exist in these areas, without a handful of species taking over,
remains a long-standing issue in ecology. Processes acting on seedlings may be
particularly important for determining the number and types of plants found in
these forests. The present study will examine how factors such as light and
water availability, and the types and number of neighboring plants influence
seedling survival and help maintain plant diversity. Understanding how diversity
is maintained is important for conserving and managing forests and preserving
the services they provide. This project will integrate research with educational
activities, including classroom-based and field trip courses on tropical forest
ecology and conservation. Videos for online training programs targeting
environmental decision makers will also be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will take advantage of a strong rainfall gradient in central Panama to
investigate how the relative importance of different drivers of seedling growth
and survival shift with changes in rainfall and dry season severity. In
addition, the project will examine how species characteristics -traits like wood
density and leaf area- determine seedling responses to their local environment.
Data collected at field sites in Panama will be used to develop new computer
models that simulate forest dynamics over multiple generations in order to
assess the relative contribution of abiotic and biotic drivers of seedling
performance to tree species coexistence. This integration of field data and
novel forest simulation models will significantly advance understanding of the
key mechanisms shaping tropical tree communities and will provide a framework
for predicting changes in tropical forest diversity and species composition in
response to shifts in climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.