* 1845986
* CAREER: Hardware-Software Co-Design to Dynamically Specialize the Memory Hierarchy
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Nathan Beckmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 06/30/2024
* USD 575,059.00

Decades of exponential growth in computing power have yielded transformative
benefits for research, industry, and society. To sustain this growth as Dennard
Scaling benefits fade, computer architects must design new systems with orders-
of-magnitude better performance and energy-efficiency. Unfortunately, computer
systems are increasingly limited by the rising cost of accessing data, which
often dominates the time and energy spent doing actual computation. This project
will design and evaluate a new computer system design that makes data accesses
much faster and cheaper by dynamically specializing the memory hierarchy for
each application. This project will continue the growth in computation power
that researchers, industry, and society have come to rely upon. It will
particularly accelerate important applications like machine learning, social
networking, and robotics whose core computations remain beyond the capability of
current chip designs. This project will develop new curricula on memory
hierarchy and specialized architectures as well as involve high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students in research. It will improve diversity
through research workshops for undergraduate women and a summer internship
program for under-represented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current computer
systems incur significant unnecessary data movement because their memory
hierarchy is fixed in hardware and hidden from software, so that applications
have no control over how data are managed. This project will develop a new
hardware-software co-design that incorporates data as a first-class citizen
alongside compute. Applications will express their performance goals (e.g.,
throughput, quality of service, and/or security) and, with compiler support,
break their computation into tasks with associated data. The operating system
(OS) and hardware will collaboratively co-schedule tasks and data so that
applications' goals are achieved with minimal data movement. The OS scheduler
will account for the diverse performance characteristics of each
core/accelerator in a heterogeneous system-on-chip (SoC), and hardware will
incorporate energy-efficient cores throughout the memory hierarchy to enable
near-data computation while maximally exploiting data locality. The hardware-
software co-design gives an extensible platform for further research on reducing
data movement, and it complements industry investment in heterogeneous SoCs by
making it inexpensive to integrate new accelerators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.