* 1845933
* CAREER: Thermal transport in ultrathin metamaterials: Enabling levitation at the macroscale
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Igor Bargatin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Photophoresis, a light-induced thermal transport and levitation mechanism, has
been studied and used with micrometer-scale particles for over a century. The
principal investigator's group recently discovered photophoretic levitation and
propulsion of macroscopic (millimeter-scale) plates thousands of times larger
than ever before realized. This project will study the mechanisms of heat
transfer that lead to the levitation of ultrathin macroscopic structures. The
research can bring about a paradigm shift in unmanned aerial vehicle (drones)
technology, eliminating the need for onboard propellers and batteries, and
enabling persistent microflyers that can be powered by sunlight alone and
operate at altitudes ranging from the sea level to mesosphere (an underexplored
region of the atmosphere at altitudes of 50-80 km). Separately from
photophoresis, thermal absorption and emission in ultrathin structures are
important for thermal engineering of miniaturized spacecraft, including
interstellar light sails, which may one day transmit images from other stars'
planetary systems. The integrated research, education, and outreach plan will
train a new generation of engineers to work at the intersection of
thermodynamics, heat transfer, and nanotechnology through interdisciplinary
courses and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of
this project is to study radiation absorption, radiation emission, and thermal
accommodation in ultrathin metamaterial structures that produce photophoretic
forces exceeding their weight. The photophoretic force arises when a solid is
illuminated by light, which heats the solid relative to the ambient gas,
producing momentum exchange between them. The force is maximized in structures
that absorb light on the bottom while keeping the top side cool, or in heated
structures with different thermal accommodation coefficients on opposite sides.
The PI will use photophoretic levitation as an experimental platform to study
light absorption, thermal infrared emission, and thermal accommodation in
ultrathin structures, including micro- and nano-patterned structures as well as
novel 2D materials. Simultaneously, theoretical modeling will be performed to
understand the heat transfer across multiple length scales, including molecular
dynamics of thermal accommodation of gas molecules, finite-element simulation of
ultrathin selective absorbers and emitters, and analytical modeling of the
solid-gas momentum exchange. The intellectual merit of this proposal lies in the
performance of novel experiments and the development of new theoretical models
to understand photophoresis and heat transfer in structures with nanoscale
thickness but macroscopically large lateral scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.