* 1845363
* CAREER:  Examining the Role of Nascent Multicellular Life Cycles on the Evolution of Organismal Complexity
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* William Ratcliff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,136,348.00

The evolution of multicellular organisms has occurred repeatedly over the
history of life and in each case led to new more complex life forms, such as
plants and animals. Yet, little is known about how single celled organisms
evolve to form multicellular groups, and how these groups subsequently evolve
into complex, integrated multicellular individuals. These questions persist
because these transitions are deep in the past. This project overcomes this
limitation with a novel experimental yeast system and directly examines the
evolution of multicellularity in the lab. Using synthetic biology, the team will
construct a yeast strain capable of expressing all possible early multicellular
life cycles: a single-celled stage, an aggregative multicellular stage, and a
clonally-developing multicellular stage. The project examines how yeast
expressing these different life cycles evolve, over thousands of generations in
the lab, examining two key steps necessary for the evolution of
multicellularity: the origins of interdependent cells and cellular
differentiation. Using this unique experimental system and the powerful tools of
modern cell biology, this project stands to make fundamental insights into the
origins of multicellularity. In parallel to the experiments described above, the
team will pursue a broad-based educational outreach platform, explaining the
wonder and elegance of major evolutionary transitions to children, high school
students, undergrad/graduate students, and scientifically-curious adults. This
will be accomplished primarily by developing novel high school and college
curricula, holding workshops to train teachers how to use this material, and
writing books aimed at a general audience.

Recent experiments have shown that unicellular organisms readily evolve to form
multi-celled clusters, but little is known about how cellular clusters
subsequently evolve greater multicellular complexity. The proposed research
addresses this subject directly, using the snowflake yeast model system, by
asking the following questions: How are cells stripped of their evolutionary
autonomy, evolving from organisms into mutually-reliant parts of the new
multicellular organism? How does novel cellular differentiation arise? Can
specific life cycles (i.e., obligate clonal development) catalyze the evolution
of the above traits? Conversely, are these processes undermined by the inclusion
of other common life history stages (i.e., an extended single-cell phase or
aggregation)? The project will address these questions with yeast strains
engineered to express different life cycles, as detailed above, and then allowed
to evolve over many generations. The tools of modern cell biology, such as
synthetic biology, single cell RNA-seq, and 3D confocal microscopy, will allow
the research team to follow the evolutionary dynamics and characterize specific
changes in these lineages. Answering the above questions will provide
fundamental insight into the evolutionary origins of multicellularity and will
provide a theoretical foundation for similar investigations in other major
evolutionary transitions. The educational aims for this CAREER award have three
major components: i) Develop, disseminate and support snowflake yeast lab kits
for use in high school and college courses. The PI will also host monthly
summertime teacher training workshops, recruiting teachers from predominantly
African American Atlanta public schools, and give talks to audiences of high
school teachers. ii) Develop a novel course 'Origin of Complex Life: from Cells
to Societies' at Georgia Tech, and help create a three-week snowflake yeast
module for a graduate-level biophysics course. iii) Reach a general audience
through books. The PI will write two books on major evolutionary transitions, a
picture book aimed at children (~5-8 years old) and a book for an adult
audience.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.