* 1845994
* CAREER: Determining the Role of Intertwined Orders in Superconducting Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2020
* Eduardo da Silva Neto, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2020
* USD 223,270.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;The origin of electrical resistance in simple
metals is well-described by a model in which electrons behave like independent
billiard balls colliding within the material, and losing energy in the process.
On the other hand, in superconducting quantum materials many electrons behave
collectively to create a state where electric current can flow without energy
loss. In many cases, these quantum materials may feature enhanced properties
that defy our conventional knowledge, and could be key to the future of clean
energy transmission and other everyday technologies. However, as one tries to
enhance superconductivity, other phenomena, including ordered states, appear as
well. The fundamental roadblock is to understand how these additional
intertwined orders are detrimental or helpful to the superconductivity. This
project uses complementary scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy, a
tool that visualizes the electrons in the sub-nanoscale, and resonant x-ray
scattering to investigate the role of intertwined orders in superconducting
quantum materials, while manipulating the materials using a variety of
conditions like external field or temperature. This project also uses online
tools for the broader dissemination of knowledge. Several online video modules,
featuring undergraduate and graduate students, demonstrate and explain the
advanced laboratory techniques related to this project. This project also
targets the inclusion of underrepresented minorities through the development of
teaching modules for the Mentorships for Undergraduate Research Participants in
the Physical and Mathematical Sciences program at UC
Davis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how
quantum materials develop collective electronic phenomena is one of the biggest
challenges facing condensed matter physicists today. The key to unlocking
quantum materials comes from understanding how multiple phases are intrinsically
intertwined and cannot exist alone. In quantum materials, superconductivity may
intertwine with phases where electrons self-organize into unusual patterns
(density waves) or into states where the x and y directions become nonequivalent
for electrons in an otherwise square crystal (nematic order). This project
investigates the role of intertwined orders in unconventional superconductors,
focusing on two important cases : (i) studies of the relationship between
density-wave order, magnetism and superconductivity in the Ce-based 115 family
of heavy-fermion superconductors using scanning tunneling microscopy and
spectroscopy (STM/S) and resonant x-ray scattering techniques; and (ii) studies
of superconducting and nematic orders in Fe-based superconductors by integrating
STM/S and uniaxial strain to control the nematic order. Through these
activities, this research ultimately targets the direct visualization of a pair-
density-wave state in a heavy fermion superconductor and the switchable control
of superconductivity by crystal deformation of Fe-based superconductors.
Finally, the development of a new methodology to study nematic order via the
integration of uniaxial strain to STM/S will have significant impact on the
study of other quantum materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.