* 1845177
* CAREER: Trust, Cooperation, and Collective Action in Diverse Communities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2020
* Maria Abascal, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 413,559.00

This project will investigate how people view and respond to racial/ethnic
diversity in their communities. An underlying premise is that people may respond
to diversity differently depending the specific racial/ethnic groups that make
up that diversity. The first part of the project will examine how people from
different racial/ethnic backgrounds define diversity, followed by distinguishing
heterogeneity from the share of non-Whites in a community. The second part asks
whether and how people learn from past cross-racial interactions and become
trusting toward strangers from different racial/ethnic backgrounds. The third
part of this project studies neighborhoods in a large urban city where diversity
functions well, i.e., where neighbors have repeatedly organized to achieve
common goals, despite racial/ethnic differences between them. In this phase of
the research, the project investigates the mechanisms, such as information
sharing and sanctioning, that successfully promote cooperation between people
from different backgrounds. The project will create a research practicum for
advanced undergraduate students and graduate students that will focus on
experimental research methods. The project will also continue and expand upon an
ongoing initiative that has created an experimental design workshop. This
workshop brings together experimental social scientists from across the
university to exchange ideas and receive feedback on original experimental
research. A final educational initiative will involve a weeklong summer school
on the topic of experiments in the social sciences, which will be open to Ph.D.
students from several local universities. The project will provide insights
useful in formulating and implementing policies such as those concerning
affirmative action, immigration and residential integration.

This project will first clarify the meaning of diversity and the burden-of-proof
for documenting the effects of diversity. Second, it will analyze how members of
racial/ethnic minority groups, not just Whites, react to diversity. Third, it
will bring innovative experimental methods to bear on questions of longstanding
sociological interest. To shed light on understandings of diversity, the first
part of this project relies on a conjoint experiment with a nationally
representative sample of U.S. adults, including strategic oversamples of non-
Whites. A second part involves a public goods game where participants are
assigned to heterogeneous groups, homogeneously White groups, or homogeneously
non-White groups. The goal is to understand how people respond not just to
diversity, but also to the share of specific racial/ethnic groups. The third
part involves recruiting White and non-White residents of diverse and
homogeneous urban neighborhoods. These participants will participate in an
online survey with behavioral game components. The behavioral games capture
altruism, trust, and cooperativeness toward both in-group and out-group members.
They also allow the researcher to address social desirability bias, to observe
real-stakes behavior, to disentangle micro-level motivations and mechanisms, and
to clarify the scope conditions around hypotheses. Taken together, this project
will bring clarity to the growing but inconclusive social scientific literature
on racial/ethnic diversity, both by informing theories of diversity and by
producing new empirical findings regarding intergroup relations in diverse
communities.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.