* 1845888
* CAREER: Breaking Through the Optimality-Efficiency Barrier in Multi-Body Motion Planning
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jingjin Yu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 03/31/2024
* USD 557,988.00

The effective coordination of motions for many moving bodies (e.g., mobile
robots, autonomous vehicles, and so on) poses a computational problem with both
fundamental research importance and practical significance. Because the multi-
body motion planning problem involves computing collision-free trajectories for
a large number of physical bodies, it is a highly challenging to solve with good
optimality guarantees. This CAREER project will carry out a multi-thrust study
on multi-body motion planning with the goal to push the state-of-the-art in the
area through the development of fundamental theories, effective algorithms, and
prototype hardware-software systems. From a practical point of view, the
advances brought forward by this project will help enable a wide range of real-
world applications including material handling (e.g., autonomous multi-robot
systems at warehouses and shipping ports), entertainment (e.g., choreography
with aerial vehicle swarms), digital biology (e.g., microfluidics chips), to
list a few. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optimal motion coordination of many
labeled physical bodies in a bounded 2D/3D environment, even under the
relatively simple discrete setting, is known to be computationally hard. Until
very recently, the best polynomial-time algorithm for labeled multi-body motion
planning only guarantees time optimality that is quadratic with respect to the
size of input problem, which is highly sub-optimal. This is far from ideal
because it suggests that algorithms that compute optimal or near-optimal multi-
body motion plans could potentially require super-polynomial running time. This
CAREER project intends to bridge this long-standing gap that divides solution
optimality and computational efficiency in multi-body motion planning. That is,
could we construct algorithms that not only compute highly optimal solutions but
also run in guaranteed low polynomial time? Our initial efforts over the past
few years indicate that this could indeed be possible through a novel
composition of algorithmic techniques including divide-and-conquer, regular
bipartite perfect matching, and network flow, among others. Exploiting these
techniques and our insights to their full potential, the project will develop
theories, methods, and systems that will shatter the optimality-efficiency
barrier in multi-body motion planning. The proposed research could bring
foundational advances to robotics and intelligent systems research, including
(1) a thorough structural analysis of discrete and continuous multi-body motion
planning problems, leading to a solid understanding of key factors that affect
the achievable optimality lower bounds, and (2) the development of state-of-the-
art, practical algorithmic solutions with simultaneous optimality and
computational efficiency guarantees, pushing the limits on the achievable
optimality upper bounds. At the same time, the significant system development
effort of the project, which involves the adaptation of algorithms to hardware
subject to physical constraints and uncertainty, will help expose and resolve
issues keen to real-world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.