* 1845125
* CAREER: The Polynomial Method in Complexity and Cryptography
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Justin Thaler, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2024
* USD 549,045.00

The "polynomial method" in computer science refers to the study of the algebraic
structure of Boolean functions, in the form of approximation or exact
computation by low-degree polynomials. It has led to many celebrated results in
computer science over the last 50 years, in areas as diverse as machine
learning, quantum computing, and circuit lower bounds. As one example, quantum
computers have the potential to be vastly more efficient (for some problems)
than today's classical computers, and the polynomial method has proven to be one
of the most promising tools available for understanding their power. This is
because any function that can be efficiently evaluated by a quantum computer
must be well-approximated in a precise sense by low-degree polynomials. This
project seeks to improve our understanding of known formulations of the
polynomial method, and to develop new formulations to solve major open problems
in the aforementioned application domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this project are separated into two classes. The first class focuses on a
basic formulation of the polynomial method called approximate degree, which has
many applications. The project will develop a relatively new technique for
proving approximate degree lower bounds, called the method of dual polynomials,
that is poised to resolve the approximate degrees of many basic functions. Via
established connections, this will impact the fields of quantum algorithms
(where it is likely to imply the optimality of a variety of quantum algorithms),
circuit complexity (where it will resolve the complexity of shallow circuits
under basic complexity measures), and learning theory (where it will
characterize the power of important objects including halfspace learners, noise-
tolerant learners, and deep nets). The project will also investigate new
polynomial-based notions of structure with the potential to solve additional
major open problems in these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second class of
objectives focuses on a different application of the polynomial method, to
verifiable computing (VC). VC refers to cryptographic protocols enabling an
untrusted prover to guarantee to a verifier that the prover performed a
computation correctly. Efficient VC systems would enable a wide variety of
applications. For example, entities that offload data processing to the cloud
could obtain guarantees that the cloud is operating correctly. Seminal
theoretical results used the polynomial method to show that VC protocols can be
dramatically more efficient than static proofs, and the last decade has seen
major progress in building VC systems verging on practicality, and even
commercial deployment of such systems. Still, many existing VC systems have high
costs or lack several key properties, limiting their applicability. The project
will explore new formulations of the polynomial method to overcome these
limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.