* 1845761
* CAREER:  Multicolor imaging of single mRNA translational heterogeneity in living cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Timothy Stasevich, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 06/30/2024
* USD 926,170.00

The goal of this project is to understand how translation of mRNA to protein is
orchestrated at the single molecule level in living cells. Through the creation
of open-source tools for fluorescence microscopy, long-standing models of gene
regulation will be tested by direct visualization, to better understand and
ultimately control protein synthesis in both natural and engineered living
systems. This project will provide students and junior scientists with an
interdisciplinary and international research experience that will train them in
advanced single-molecule microscopy, biosensor engineering, and biophysical
modeling of gene regulation. This project will also incorporate inexpensive,
open-source video microscopes into a multi-pronged STEM outreach and education
effort designed to engage a diverse population of K-12 students and teachers
with exciting citizen science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although protein synthesis
is essential to life, the real-time dynamics of mRNA translation to protein have
been difficult to capture in vivo. This problem has left many open questions
about how protein synthesis is regulated in living systems, particularly at the
level of mRNA translation initiation and elongation. This project will answer
such questions by combining single-molecule microscopy with the creation of
multicolor biosensors that literally light up the heterogeneity of protein
synthesis in living cells, one protein at a time. With this powerful combination
of technologies, conflicting models of codon usage and open reading frame
selection at the level of single mRNA translation will be directly visualized
and tested for the first time. This work will lay the foundation for real-time
analysis of protein synthesis in vivo, with broad application to both basic
research and the biotechnology industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.