* 1845606
* CAREER:  Reinforcement Learning of the Free Energy Landscapes of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Diwakar Shukla, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2023
* USD 699,711.00

Proteins are molecular machines that perform a variety of tasks in living
organisms, such as transporting nutrients and communicating signals within and
between cells. Some of these proteins undergo a change in their conformation or
shape to carry out these functions. It is challenging to visualize the different
shapes of these molecular machines using traditional experimental techniques,
such as X-ray crystallography. Therefore, the molecular level understanding of
these processes and its implications for protein function remains elusive. This
lack of molecular information makes it difficult to develop engineering
approaches to regulate protein function. Molecular Dynamics simulations provide
a way to observe these movements at the atomic scale. However, significant
amount of computer time is required to observe long timescale conformational
change processes in proteins. The objectives of this project are (1) to develop
efficient algorithms based on machine learning techniques to understand how
proteins undergo conformational change and (2) to apply these algorithms to
understand the role of protein dynamics in transport of molecules across the
cell membrane via membrane transporters. The specific transporters investigated
in this project play a critical role in determining crop productivity and
neurological disorders in humans. In concert with these research objectives, the
PI will develop outreach activities teaching high school girls about
computational methods used to investigate protein function via Girl's Adventure
in Mathematics, Engineering and Sciences summer camp at the University of
Illinois. PI also plans to engage African-American boys at local Urbana-
Champaign schools via a three-day after-school program to teach them about
protein structure and function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
computational methods that can efficiently explore the free energy landscapes
associated with protein conformational changes. This work is guided by the
hypothesis that leveraging ideas from reinforcement learning technique and using
evolutionary coupled residue pair distances as order parameters for protein
functional dynamics will allow efficient sampling of free energy landscapes. The
development of the algorithm called "Reinforcement Learning-Based Adaptive
Sampling" (REAP) has been initiated. Preliminary results have shown promising
application of these ideas to several proteins. The fully developed algorithm
would be particularly useful for systems with limited structural information, as
order parameters can be identified using evolutionary coupled residues based on
sequence information alone. The specific goals of this project include: (1)
further develop the REAP methodology to efficiently explore the free energy
landscapes associated with protein function, (2) test the new methodology to
understand molecular processes of high biological importance but with limited
availability of structural information. In particular, molecular mechanisms of
substrate transport and its regulation for the following transport processes
will be investigated: (1) Nitrate transport process via root-associated
transporters in plants with applications in increasing the crop yields. (2)
Serotonin transport in brain via human Serotonin transporter for elucidating
molecular origin of neurological disorders. (3) Sugar transport via SWEET family
transporter in Rice with applications in enhancing plant growth. Despite
differences in their function and structures, these systems share similarities
in terms of their modes of regulation that could allow for a comprehensive
understanding of the regulatory mechanisms in membrane
transporters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.