* 1845913
* CAREER: Investigating Non-heme Iron Enzyme Catalyzed Nitrile Formation Mechanisms in Etoposide and Other Natural Product Biosynthetic Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Wei-chen Chang, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 04/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Enzymes are biological catalysts that increase the speed of chemical reactions
in the cell. Redirecting and repurposing enzymes to produce desirable novel
chemical products is a challenge but could have significant industrial rewards.
With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Wei-chen Chang from North Carolina State University to
repurpose specific iron-containing enzymes to speed-up a variety of chemical
reactions that these proteins do not typically perform. Recent computational and
mechanistic advances point to opportunities to use these enzymes to "bio-
synthesize" compounds of industrial interest, and to understand the fundamental
principles of how to control such reactions. Dr. Chang's studies use a
"substrate decoy", in which the standard starting compound is replaced by a new
reactant to change the type of chemistry catalyzed by the enzyme. For this
project, the iron-containing enzymes are reprogramed to alter their functions.
Where they used to break down molecules, they now add chemical groups to create
new compounds. The research plan is integrated with educational activities to
inspire the next generation of students to pursue interdisciplinary research at
the interface between chemistry and biology. The "science express" outreach
activity uses a simple biochemical reaction that turns ordinary sugar into a
blue dye (the "blue genes for blue jeans" hands-on experience) to show students
how chemical biology impacts the world around them. These activities engage
underrepresented K-12 students from diverse cultural, racial, and socioeconomic
backgrounds in rural areas of North Carolina. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project aims to develop a substrate decoy approach to redirect the
reactions catalyzed by mononuclear non-heme iron and 2-oxoglutarate dependent
(Fe/2OG) while maintaining their catalytic efficiencies. Dr. Chang's goal is to
explore the potential of utilizing this approach to biosynthesize industrially
important molecules. The research objective is to redirect the reaction outcome
of these enzymes from hydroxylation to nitrile group installation. A
complementary objective is to elucidate, through various chemical probing and
kinetic approaches, the mechanism by which Fe/2OG hydroxylases catalyze this
non-native reaction. Dr. Chang's educational objectives include developing an
undergraduate course in enzyme kinetics that integrates chemical and biochemical
concepts through active learning methods. In addition, his group has developed
an easy-to-understand enzyme catalyzed reaction ("blue genes for blue jeans") as
part of the science express outreach program. This program, established in
collaboration with local teachers, introduces middle school students to exciting
research in chemical biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.