* 1845836
* CAREER: Dynamical Systems Modeling of Large-Scale Neural Signals Underlying Cognition
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Il Park, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 357,393.00

Simple mathematical expressions can often precisely describe animal behaviors
during simple laboratory tasks; however, the specific inner workings of the
brain reflected by its complex activity patterns have remained elusive. This
project aims to transform the mathematical and computational analysis paradigm
for understanding the fundamental organizational principles of neural systems
through the development of novel neural data analysis tools. In particular, the
computational strategies used by the animals for two behaviors: to perceive if a
random visual pattern is moving toward left or right, and to combine information
from visual and auditory senses to determine if they are from a potential
predator, will be analyzed and visualized as hidden forces acting on the
internal brain states from moment to moment. These tools will also be applied to
studying disorders of consciousness in coma patients. Successful achievement of
these goals will provide new analytical tools to accelerate systems-level
understanding of cognition and inspire development of new treatment devices for
neurological disorders. The outreach goal of this project is to increase the
awareness of the general public on how the nervous system functions through
short-form online educational videos that will explore misconceptions and
inaccurate analogies made between computer systems and the brain, and thereby
stimulate their curiosity and desire to understand how the nervous system
functions at different levels. The educational goal of this project is to enrich
the computational neuroscience community through curriculum development and
engaging high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in the cutting-edge
research and trained in advanced quantitative methodologies in computational
neuroscience and neural engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to develop both real-time and offline analysis methods to infer the
normal and abnormal cognitive dynamics, that is, the internal mental processes
that intelligently link sensory and motor function, manifested within the neural
systems from streaming neural signals. The neural data analysis techniques will
be tailored for extracting interpretable dynamics from neural time series by
utilizing the low-dimensional dynamical system structure and recent developments
in nonlinear state-space modeling and recurrent neural networks in machine
learning. The extracted dynamics and phase portraits are expected to serve as an
integral part of human understandable description of how the system operates at
an intermediate scale where population state rather than individual neurons
describe neural computation. The outcomes of this project will aid the
development of translational medicine applications of closed-loop brain
stimulation, and the education of the next generation computational
neuroscientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.