* 1845953
* CAREER:  Elucidating the spatiotemporal dynamics of the cyanobacterial circadian clock
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Susan Cohen, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Loretta Jackson-Hayes
* 03/31/2024
* USD 736,369.00

We live on a planet that rotates on its axis, creating daily and very
predictable changes in our environment; including fluctuations in light
intensity, temperature and humidity. In order to cope with these changes many
organisms have evolved circadian rhythms, which allow them to coordinate their
biological activity over the course of the day. Circadian rhythms, driven by
24-hour biological clocks, are oscillations in biological activity that peak
approximately once per day, and are found ubiquitously throughout nature. This
project will elucidate how the circadian clock functions in cyanobacteria, which
are the simplest organisms and the only bacteria known to possess a robust
circadian clock. The aim of this project is to gain a near comprehensive
understanding of the cyanobacterial circadian clock, and help set the foundation
for leveraging these bacteria for broad ranging applications including
bioremediation, biotechnology, and ecological/environmental issues. Additionally
the project will provide research training opportunities for students both by
providing undergraduate and graduate research assistantships, but will also
reach a greater number of students by introducing an element of inquiry-based
research into laboratory modules for both introductory and advanced
undergraduate courses. These experiences will provide students with hands-on
experience in experimental biology, and also the repetitive and progressive
development of concepts will allow students to gain a deeper understanding of
the material. Moreover, students will present the results of their semester long
projects to local elementary and middle school students to promote STEM in K-12
education in the local community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
investigate how the core oscillator of the cyanobacterium, Synechococcus
elongatus PCC 7942, is integrated into a three-dimensional cell and how changes
in the spatiotemporal dynamics of the oscillator contribute to the
synchronization and robustness of the circadian clock as well as its integration
with other cellular processes. While it is known that the subcellular
localization and co-localizations of clock proteins that vary in space and time
contribute a level of complexity to the circadian clock mechanism, very little
is understood about the biological significance of the observed spatiotemporal
dynamics occurring with 24-hour periodicity. The research aims to fill in these
gaps by investigating how the changes in subcellular localization are achieved
and how spatiotemporal changes in the extended clock network contribute to clock
function, by using a combination of molecular genetics, biochemistry and cell
biology including fluorescence microscopy to determine the subcellular
localization of members of the extended clock network and time-lapse imaging to
investigate how the inheritance of clock proteins during cell division
contributes to the robustness of the circadian clock and the inheritance of
timestamps during cell division. A short list of candidates, identified by
immunoprecipitation mass-spectrometry analysis, has been identified for possible
contributions to promoting changes in the subcellular localization of the core
oscillator proteins and preliminary deletion or depletion of these genes results
in various circadian defects. None of these candidates have been previously
implicated in the circadian mechanism and thus represent novel avenues for
understanding how the clock functions in vivo and how the clock is integrated
with various cellular processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.