* 1846520
* CAREER:  Integrating contemporary evolution of animal communication in the field with science communication in our communities
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2024
* Robin Tinghitella, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,113,604.00

Many organisms communicate with one another using sounds, smells, colors, or
behaviors. Communication between males and females is often required for
reproduction, and mating communication differs between species, preventing
mating between different species. When male mating characteristics change
dramatically, types with and without a new signal can become reproductively
isolated, particularly when the preferences of signal receivers (often females)
change in step with the male signals. The researcher discovered a novel song
type, 'purring', in long-studied populations of Pacific field crickets,
Teleogryllus oceanicus. Male crickets produce songs using specialized wing
structures to attract females and urge them to mate. The researcher capitalizes
on this opportunity to understand the earliest stages of mating signal evolution
by measuring and tracking the components of the new purring song. The new song
is detectable to female crickets of the same species and to a parasitoid fly.
Female parasitoid flies use song to locate host crickets and then deposit larvae
on them that will burrow into and later eat their way out of the crickets' body.
The researcher will thus also measure preferences of female crickets and flies
and investigate both the evolutionary history and genomic basis of the new song.
The researcher links the contemporary evolution of animal communication with
science communication through a program (STEMComm) founded on increasing
diversity and inclusion in science and on increasing the cross-cultural literacy
of participants. STEMComm will improve undergraduate and graduate students'
training in science communication while engaging underserved urban and native
Hawaiian students with leading-edge research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The origins
of evolutionary novelty remain elusive because of the inherent difficulty of
catching novel trait evolution in action. The researcher discovered a new song
('purring') in Hawaiian populations of the Pacific field cricket, Teleogryllus
oceanicus, that is increasing in frequency in multiple populations. The novel
song differs from the typical one in characteristics used to identify
conspecifics and preferred mates, and is detectable to females and an
eavesdropping natural enemy. This discovery affords an opportunity to document
the origin of a novel male trait and its consequences for signal-preference
relationships and sexual isolation in real time. Ancestral signals and
preferences are well-characterized, and the system is known for rapid evolution
of communication, particularly in response to an acoustically orienting
parasitoid fly. The researcher will track replicate populations that contain
purring males for 20 generations, revealing how novel traits come to coevolve
(or not) with the preferences and perceptual capabilities of intended and
unintended receivers, and will probe the evolutionary history and genomic
architecture of purring crickets. Combining field studies with modern genomic
techniques will provide an integrative understanding of the why and how of
evolutionary novelty. The project seamlessly integrates research and education
through a new science communication program modeled after Graduate STEM Fellows
in K-12 Education, adapting the research for a non-specialist audience and
enhancing diversity and inclusion in science. Participants will partner with
K-12 teachers to co-develop publishable curricula and pilot activities in
classrooms, a summer camp for minoritized girls, and a community outreach
program in Hawaii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.