* 1846227
* CAREER: Expanding Latinxs' Opportunities to Develop Complex Thinking in Secondary Science Classrooms through a Research-Practice Partnership
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Hosun Kang, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,257,890.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) proposal responsive
to Program Solicitation NSF 17-537 and funded by the Discovery Research PreK-12
program, which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of
science, technology, engineering, mathematics and computer science (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of STEM
education innovations and approaches. This project will address the need to
educate teachers and students to engage in asking questions, collecting and
interpreting data, making claims, and constructing explanations about real-world
problems that matter to them. Science educators generally agree that science
classrooms should provide opportunities for students to advance their thinking
by engaging in critical conversations with each other as capable sense-makers.
Despite decades of reform efforts and the use of experiential activities in
science instruction, research indicates that classroom learning for students
remains largely procedural, undemanding, and disconnected from the development
of substantive scientific ideas. Furthermore, access to high-quality science
instruction that promotes such complex thinking is scarce for students with
diverse cultural and linguistic backgrounds. The project goals will be: (1) To
design a year-long teacher professional development program; and (2) To study
the extent to which the professional development model improves teachers'
capacity to plan and implement inclusive science curricula.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will explore ways to enhance youths' learning
experiences in secondary school classrooms (grades 6-12) by building a
sustainable partnership between researchers and practitioners. The work will
build on a previous similar activity with one local high school; plans are to
expand the existing study to an entire school district over five years. The
proposed work will be conducted in three phases. During Phase I, the study will
develop a conceptual framework focused on inclusive science curricula, and
implement the new teacher professional development program in 3 high schools
with 15 science teachers. Phase II will expand to 6 middle schools in the school
district with 24 teachers aimed at creating a continuous and sustainable
research-practice partnership approach at the district. Phase III will focus on
data analysis, assessment of partnership activities, dissemination, and planning
a research agenda for the immediate future. The study will address three
research questions: (1) Whether and to what extent does participating teachers'
capacity of planning and implementing the curriculum improve over time; (2) How
and why do teachers show differential progress individually and collectively?;
and (3) What opportunities and constraints within schools and the school
district shape teachers' development of their capacity to design and implement
curricula? To address the research questions, the project will gather
information about the quality of planned and implemented curriculum using both
qualitative and quantitative data. Main project's outcomes will be: (1) a
framework that guides teachers' engagement in planning and implementing
inclusive science curricula; and (2) increased knowledge base on teacher
learning. An advisory board will oversee the work in progress. An external
evaluator will provide formative and summative
feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.