* 1846913
* CAREER: Nanoflow RPLC-CZE-MS/MS: a novel approach for deep and highly sensitive bottom-up proteomics
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Liangliang Sun, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2024
* USD 670,446.00

In this project, researchers at the Michigan State University will develop novel
methods that transform a mass spectrometry-based analytical platform so that it
can identify and quantify protein molecules from biological samples where they
currently cannot be detected. The novel platform will provide much greater
sensitivity and specificity, in part by developing higher separation capacities
than the commonly used mass spectrometry-based methodologies. The impact of
these advances will be wide, as many areas of fundamental research in biology
involve mass-limited protein analyses, such as developmental biology, cancer
biology, and neuroscience. The project requires advances in both chemistry and
biology, and through involvement in the research it will train a new generation
of graduate and undergraduate students for careers in interdisciplinary
research. Project personnel will host local high school students from under-
represented groups as participants in the project, nurturing their interest in
science, prompting active learning experiences, and encouraging them to pursue
science careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bottom-up proteomics is a
powerful tool for large-scale and high-throughput characterization of proteins
in the cell. Over 8000 protein identifications from human cells can be
accomplished using advanced bottom-up proteomic methodologies, given hundreds of
micrograms of protein material. However, to progress in using bottom-up
proteomics for the analysis of mass-limited proteome samples, containing only
low micrograms to nanograms of proteins, will require novel analytical tools
with drastically better sensitivity. This project will develop an innovative and
automated nanoflow reversed-phase liquid chromatography-capillary zone
electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoRPLC-CZE-MS/MS) platform for
highly sensitive and deep bottom-up proteomics. This transformative approach
will boost the sensitivity of bottom-up proteomics by over two orders of
magnitude, enabling the identification of about 8000 proteins from only
nanograms of human cell protein material as proof of concept. The novel
methodology will benefit a variety of scientific communities for pursuing
answers to important fundamental questions that involve mass-limited proteome
analyses. The research will also apply the nanoRPLC-CZE-MS/MS technology in
discovering the changes in the level of abundance of chromatin-associated
proteins in zebrafish embryos during the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT).
The MZT is key for development, and it coordinates important events during early
embryogenesis, e.g., zygotic genome activation. The quantitative proteomic
dataset will provide a better understanding of the roles played by chromatin-
associated proteins in modulating the zygotic genome activation during the MZT.
Results of the project can be found at https://sungroupchemmsu.wixsite.com/sungr
oup/publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.