* 1846676
* CAREER: The Science of Producing Metallic Parts with Location-Specific Properties Using Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Alaa Elwany, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 04/30/2024
* USD 548,702.00

Metal additive manufacturing, where the part is built up layer by layer, can
realize parts with great geometrical complexity and with locally varying
microstructures. While prediction and control of local microstructures, enabling
the control of local material properties, has the potential to realize complex
functionalities within monolithic structures, it is not yet fully realized in
metal additive processes. Achieving this capability is seen as an important step
in realizing components, via a single manufacturing process, that can mimic
advantageous bioinspired structures such as a mantis shrimp claw which combines
a very hard outer surface with a tough core to give excellent fracture
resistance. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program award seeks
to address this knowledge gap by understanding how additive manufacturing
process parameters drive changes in pivotal microstructure characteristics, and
hence the final properties, of printed nickel-titanium shape memory alloys.
Being able to predict and control location-specific material properties will
greatly extend current additive manufacturing capabilities giving further
competitive advantage to US manufacturers involved in the production of high end
components for aerospace and biomedical industries. This award will also provide
opportunities for future manufacturing workforce development through activities
such as; 1) internships for graduate students at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, 2) study abroad programs, 3) an outreach program for K-12 teachers,
and 4) incorporation of a course on additive manufacturing into a larger
certificate program aimed at the advanced manufacturing workforce in Texas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective is to enable the fabrication of
metallic structures with location-specific properties using laser powder bed
fusion additive manufacturing processes. The focus of the research is on how the
phase transformation temperature of nickel-titanium alloys varies with
processing conditions. Preliminary work suggests that there are three
significant factors affecting the transformation temperature; (1) the volume
fraction of precipitates, (2) the dislocation density within the material, and
(3) the nickel evaporation loss during processing. Experimental tests and
subsequent characterization will deconvolve the effects of these factors. Most
importantly the results will be considered with respect to the processing
conditions and will provide insights on how process parameters such as hatch
spacing and laser power influence can be selected to control the microstructure.
Nickel-titanium is selected as a proxy for other materials in which
microstructural and/or composition changes greatly affect material properties,
due to its sensitivity to these changes. It is expected that the knowledge
generated in this CAREER research will serve as foundational knowledge to
realize location-specific property control in other material systems processed
using metal additive manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.