* 1846832
* CAREER: Identification as Optimization
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Alexander Torgovitsky, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 448,960.00

Using data to answer questions in economics requires maintaining assumptions
with stronger assumptions leading to stronger conclusions. However, stronger
assumptions are also more likely to lead to wrong conclusions. Researchers
therefore need methods that bridge these tensions; methods not currently
available. This research project will develop new methods that can be used to
provide better control on the tradeoff between the strength of assumptions and
correct conclusions. The results of the research project will provide
researchers with tools to improve empirical economic research and therefore
provide policy makers with more accurate policy inputs. The research project
therefore advances national economic prosperity by providing better and more
reliable tools for evidence-based economic policy analysis in many areas such as
antitrust enforcement. The research project also provides pedagogical advances
that better integrate economics into a broader STEM education on data science,
computer science, and applied mathematics. The results of this project will also
establish the U.S. as the global leader in developing better tools for economic
analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identification is a critical concept in empirical
economics and many other fields. It exhibits an inherent tradeoff: Stronger
conclusions require stronger assumptions, but stronger assumptions may lead to
wrong conclusions. Empirical researchers differ in their preferences for
resolving this tradeoff. The goal of the proposed research is to widen the
choice of available methodology in a way that gives researchers more flexibility
in exploring the assumptions-conclusions frontier. The proposed research will
achieve this goal by casting the identification problem as an optimization
problem. This transforms the abstract question of identification into the
concrete mathematical operation of maximizing a function subject to constraints.
This enables the application of computational and theoretical tools from applied
mathematics and operations research. The proposed research will apply this
identification-as-optimizations link to three different empirical problems: (1)
nonparametric discrete choice modeling; (2) sensitivity analysis in dynamic
programming models; and (3) extrapolation in instrumental variable and
regression discontinuity designs. The results of this research project will
provide enhanced method for empirical research, hence better inputs into
economic policy making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.