* 1846004
* CAREER:   Investigating environmental acidification and temperature as drivers of morphological alteration and physiological deficits in auditory systems of soniferous fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Andrij Horodysky, Hampton University
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 05/31/2024
* USD 700,000.00

Since the Industrial Revolution, the ocean has become 30% more acidic due to its
uptake of carbon dioxide, and coastal areas and freshwaters are frequently more
acidic still due to inputs from natural and agricultural land and human
activities in adjacent watersheds. The goal of this CAREER project is to examine
the effects of temperature and carbon dioxide exposure on the structure and
function of the auditory (hearing) systems of closely-related sound-producing
fishes of the croaker/drum family Sciaenidae. These fishes are model organisms
for the study of fish hearing and communication, most support valuable
recreational fisheries in habitats ranging from fresh through salt water, and
nearly all produce sounds to aid in reproduction and/or to raise alarm when
disturbed or threatened. While auditory sense is of great importance to these
sound producing fishes, little is known about the effects of changing
environmental conditions on fish hearing and communication. This project's
interdisciplinary approach will make significant impacts in this rapidly
emerging field that will be of broad interest to both the ocean science and
recreational fishing stakeholder communities. The award supports recruitment and
professional development of postdoctoral, graduate, and undergraduate
researchers from underrepresented groups in STEM disciplines. Student training
includes mastery of quantitative reasoning, critical thinking, and communication
skills regarding environmental impacts on aquatic ecosystems and sustainable
stewardship of future ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER Award will
expand the interdisciplinary neurosensory laboratory developed at Hampton
University under the PI's earlier Research Initiation Award to examine how
changing environmental conditions over the next century may affect the form and
function of auditory systems of phylogenetically-related soniferous fishes that
rely on auditory communication during aggregate spawning. This project will
apply electrophysiological techniques and morphological analyses to assay the
effects of increased temperature and CO2 concentrations representative of
projected changes over the next century on auditory morphology and neurosensory
function in representative freshwater, estuarine, and fully marine sciaenid
fishes. Using related fishes from a common phylogeny but differing habitats and
life histories, this project will examine the effects of chronic aqueous CO2
exposure (i.e. acidification) and increased temperature on the: (1)
morphological development of sensory structures via digital microscopy and
computerized tomography (CT), (2) neurosensory performance of auditory systems
via Auditory Brainstem Response, and (3) manipulation of the GABA
neurotransmitter to alter sensory deficits during CO2 exposure. This CAREER
project will enhance research capacity and provide critical infrastructure that
will support continued research by the PI, a postdoctoral associate, and both
graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds in STEM
beyond the award's lifetime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.