* 1846403
* CAREER:  An Integrative Approach to Understanding Infectious Disease Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jamie Voyles, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 748,365.00

Emerging infectious diseases are a global concern. Disease outbreaks can be
devastating for host populations, but also provide an opportunity to address
gaps in our knowledge about how diseases work. For example, we need to better
understand how outbreaks subside. Researchers hypothesize that host defenses
(i.e., host immunity) influence pathogen infection patterns and reduce the long-
term impacts of a disease. However, it is challenging to pinpoint the specific
host defenses that reduce disease severity in natural populations. This project
will test the hypothesis that host defenses alter infection patterns in a
disease known as chytridiomycosis. Chytridiomycosis is a deadly fungal disease
that impacts frogs, toads, salamanders, and other amphibians. This disease has
caused - and continues to cause - dramatic losses of amphibian biodiversity
around the world. The investigators will determine how skin secretions, an
amphibian defense with anti-fungal properties, affect the severity and duration
of chytridiomycosis outbreaks. This research will contribute to society by
informing strategies to protect amphibian biodiversity. It will also advance
scientific knowledge of emerging infectious diseases like chytridiomycosis.
Finally, the project will broaden participation through training and research
engagement for young women in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will combine
cutting-edge experiments with field studies on host defense mechanisms in three
species of amphibians. The research team will determine the role of skin
secretions in host defense using immunosuppression treatments and pathogen-
exposure experiments. The team will also use field and common-garden experiments
to quantify how skin secretion defenses vary across populations, elevations, and
seasons. In addition, the project will implement a "20 in 2020" program that
will launch 20 young women in their pursuit of higher education in scientific
fields. The educational plan includes engagement in the scientific research
project; preparation for university coursework; and a tiered mentoring network
to support high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. The education and
outreach activities will be an integral part of the proposed project, helping to
increase awareness of the potential of young women in science, the loss of
amphibian biodiversity, and the importance of advancing our understanding of
infectious disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.