* 1846797
* CAREER: Force spectroscopy enabled multivalent glycan-binding protein engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Shishir Chundawat, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 569,469.00

Glycans are carbohydrates composed of multiple sugar units. They are the most
abundant type of biomolecule on Earth and play a critical role in biology. The
interactions between glycans and proteins on the surface of cells can change how
those cells function and how they respond to disease. The focus of this project
is to explore how glycans bind to proteins and what properties affect how they
bind. Tools will be developed to rapidly measure the interactions between
glycans and proteins with the goal of understanding how to better design binding
proteins. The insights gained from this work will aid in the development of
improved biofuels and better drugs that can prevent infections. Additionally,
this project will engage elementary students through college freshmen via hands
on experiments and smart-phone apps that teach users chemical engineering
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to define the
molecular origins of protein binding to glycans. This will help to clarify the
relationship between structure and function in protein-glycan binding
interactions. To accomplish this, an acoustic force spectroscopy (AFS) toolkit
will be developed. The toolkit will be capable of assaying multiple glycan-
protein interactions simultaneously. Carbohydrate binding modules (CBM; type A)
will be used to develop and validate the technique. AFS will allow for much
higher throughput that traditional techniques and provide for probing the effect
of physiologically-relevant acoustic force loading rate varied over several
orders of magnitude. Comparisons between single-molecule and bulk-ensemble
estimated binding parameters will be elucidated for a library of CBMs of all
types. Ultimately, the technique will be utilized as a screen to identify
improved antigens and industrial biocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.