* 1846767
* CAREER: Constructing K-Theoretic Invariants for Geometric Objects
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Inna Zakharevich, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 05/31/2024
* USD 448,306.00

A common approach to problem-solving is to split a problem into smaller sub-
problems, solve each of the smaller problems, and assemble the answers into a
solution to the original problem. This last step is often very difficult, as
there are multiple ways of gluing the pieces of the solution together. The
mathematical area of K-theory studies different ways of putting such solutions
back together, as well as the relations behind differently-assembled pieces. The
invariants constructed by K-theory can be found in many fields, from number
theory to algebraic geometry to topology. This National Science Foundation award
investigates novel connections between fields through a K-theoretic perspective,
by studying how geometric objects, known as polytopes, varieties and manifolds,
can be cut apart and reassembled. By analyzing these geometric cut-and-paste
problems using traditional K-theoretic techniques found in algebra, the project
hopes to shed light on longstanding conjectures relating geometry and algebra.
The PI also intends to establish a K-12 math circle available to all local
children, and the organization of a district-wide math club for 3-5 graders.
Currently, math clubs at schools are heavily dependent on parental involvement
and are therefore only available when interested parents have students at the
school; organizing such clubs under a central organization would help with
institutional memory and make it available to more students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project consists of three parts. The first is
an in-depth exploration of the scissors congruence of polytopes as it relates to
the algebraic K-theory of the real and complex numbers. Using Rognes' stable
rank filtration the PI and collaborator Jonathan Campbell intend to construct
maps between the filtered parts of Rognes' filtration and the derived scissors
congruence of polytopes; the long-term goal of this project is to investigate
the connections between scissors congruence groups and the Beilinson--Soule
conjecture. The second part of this project investigates the construction of
derived motivic measures on the Grothendieck spectrum of varieties. There are
two main flavors of motivic measure: the cohomological measures, which involve
structures on the cohomology of the variety, and the Hermitian measures, which
involve enriching the Euler number. These measures have proven extremely
fruitful in studying the Grothendieck ring of varieties; the project proposes to
lift these to the Grothendieck spectrum of varieties and use them to study the
higher invariants of cut-and-paste problems on varieties. The cohomological
project is joint work with Jonathan Campbell and Jesse Wolfson; the Hermitian
project is joint with Kirsten Wickelgren. The third part of this project is an
investigation of "squares K-theory", which uses four-term (instead of three-
term) relations. Such relations---for example, the principle of inclusion-
exclusion [P] + [Q] = [P u Q] + [P n Q]---appear frequently in geometric cut-
and-paste problems such as SK-invariants, Bittner's presentation of the
Grothendieck ring of varieties, and the definitions of McMullen's polytope
algebra. The project proposes to extend the definition of K-theory to such
relations, thus allowing the construction of higher derived invariants for these
(and similar) problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.