* 1846384
* CAREER:  Fire impacts on forest carbon recovery in a warming world: training the next generation of Earth analysts by exploring a missing scale of observations
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jennifer Balch, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 931,768.00

The number and extent of wildfires are increasing the western U.S. forests.
These forests are important in regulating the amount of carbon in the
atmosphere. Wildfires have reduced the amount of carbon western U.S. forests
accumulate by 15-fold since the 1980s. This CAREER award will explore the
critical question: is carbon recovery in burned forests changing as regional
warming and consequent wildfire disturbance size increase. Innovative remote
sensing using Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS), NEON's Airborne Observatory, and
the GEDI satellite will allow rapid monitoring of forest structure at very high
resolution across thousands of hectares-providing a critical and often missing
scale of observations. With these remote sensing data and other advances,
regional to continental scale ecology can now explore large areas at very fine
scales. However major impediments exist in taking full advantage of this new
technology. Training to actually harness this data revolution significantly lags
behind the data availability. This CAREER award will address this need through
training the next generation of Earth analysts in data and compute-intensive
science, cutting-edge ecosystem carbon measuring techniques, and large-team
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will advance fundamental
understanding of how aboveground biomass recovery trajectories vary as a
function of fire size and severity, drought, and conifer forest type
(1984-present) across the western U.S. This research will: 1) apply emerging UAS
technologies and methods to estimate tree-level aboveground biomass to then
explore carbon recovery post-fire in the NEON southern Rockies domain; 2)
explore fundamental drivers of carbon recovery post-disturbance across a
chronosequence of fire history in conifer forests of the western U.S. using
space-based observations; and 3) build a national network of over 100 ecosystem
scientists, predominantly graduate students, who will be enabled to conduct
data-intensive exploration of forest carbon dynamics in response to disturbance
within NEON domains. Education efforts include a distributed graduate seminar
taught simultaneously at five universities, open education modules delivered on
Earth Lab's learning portal for Earth data science that currently reaches tens
of thousands of users, and a Forest Carbon Codefest that will build
collaborative efforts around key methodological advances, data coding
challenges, and cloud-compute workflows. Overall this CAREER award will lead to
better understanding of when forests shift from carbon sinks to carbon sources
under changing fire regimes and help to train the next generation of data-
capable Earth scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.