* 1846513
* CAREER: Less Obstructive Vital Evaluation-inspection Robots for Bridges
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Hung La, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Bridges are essential infrastructure components that are critical for the safety
of the traveling public and the sustainability of the economy. The more than
600,000 bridges in the United States have an average age of 42 years and have
been subjected to varying levels of deterioration due to mechanical wear and
weather conditions, inadequate maintenance, and deficiencies in inspection and
evaluation. The cost of inspecting, repairing, and replacing deteriorating
highway bridges has been estimated at more than $140 billion. Bridge collapses -
including the I-5 Skagit River Bridge in Washington state and the I-35W bridge
over the Mississippi River, which killed 13 people and injured more than 145 -
should serve as strong motivation to ensure that the conditions of bridges are
accurately assessed. Non-destructive evaluation (NDE) technologies present a way
to identify and predict early-stage bridge deterioration to enable proactive
repair and rehabilitation. However, these technologies in their current state
cannot meet the increasing demand for efficient, cost-effective, safe bridge
inspection because they rely on manual data collection, which is prone to human
error, non-comprehensive, slow, labor-intensive and therefore expensive, and
negatively impacts traffic flow. More importantly, manual inspection is
dangerous for inspectors because they must work in open traffic and climb high
bridge structures. In response to these concerns, this project seeks to
integrate NDE technologies into a single system that will allow bridges to be
inspected by a team of robots. In addition to increasing the safety of human
bridge inspectors, reducing traffic delays, and saving money by reducing manual
labor, this system will combine the data collected by each individual NDE robot
to build a more accurate and reliable assessment of a bridge's
condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a novel
research framework that will integrate NDE technologies with recent advances in
robotics and automation sciences. Specifically, the objectives of this project
are: (1) to develop a general theoretical framework for multiple NDE sensor
fusion and to demonstrate its feasibility to facilitate efficient, accurate, and
reliable inspection of highway bridge structures; (2) to develop a control
framework to coordinate multiple inspection robots with NDE sensor fusion and
with human-in-the-loop for safe, accurate, and efficient bridge inspection while
minimizing traffic interruption and labor-intensive operations; and (3) to test
and evaluate the framework system both in the lab environment and on real
bridges. The long-term research goal of this project is to bring full
considerate robot intelligence from theory to real-world applications, such as
civil infrastructure inspection, in order to save lives and reduce the costs of
inspection and maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
by the Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS) Division in the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering (CISE) Directorate and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.