* 1846447
* CAREER: Efficient Query Processing for Private Data Federations
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jennie Rogers, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 02/29/2024
* USD 546,397.00

Almost all domains of life, including medicine, government, and business, have
data recorded on them at an unprecedented rate by many independent parties. To
realize insights from these fractured datasets, data scientists often set up a
data federation in which multiple autonomous databases are united to appear as a
single engine for querying. In many settings this is challenging due to privacy
concerns and regulatory requirements. This project investigates a private data
federation that runs queries (in SQL) over the combined secret records of
multiple sources such that the only information revealed from a query's
execution is that which can be deduced from its output. The federation uses
secure multi-party computation to protect its inputs. These cryptographic
protocols run obliviously among the data providers such that their execution is
independent of a query's secret inputs. The findings from the project, which
include the open-source private data federation prototype, could empower
database users to gain actionable insights from fractured datasets without
specialized training. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project identifies,
formalizes, and exploits opportunities to run private data federation queries
efficiently while upholding their privacy guarantees. It uses synergies between
the relational model and secure computation to create new algorithms for
oblivious database operators that minimize their use of heavyweight
cryptographic protocols. The investigators design and evaluate an algebra that
leverages properties of the relational model, such as key definitions and
integrity constraints, to bound the cardinality of a query's intermediate
results thereby reducing the complexity of its secure circuits. The project
evaluates the real-world impact of this technology with electronic health
records from multiple hospitals for clinical data
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.