* 1846784
* CAREER: Optical Intensity Diffraction Tomography with Multiple Scattering
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Lei Tian, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Tomography is a powerful technique that has found wide applications in life
science and medical diagnosis. Optical tomography is particularly attractive
since it is noninvasive and uses non-ionizing radiation. Recent development to
optical tomography focuses on pushing the imaging depth, as motivated by many
important needs including deep tissue imaging and brain photostimulations.
However, existing optical tomography devices can only provide high-resolution
imaging up to ~100 microns, limited by the single-scattering approximation. The
goal of this CAREER program is to overcome this limitation by advancing both
fundamental theory and practical devices. This program will establish novel
multiple-scattering based tomography models that allow efficiently utilizing the
information contained in the multiply scattered light. A new type of optical
devices based on the intensity diffraction tomography will be developed with
simple experimental setups to facilitate easy adoption to existing microscope
systems. The outcome of this program can enable scientific and biomedical
discoveries by providing means to study biological samples and phenomena that
would be otherwise not accessible, in areas such as histology, cytometry, brain
mapping, and drug discovery. In addition, the research subject will be
translated to a new "Innovation in a Box" hands-on curriculum and disseminated
broadly to middle and high-school students through the Boston University
Technology Innovation Scholars Program. The education program will focus on
raising both interest and knowledge of STEM subjects and providing
multidisciplinary training to graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students
with diverse background, in particular women, minorities, and historically
under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER program
aims to develop novel optical imaging devices that fully utilize multiple
scattering to enable high-resolution imaging in highly scattering media.
Scattering in complex media is a fundamental subject that continuously attracts
theoretical and experimental endeavors, since it impacts many important
applications. To date, solving the inverse-scattering problem remains difficult
due to the many degrees of freedom in multiple scattering, and incomplete
information limited by the measurement condition. To overcome these limitations,
this program will focus on (a) novel physical models and inverse multiple
scattering algorithms in both transmission and reflection using intensity-only
tomographic measurement; and (b) innovative spatial coherence and multispectral
illumination engineering solutions. The anticipated outcomes include: i) new
multiple scattering-based theory, algorithms, and devices that can lead to high-
resolution 3D imaging of highly scattering objects; ii) theoretical and
experimental advancement to 3D phase retrieval in both transmission and
reflection tomography; iii) new device design principles for adaptive coherence
engineering to harness the multiple scattering information. Broadly, the program
will establish fundamentally new understandings of label-free, scatter-based
imaging and develop new generation of computational imaging sensors and devices
by jointly designing optics and algorithms to break the conventional
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.