* 1846659
* CAREER: Towards Super-Resolution Label-Free Mid-Infrared Photothermal Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michelle Sander, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2024
* USD 537,700.00

Identifying low concentration specimens in nanoscience, chemical processes,
pathology, and contamination monitoring remains an existing material analysis
challenge. With an infrared microscope intrinsic material properties can be
directly determined in a contactless fashion without the need for extensive and
intrusive sample preparation with external tags, stains or nano-particles. In
the proposed novel imaging platform, simultaneous chemical, optical and thermal
material characterization will offer unique glimpses into the molecular sample
composition. Instead of being limited by poorer resolution set by the long
optical infrared wavelengths, high spatial resolution images can be collected in
such a photo-thermal microscope. The technique will be applied to determine
tumor margins in aggressive brain cancers and to characterize smart materials
that undergo size changes to advance fundamental material property studies,
diagnosis and potential drug therapies.&lt;br/&gt;As the research bridges
microscopy, fiber lasers, biomedical analysis and chemical spectroscopy, it
offers a unique interdisciplinary environment for the training of undergraduate
and graduate researchers for a wide range of career choices. The PI aims to
build up a diverse and inclusive community by recruiting talent from all sectors
and groups of society and by offering targeted training and mentorship. To
broaden participation for optics and address the gender gap in STEM, the PI will
launch outreach activities as well as professional development activities on a
local (Boston Women in Photonics Networking Series) and international scale
(presentation feedback program at conferences). These initiatives will support
the PI's vision of empowering a diverse group of innovative next generation
engineers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term
vision is to build an integrated research and education program that explores
multi-dimensional, contactless super-resolution imaging by merging innovative
optical approaches with custom-designed fiber laser technology for enhanced
material analysis and interdisciplinary sensing applications. The overall aim is
to study the interplay between absorption, thermal diffusion, non-equilibrium
induced phase transitions and thermal blurring dynamics in photo-thermal
imaging. These novel photo-thermal concepts will then be integrated into a
label-free and non-destructive super-resolution imaging device platform that
will deliver rich details on both biochemical spectral signatures and thermo-
physical characteristics. This will address existing scientific challenges of
identifying weakly absorbing features that can frequently be overshadowed in
overlapping spectral bands. Photo-thermal imaging capabilities, with a mid-
infrared pump and a shorter wavelength probe beam, will be expanded by studying
novel nonlinear material and demodulation schemes for higher spatial resolution.
The combination of these concepts promises new insights into non-equilibrium
photo-thermal phenomena and thermal diffusive properties at the micro- and nano-
scale while offering spatial resolutions beyond the diffraction limited spot
size of the probe beam with unprecedented chemical specificity. The impact and
versatility of the research will be demonstrated by monitoring material
properties and their biochemical signatures in brain cancer tissue and smart
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.