* 1846851
* CAREER: Role of Mn(III) in Limiting Oxidative Transformation of As(III) by Mn(III/IV) Oxides
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Matthew Ginder-Vogel, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 06/30/2024
* USD 447,193.00

Arsenic in water occurs both naturally and as a result of human actions and
arsenic is found in drinking water supplies throughout the world. The overall
goal of this project is to understand how environmental factors control the form
of arsenic that is present, and whether it is dissolved in water or attached to
solids like soil. When arsenic is dissolved in water it is more likely to move
and impact human health. This work is important because more than 150 million
people worldwide are exposed to unsafe amounts of arsenic in drinking water.
Minerals with the element manganese are found in many natural sediments and they
are powerful chemical reactants. This project will determine how, and how fast,
manganese minerals react with arsenic to change its form and therefore how
mobile it is. This project also will look at how the very common element iron
changes how manganese minerals react with arsenic. Outreach will be conducted to
educate people about how minerals affect water quality and there will be work to
engage K-12 and undergraduate college students in the field of environmental
geochemistry will be. This project will work to increase the number of students
from diverse backgrounds who take classes and do research in environmental
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arsenic (As) is a naturally occurring and
anthropogenic contaminant present in drinking water supplies around the world.
The environmental mobility of arsenic in natural systems as well as the efficacy
and efficiency of removal systems are strongly influenced by its oxidation
state. AsV readily sorbs to many mineral components of soil and sediments or to
filter bed media and/or coagulant flocs in oxic systems, while AsIII generally
forms less stable bonds with these materials. In subsurface environments,
oxidation of AsIII is largely driven by interaction with MnIII/IV oxides.
Despite their role in controlling the geochemical speciation of As, in addition
to other redox-active contaminants, the results of numerous studies to determine
oxidation rates and mechanisms are often inconsistent. In particular, the role
of solid associated MnIII in limiting contaminant transformation rates and
extents is at best, poorly understood. This project will systematically
investigate the oxidation of AsIII by various MnIV oxide minerals, with an
emphasis on quantifying the effect of solid-phase MnIII and FeIII on AsIII
oxidation rate, extent, and the formation of As surface complexes. This proposal
aims to combine traditional lab-based measurements with in situ, quick scanning
X-ray absorption spectroscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) to
determine the role of MnIII in limiting AsIII oxidation. The research will (1)
examine the effect of MnIII content on the kinetics of AsIII oxidation during
early time periods (e.g., &lt;1 min), (2) seek to systematically define effects
of FeIII substitution in MnIII/IV oxides on AsIII oxidation and sorption, and
(3) quantify the fundamental relationship between oxidation kinetics, mechanism,
and changes in the MnIII/IV oxide surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.