* 1846930
* Workshop for Evaluating Part-Time Doctoral Study  for Growing the Underrepresented Student Population
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Gilda Barabino, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2019
* USD 49,809.00

This project proposes a workshop to investigate the impact of domestic
engineering doctorates, especially from underrepresented groups, through PhD
program that allow part-time students working in industry. Anecdotal evidence
suggests that part-time students take significantly longer to complete their
dissertations and limited research suggests that this is due to a lack of
support and adequate planning by the students. &lt;br/&gt; The workshop is to be
held at the University of Massachusetts and will be divided into three parts,
which will include data sharing, presentations, and brainstorming among the
participants. Participants include administrators from Programs with large part-
time programs including several prominent HBCUs such as Howard, Maryland at
Baltimore County, North Carolina A&amp;T, Morgan State, and Prairie View
A&amp;M. As doctoral student populations have significantly higher proportions
of underrepresented students when compared to full-time populations, and
institutions with large part-time doctoral populations are located across the
country, this project has the potential for far-reaching impact. The initial
workshop seeks to bring stakeholders together, collect data on part-time
doctoral programs, and design a program of support for part-time doctoral
students for subsequent evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.