* 1846651
* CAREER: Mechanics of Kirigami-based Reconfigurable Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Jie Yin, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Nakhiah Goulbourne
* 02/29/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will support
fundamental research on the mechanical behavior of kirigami-based reconfigurable
two dimensional (2D) and three dimensional (3D) structures. Very recently,
kirigami, the ancient paper cutting art, has inspired emerging scientific
research and engineering innovations, ranging from mechanical metamaterials,
stretchable devices, and solar tracking, to self-assembled 3D meso-structures.
However, it largely lacks the fundamental understanding of cut-structures
determined macroscopic mechanical response of kirigami structures. This research
program will establish a theoretical framework for connecting the macroscopic
mechanical behavior and cuts-based microstructures in a new class of kirigami-
based structures, which are reconfigurable in both 2D and 3D. The knowledge
developed through this project will advance multiple technologies, including
scaffolds for conformable and stretchable electronics, electronic skin, adaptive
energy efficient building envelope, programmable soft machines, soft robots, and
reconfigurable acoustic wave guides. The education and outreach objectives will
align with the research goal in generating better understanding of mechanics and
structure-determined properties and functionalities in kirigami structures.
Programs at Temple and museums in Philadelphia will be used to broaden the
participation of K-12 in STEM, including Women's Engineering Exploration summer
program and STEM education department at Temple, as well as Science museum
displays (Franklin Institute) and Art show (Philadelphia Museum of Art) in
Philadelphia.

Kirigami-based 2D/3D structures will be constructed by applying designed cuts
and/or folds to both planar sheets and bulk materials for actuation under forces
or external stimuli. Systematic theoretical framework will be developed to
predict the kinematics and constitutive modeling of 2D and 3D kirigami
structures, with validation by numerical simulation, fabrication, and
experimental testing. For 2D structures, a unified design of patterned cuts will
account for both symmetric and non-symmetric deformation. The quantitative
relationship between the overall mechanical properties and the geometry of
localized cut structures will be determined through developed homogenization
continuum model. 3D reconfigurable kirigami structures will be constructed from
either (self-) folding of kirigami sheets or assembly of 3D cut polyhedron units
as fundamental building blocks for architected structures. For 3D architected
kirigami structures, their reconfigurability and mechanical properties will be
determined by the deformation modes in localized 3D cut units. A theoretical
framework will be developed to predict the overall deformation modes through
mode analysis under both small and finite deformation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.