* 1846205
* CAREER: Bio-Inspired Sensory Interfaces Incorporating Embedded Classification and Encryption
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Vanessa Chen, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2020
* USD 393,226.00

Ubiquitous sensing and computing, leading to rapid growth of big data analysis,
will potentially transform the world. That vision creates new challenges for
pervasive sensory interfaces to enable the always-on feature, rapid analysis of
information, and design for security to prevent cyberattacks. In the meantime,
however, significant power will be consumed to run machine learning and complex
cryptography algorithms. Critical challenges also exist in integrating
classifiers and security measures into sensors to enable continuous monitoring.
This project proposes an integrated program of research, education, and outreach
to develop low-power sensory systems with theory, algorithms and architectures
to enable in-sensor intelligence and security. The transformative aspects of
this research project include fundamental understanding of bio-inspired
computing, discovering useful intrinsic device characteristics, analysis of
real-time data with adaptive machine learning, and exploring chaotic behaviors
for efficient encryption. This research will have a significant impact on the
needs of society for secure and continuous real-time monitoring to improve
health, transportation, and environment through the developments of ubiquitous
sensing and computing. This project also incorporates an integrated education
plan to inspire and motivate younger generations with diverse backgrounds, in
particular women and underrepresented minorities, to pursue education in
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) fields. The plan will
introduce the concepts of secure ubiquitous sensing and computing to
undergraduate and graduate students, and create strong outreach activities to
local K-12 students by illustrating easily-understood concepts of fundamental
electronics and mathematics with compelling examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop ultra-low-power sensory interfaces that
integrate autonomous sensing, classification, and secure measures into a single
hardware platform. The bio-inspired classifiers incorporating combinatorial
intrinsic characteristics emulate sophisticated biological systems where
sensing, learning, and decision making are carried out through nonlinear and
adaptive analog computing. The proposed architecture is driven by fast
regeneration to extract relative timing information for hierarchical
classification. Instead of using linear amplification and fine integration,
inherent device mismatch and nonlinearity are exploited in time domain to
achieve energy-efficient computation under low supply voltages. To process real-
time data in sensors, Bernoulli variational distributions are employed for
approximating the posterior to develop a computationally-efficient multi-layer
neural network with Bayesian methods. The algorithm integrates medical knowledge
and statistical analysis into the training process for adaptation to incoming
signals. The proposed algorithm explores maximum sparsity in both sample and
feature spaces, where regularizations of hardware constraints are included in
the model to ensure robustness. Moreover, to perform encryption in sensors, the
information will be randomized into deterministic noise for transmission. The
pipeline chaotic system can be trained with time-varying maps to enhance the
strength of the security without creating observable patterns to counter side-
channel attacks. The transformation function is built with combinatorial
intrinsic characteristics, which are physically unclonable to ensure complete
security measures. This ensures data integrity and basic authentication for
multi-layer security schemes from the edge sensors to the cloud while
classification algorithms are performed locally in sensors to achieve rapid
analysis and data reduction for wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.