* 1846054
* CAREER: Towards Understanding and Modeling Turbulent Reacting Particle-Laden Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jesse Capecelatro, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 475,922.00

Multiphase reactors are central to nearly all energy processes. Examples include
the production of biofuels, post-combustion carbon capture, and particle-based
solar receivers. In addition, many natural processes involve multiphase heat and
mass transfer in a turbulent flow. For example, ocean spray ejected from
breaking waves affects air-sea fluxes that influence the intensity of
hurricanes. However, there are many challenges associated with modeling how
turbulent mixing interacts with the reaction kinetics, mass transfer, and heat
transfer across length and time scales. Because of these challenges, most
existing models are based on empirical correlations that do a poor job at
predicting measurements in applications of interest. This project aims to
improve our fundamental understanding of these complex multiphase flows and
enable predictive models that work across varying regimes. The Principal
Investigator will use his expertise in multiphase flows and turbulence modeling
to accomplish three goals. He will 1) establish a connection between two-phase
flow dynamics and rates of heat and mass transfer, 2) use recent advances in
data science and machine learning to link physical processes across scales, and
3) create a museum exhibit that highlights the art and science of these complex
flows and its role in the energy sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While there has
been significant progress characterizing hydrodynamic interactions in particle-
laden flows, much less is known about interphase heat and mass transfer. State-
of-the-art codes used in industry and academia rely on simplistic models for
average reaction rates as well as heat and mass transfer coefficients that are
known to vary by orders of magnitude across two-phase flow regimes, resulting in
enormous predictive uncertainty. The main limitation is the lack of meaningful
data that describe multiphase interactions from the level of individual
particles to larger scales of interest. In this project, unique, high fidelity
numerical simulations will isolate two-way coupling between the phases and
establish a relationship between multiphase interactions and heat/mass transfer.
The emergence of inverse modeling and machine learning has enabled new
approaches to systemically inform models with such data, and will be used here
to quantify and reduce model uncertainty. The combination of these efforts will
result in a new paradigm in data-driven multiphase turbulence modeling. Results
are anticipated to have far-reaching impact on energy and environmental
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.