* 1846777
* CAREER: Determining Distinct Triggers of Mass Extinction and Diversification in Fishes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Lauren Sallan, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 04/30/2024
* USD 543,104.00

This project addresses a fundamental question in the study of life: when, how,
and why do animals exhibit large-scale species loss and gain through time?
Complex life has experienced countless rounds of such changes over the last 500
million years varying in geographic scale from local to global, in timing from
days to tens of millions of years, and in scope from single species to all life.
Despite the numerical dominance and ecological importance of fishes in modern
oceans, little is known about their specific responses to events like mass
extinction or the triggers of their proliferation. This project is assembling
and analyzing the first comprehensive databases for all known fossil fishes
through time. Processing this data involves training teams of undergraduates in
cutting-edge 'Big Data' analytics and programming, imparting essential skills
for multiple careers. These efforts are revealing the origins of modern fishes
and fundamental biodiversity processes and are informing fisheries and
conservation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fishes are vastly diverse (34,000
living species) and are key components of aquatic ecosystems, functionally
distinct from both benthic invertebrates and terrestrial tetrapods. Patterns and
processes of fish turnover are therefore essential for understanding modern
biodiversity, selective mechanisms driving its origins, and biosphere evolution.
There is growing evidence that fishes have exhibited distinct sequences of
biodiversity loss and gain over their 500 million year history. However,
elucidation and understanding of this record is hampered by a lack of
appropriate, comprehensive datasets for most intervals. This project is creating
global diversity, environmental and ecological compendia for fossil fishes.
These data are revealing temporal patterns of turnover and are enabling direct
testing of when fish diversity trends were primarily driven by 1) selective mass
extinctions ('Big Five' and others, including unknown or second-order
extinctions), 2) longer-term environmental changes ('Ice House' vs. 'Hot House'
Intervals), or 3) competitive replacement. Creating the database of fossil
fishes is enhancing infrastructure for research and education. Teaching and
training students are central activities in this project and are advancing
discovery and understanding. Benefits of this project to society include the
potential to inform public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.