* 1846327
* CAREER: Robustness of Inductive Reasoning Engines
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Roopsha Samanta, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 596,000.00

The past decade has seen a renaissance in the field of machine learning and
simultaneously witnessed an explosion of interest in the related area of
Programming by Example (PBE). While both fields have enjoyed spectacular
successes, their algorithms can be brittle and can drive applications to
unexpected failures. The cause of many failures in both machine-learning and PBE
systems can be traced back to their shared task of inductive reasoning: learning
some artifact in a hypothesis space from a set of examples. Since examples are
inherently incomplete specifications, there can be a large number of artifacts
that fit a set of examples but fail to generalize to an unseen example. This
project advocates for a more principled approach to constructing such inductive
reasoning engines based on a formal characterization of their
reliability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project casts the problem of reliability
of these systems as one of robustness: is the change in the artifact learnt
acceptable, or, at least predictable, in the presence of small changes to the
set of examples? The project integrates concepts from formal methods, logic,
relational reasoning, and computational learning theory to develop new
foundations, algorithms and tools for the design and analysis of robust
inductive reasoning engines. The multi-faceted project will impact formal
methods and programming languages (through contributions to inductive synthesis
and relational reasoning), machine learning (through automated techniques for
addressing the dataset shift problem), and society (through users of inductive
reasoning engines, and education activities targeting expansion of scientific
literacy and computer science pathways). The investigator plans broad
dissemination of results (through a workshop on robustness co-founded by the
investigator, talks at outreach platforms and a graduate
course).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.