* 1846560
* The Role of the Classical Limit and Symmetries in Constructing Quantum Theories
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Feintzeig, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 296,719.00

This is a research project in the philosophical foundations of physics. The
research team will investigate technical and philosophical aspects of
constructing quantum theories, including the process of quantizing classical
theories and the closely related process of taking the classical limit; they
will focus on the role of symmetries in these processes. The results of this
part of the study will then be used to develop new insights concerning both
conceptual and philosophical issues surrounding theory construction, scientific
progress, and explanation. In addressing these goals, the team will develop
conceptual and mathematical tools that they expect will indicate new directions
for physics, perhaps leading to recommendations for solving some open problems
in mathematical physics. The researchers will build a new interdisciplinary
research community by hosting two workshops to facilitate further conversations
between philosophers of physics and contemporary physicists. They will also
create new teaching methods at the undergraduate level by using techniques from
the project for interpreting quantum theories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research team will focus on the role of one important feature of theory
construction in physics, the use of symmetries, to develop a case study of the
philosophical significance of quantization procedures. They will address several
interrelated questions. Why are symmetries so useful in the construction of
quantum theories? How are symmetries in quantum theories related to symmetries
in classical theories? How do symmetries constrain the construction of new
theories? In addressing these questions, they will focus on theories of
particles moving in an external gauge field; such theories have finitely many
degrees of freedom, meaning that they are mathematically tractable. The goal
will be to construct mathematical tools that allow one to compare models and
theories across classical and quantum physics. The team will then investigate
how their insights about transitions from classical to quantum theories relate
to general issues in philosophy of science. They will consider several questions
in this phase of the project. To what extent can the transition between
classical and quantum physics be understood as continuous and cumulative? Can
one make precise the representational structure that changes between classical
and quantum descriptions? Must the construction of quantum theories be done
piecewise by constructing individual models, or is it possible to construct the
theoretical framework wholesale?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.