* 1846821
* CAREER: Moving Beyond Equilibrium: Understanding the Ocean's Overturning Circulation in a Changing Climate
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Malte Jansen, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 601,131.00

Most theoretical understanding of the ocean circulation assumes that changes in
surface winds and air-sea heat fluxes, the drivers of ocean circulation, are
rapidly felt by the ocean. This assumption implies an instantaneous dynamic
balance between changes in the drivers at the ocean surface, and ocean flow
throughout the ocean (so-called steady-state equilibrium solutions). Numerical
models show that the deep ocean adjustment to changes at the surface are not
instantaneous, and can take many millennia, suggesting that the steady-state
equilibrium approach required for theoretical studies can miss ocean responses
occurring at decadal to millennial time-scales. This could have a significant
impact on understanding ocean overturning circulation, and affect our ability to
make accurate climate predictions. A suite of models will be developed that
accounts for the time required for the ocean to respond to changes in wind
forcing over these long, climate relevant time-scales. These models will be used
to gain deeper insights into each of the most essential mechanisms that control
changes in the ocean overturning circulation, and their combined effects. The
suite will be disseminated online as open source software, and will provide
researchers and students with an interactive computing experience to help them
build an intuitive understanding of ocean dynamics. At the same time, it will
foster the development of modern computational skills to students, something
increasingly important in both research and industry. The project will train two
graduate students as well as two undergraduate interns from underrepresented
minorities. In addition, the project will engage with high-school students and
introduce them to ocean and climate science - helping to entrain the next
generation of scientists into this field.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a theoretical understanding of the nonequilibrium ocean response to
changes in climate on time-scales from decades to millennia. It aims at closing
the gap between observations and numerical modelling studies which demonstrate
transient responses to be different than those obtained using equilibrium
solutions. The proposed research focuses on two specific problems that have
received wide attention in the literature, but the expectation is that the
developed theoretical framework will eventually be applicable to a much wider
range of questions about the ocean's role in past and future climate change. The
first question addresses the time-scale dependent response of the ocean state
and circulation to changes in the wind stress over the Southern Ocean. The
second question addresses the ocean's time-dependent response to global warming,
with applications to both anthropogenic climate change as well as glacial-
interglacial climate transitions. The investigation will use a hierarchy of
models of varying complexity to obtain a mechanistic understanding of the deep
ocean's response to changes in the surface boundary conditions on time-scales
from decades to millennia. A particular focus will be on the development of a
simple model suite for the overturning circulation, which will be incorporated
both in the research and educational component of this proposal. The model suite
will be set up in Python for use on a laptop computer and will allow deeper
insight into the most essential mechanisms that control changes in the ocean
overturning circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.