* 1846690
* CAREER: Mathematical Modeling from Data to Insights and Beyond
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Yifei Lou, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,213.00

This project will develop both analytical and computational tools for data-
driven applications. In particular, analytical tools will hold great promise to
provide theoretical guidance on how to acquire data more efficiently than
current practices. To retrieve useful information from data, numerical methods
will be investigated with emphasis on guaranteed convergence and algorithmic
acceleration. Thanks to close interactions with collaborators in data science
and information technology, the investigator will ensure the practicability of
the proposed research, leading to a real impact. The investigator will also
devote herself to various outreach activities in the field of data science. For
example, she will initiate a local network of students, faculty members, and
domain experts to develop close ties between mathematics and industry as well as
to broaden career opportunities for mathematics students. This initiative will
have a positive impact on the entire mathematical sciences community. In
addition, she will advocate for the integration of mathematical modeling into
K-16 education by collaborating with The University of Texas at Dallas Diversity
Scholarship Program to reach out to mathematics/sciences
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses important issues in
extracting insights from data and training the next generation in the "big data"
era. The research focuses on signal/image recovery from a limited number of
measurements, in which "limited" refers to the fact that the amount of data that
can be taken or transmitted is limited by technical or economic constraints.
When data is insufficient, one often requires additional information from the
application domain to build a mathematical model, followed by numerical methods.
Questions to be explored in this project include: (1) how difficult is the
process of extracting insights from data? (2) how should reasonable assumptions
be taken into account to build a mathematical model? (3) how should an efficient
algorithm be designed to find a model solution? More importantly, a feedback
loop from insights to data will be introduced, i.e., (4) how to improve upon
data acquisition so that information becomes easier to retrieve? As these
questions mimic the standard procedure in mathematical modeling, the proposed
research provides a plethora of illustrative examples to enrich the education of
mathematical modeling. In fact, one of this CAREER award's educational
objectives is to advocate the integration of mathematical modeling into K-16
education so that students will develop problem-solving skills in early ages. In
addition, the proposed research requires close interactions with domain experts
in business, industry, and government (BIG), where real-world problems come
from. This requirement helps to fulfill another educational objective, that is,
to promote BIG employment by providing adequate training for students in
successful approaches to BIG problems together with BIG workforce
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.