* 1846671
* CAREER: Nanolithography Using Ultrashort-Pulsed Laser Processing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Xiaoming Yu, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 03/31/2024
* USD 570,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports basic
research in laser-based advanced manufacturing that enables single-step
fabrication of nano-scale structures over a large area. Current nanofabrication
processes involve multiple steps and are not suitable for fabricating one-of-a-
kind or customized nanostructures in a cost-effective manner. In this project,
an ultrashort-pulsed laser, which emits flashes of light (pulses) with extremely
short duration, is used to drill, cut and pattern materials with nano-scale
precision. Because the duration of a pulse is so short (less than one trillionth
of a second), the energy of the laser pulse is highly concentrated in the
material, creating conditions that are not normally achieved with other
processing methods. Ultrashort-pulsed laser processing provides the key
advantage of significantly-reducing collateral damage, that is damaging the
surrounding material, and thus improving precision in the processing of a
variety of materials. This project advances the understanding of ultrashort-
pulsed laser processing of dielectric materials, such as glass and diamond,
which are commonly used in display panels, microelectronics and cutting tools.
Advances resulting from the project benefits society by enabling a new method
for nano-scale patterning that reduces manufacturing time and lowers cost, and
by supporting an education and outreach program aimed at cultivating a well-
trained manufacturing workforce. The project raises public awareness of laser
and optical technologies in everyday life, attracts young students to science
and technology, and guides college students to pursue a career in advanced
manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new nanolithography method is based on
laser ablation using a sequence of ultrashort laser pulses (a pulse train) that
is temporally tuned to create localization of free-carrier population and
enhanced absorption of laser energy. Nonlinear interaction between ultrashort
laser pulses and wide-bandgap dielectrics is studied and controlled to enhance
spatial resolution and improve energy-absorption efficiency. The research
generates knowledge of the critical process parameters and relevant nanoscale
physics that enable this new nanofabrication method. Three processing modes -
drilling, cutting, and projection (using an electronically-controlled spatial
light modulator as a customizable photomask) - are explored, and the challenges
unique to each mode are studied. Spatial and temporal electron dynamics, which
play a key role in laser processing of dielectric materials, are investigated by
transient pump-probe microscopy and laser damage threshold measurement. Large-
area patterning of arbitrary nanostructures are demonstrated using a system that
integrates pulse-train processing with mask-projection lithography. This project
enhances the capability of ultrashort-pulsed lasers as a manufacturing tool and
opens up new opportunities for studying laser-matter interactions in the above-
damage-threshold regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.