* 1846157
* CAREER:  Intermetallic Interfacial Thermal Transport for Advanced Electronics Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Scott Schiffres, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Intermetallic-semiconductor interfaces are used widely in electronics and
additive manufacturing. Thermal transport across these interfaces affects heat
dissipation, and a better understanding of these thermal properties is needed to
reduce electronic operating temperatures. Directly manufacturing heat removal
devices onto semiconductor substrates can lead to substantial energy savings and
a reduction in toxic electronic waste. The added reliability due to improved
cooling will be especially valuable in failure-intolerant applications such as
space, defense, and medical devices. This research considers the manufacture of
heat removal layers directly onto electronic devices. The thermal transport in
intermetallic-semiconductor interfaces versus solid-solution alloy-semiconductor
interfaces will be studied. Additional tasks are to improve interfacial
conductance through laser exposures and to determine whether increasing
mechanical interfacial strength increases thermal transport. This project is
integrated with educational activities at the K-12, community college,
undergraduate, and graduate levels. A primary outreach activity, titled "Heat
Transfer Thru Additive Manufacturing", uses hands-on experiments to teach K-12
students, largely from underrepresented groups, about the three modes of heat
transfer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intermetallics form via direct additive
manufacture of high-thermal-conductivity heat-removal devices on semiconductor
substrates, as used in microprocessors and power electronics. However, the
thermal properties of intermetallics are poorly understood and cannot be
predicted from base metal thermal conductivity, unlike solid-solution alloys
with Nordheim?s relation. Recent research indicates that silicides (a type of
intermetallic) have excellent thermal conductance with silicon, but no other
intermetallic-semiconductor interfacial conductances have been reported. This
research investigates the nature of intermetallic-semiconductor interfaces
versus solid-solution alloy-semiconductor thermal interfaces. Furthermore, the
project explores whether defects induced by quenching at 107 ?C/sec can be
relieved by multiple laser exposures that grow the intermetallic grain
boundaries and relieve defects. The relation between interfacial mechanical
properties and interfacial thermal conductance are also examined. Samples are
prepared by selective laser melting of specially designed alloys to form
intermetallics on the semiconductor surface. Thermal characterization is
performed with a frequency-domain thermoreflectance tool. The relationship
between mechanical properties and thermal conductance has only been examined for
a few systems, so this research expands knowledge of different intermetallic-
semiconductor systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.