* 1846563
* CAREER:  Remodeling the egg extracellular matrix at fertilization
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Sara Olson, Pomona College
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2024
* USD 827,962.00

Fertilization represents a major biological challenge, where sperm and egg must
recognize and bind each other to create new life. However, an equally serious
challenge soon awaits. Immediately after fertilization, the new embryo must
rapidly remodel its surface so that additional sperm can no longer bind, and it
must create an impenetrable barrier that will protect the embryo during
development. The goal of this project is to explore protective barrier formation
in the nematode worm, C. elegans, which offers several advantages over other
organisms typically used to study this process (humans, mice, sea urchins). The
work will be conducted entirely by undergraduate and high school students at
Pomona College, a small liberal arts college dedicated to training the next
generation of exceptional scientists. A diverse group of students in the
investigator's research lab, as well as students in an Advanced Cell Biology
course, will use genetic, biochemical, and cell biological approaches to
investigate eggshell assembly in C. elegans. These studies will harness the
power of C. elegans as a model system to explore both widely-conserved and
species-specific strategies that contribute to protective barrier assembly in
nematodes. Common features will lend insight into evolutionarily-conserved
reproductive strategies, while species-specific features could identify new
therapeutic targets to fight parasitic nematode infection of humans, plants, and
animals. Importantly, this award will also create a mentorship pipeline for
students historically underrepresented in science to support their persistence
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Before fertilization, the C. elegans
vitelline layer (analogous to the mammalian zona pellucida, fish chorion, and
sea urchin vitelline layer) forms on the oocyte surface and is comprised of at
least three proteins with an interdependent relationship. CBD-1 functions at the
top of the hierarchy and recruits PERM-2 and PERM-4, who in turn maintain each
other's localization. Interestingly, CBD-1 also organizes a separate protein
complex involved in fertilization and egg activation (the EGG complex). After
fertilization, the PERM complex is remodeled into the outermost eggshell layer,
while the EGG complex is internalized. Little is understood about the mechanism
of vitelline layer remodeling, or how the relationships among vitelline layer
proteins promote these events. In Aim 1 of this project, students will examine
the interdependence of the PERM and EGG structural scaffolds at the oocyte
surface before fertilization by analyzing null mutants and domain variants
generated by CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing. In Aim 2, students will use biochemical
and phenotypic analyses to investigate how PERM-2 and PERM-4 contribute to the
structural and functional changes to the vitelline layer after fertilization. In
Aim 3, they will explore whether similarities exist between nematode and
mammalian vitelline layer structure and assembly. Together, these studies will
provide mechanistic insight into conserved and divergent processes in protective
barrier assembly across distantly-related phyla.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.