* 1846991
* CAREER: Mesoscale Analysis of Dense Granular Flows
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Kerstin Nordstrom, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 615,296.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Granular materials like sands, grains, and
powders are all around us, yet we still cannot predict precisely how they will
flow or jam, unlike normal liquids. Both flow and jamming can create problems -
clogging within a production line can be catastrophic, and flow from a rockslide
can cause a state of emergency. Additionally many other systems are particulate
in nature, such as cars and blood cells, and insights from the study of granular
materials can give us insight into solving problems like traffic and blood
clots. Part of the issue is that granular materials are difficult to image, and
there is interesting physics happening at a wide range of time and length
scales. This project will study the flow and jamming of granular materials with
extremely fast video capture and high-definition resolution. The particles
themselves are made of material that can appear to light up when they experience
force. Thus the research team can not only detect the motion of every particle
in the system, they can also measure the force on each individual particle. The
acquisition and analysis of this data is critical for a more complete
understanding of granular materials. The project is highly integrated with the
broader educational goals of training future scientists and increasing science
literacy in the public. Specifically, the principal investigator will provide
training and mentorship to women undergraduate students involved in the
research, and the project will support the training and mentorship of a
postdoctoral researcher. The principal investigator will facilitate an immersive
pre-college program for underrepresented groups interested in the physical
sciences and engineering. Lastly, the principal investigator will continue to
support and grow a monthly public science lecture series.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective
of this project is to advance the understanding of the dynamics of granular
material flow and jamming with state-of-the-art time and spatial resolution, in
addition to grain-scale force measurements. The long-term goal is to understand
the structural and dynamical signatures at the mesoscale that control the
clogging and flow of granular materials. The research team performs this work in
the context of one particular flow geometry, though the methods are
transferrable to other granular systems. In this system, the flowing state has
been found to be described by the empirical Beverloo equation, but a sound
theoretical footing for this behavior has not been established. Theoretical
models of granular materials often use a continuum approach or a microscale
"bottom-up" approach. However, it has become exceedingly clear that the behavior
of granular materials depends on multiple length scales, and a functional
predictive model must take various mesoscales into account. There has also been
recent interest in the transition from flow to clogging in this system, and
whether it is similar to (or different from) the jamming or glass transitions.
This work will directly probe the nature of the clogging transition, and will
contribute to forming better theoretical models of granular flow. The research
team directly measures the microscopic particle motions, and mesoscale features
such as the force network and rearranging clusters of particles, all with
extremely high time and spatial resolution. The force network is measured by the
use of photoelastic grains. In addition to experiments, the research team
performs complementary molecular dynamics simulations for comparison. The data
is analyzed for mesoscale features such as cooperative rearrangments, shear
transformation zones, and particle segregation, and the initial packing
structure of the system is modified as a control parameter. Network analysis
techniques such as community detection algorithms are used to further analyze
the evolution of the contact and force networks during flow and clogging events.
In tandem, the research team is building a public library of collective motion
metrics and documenting their use in disparate fields, with the goal of spawning
more efficient implementation and cross-disciplinary
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.