* 1846943
* CAREER: The Bryn Mawr Plasma Laboratory---A liberal-Arts Centered Facility for Basic Plasma Research and Plasma Science Education
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* David Schaffner, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 502,035.00

This CAREER award supports establishment of the Bryn Mawr Plasma Laboratory that
has the dual goal of expanding small scale experimental research into the
physics of a turbulent plasma, a gas of electrically charged particles, and
serving as a gateway for increasing the number of women plasma physicists
entering the field. The laboratory has been constructed at Bryn Mawr College,
one of the few remaining women's liberal-arts colleges in the nation. It centers
around a plasma wind-tunnel experiment in which turbulent plasma is generated
and launched down a cylindrical column. Measurements of this plasma will be used
to better understand the characteristics of plasma turbulence and to compare it
to conventional fluid and air turbulence. The project will also benefit our
understanding of plasmas observed in space, such as the solar wind launched by
the sun into the solar system, and will help improve prediction of space weather
here on Earth.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A coaxial plasma gun will be used to
generate a stream of magnetized plasma structures called spheromaks down a
vacuum chamber, which then evolve via turbulent fluctuations toward relaxation
into a Taylor state. High spatial resolution of access ports along the chamber
will allow for many simultaneous direct measurements of fluctuating fields,
flows, plasma density and temperature. Experimental goals include evaluation and
study of the turbulence that is generated as well as establishing this flowing
turbulent plasma as an environment in which to study other phenomena - much like
the flowing air in a conventional wind-tunnel is used to study aerodynamics.
Plans include observations of changes in turbulence in the presence of magnetic
dipoles or insulating obstacles, as well as modifications due to injection of
energetic particles or waves. Within a controllable laboratory setting, the
program seeks to better understand the state of plasma that is observed
throughout the solar system - magnetized, turbulent, and fully three-
dimensional. Comparisons of this system will be made to data from major
spacecraft-based endeavors including the Magnetospheric Multiscale Mission in
orbit within Earth's magnetosphere, and the Parker Solar Probe, examining the
plasma at the origin of the solar wind itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.