* 1846031
* CAREER: Raster Multiview Algebra for Unlabeled Visual Data Exploration
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Hyun Soo Park, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 409,377.00

Cameras of all types continue to proliferate in our environments, continuously
recording our everyday actions and interactions with surrounding objects,
scenes, and other people. This growing capacity to collect visual data has not,
however, been matched by a comparable acceleration in the ability of individuals
being recorded (by themselves or others) to measure, analyze, and predict from
this data as they desire. This project develops a computer vision system that
performs tasks of learning from personal visual data, e.g., dietary monitoring
via a user's wearable cameras. The project will develop a common 3D geometry
representation to encode multiview image streams that can provide an auxiliary
spatial constraint to enable semi-supervised learning. This representation will
enable many computer vision tasks by leveraging a large or potentially infinite
number of unlabeled multiview image streams. The investigator plans to
disseminate this research through multiple educational activities, including:
(a) K-12 students of under-represented groups through a series of workshops in
Summer Technology Camp, Girls' Machine Learning Day Camp, and the Robot Show at
the University Minnesota; (b) public demonstration of the research outcomes
annually at the Minnesota State Fair; (c) undergraduate research involvement
through short course material developments; (d) new curriculum development on
the raster multiview algebra that consolidates multiview geometry and visual
recognition (deep learning); and (e) dissemination of research findings through
tutorial and workshop organization for broader audiences in computer
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates a new raster
representation of multiview geometry that offers a tight integration of 3D
reconstruction with the training of a visual recognition model. This theory will
allow extensive utilization of the unlabeled multiview image streams in two
ways: (1) by actively exploring multiview visual data through 3D reconstruction
in an unsupervised manner, and (2) by geometrically transferring a probabilistic
belief across views for cross-view supervision. The project will generalize this
theory to uncalibrated moving cameras through a novel raster bundle adjustment.
This research program will lay a computational foundation for two major
scientific disciplines: (1) Behavioral science: the raster theory will address
many customized visual tasks to characterize microscopic social signals,
enabling us to overcome the fundamental limitations of existing approaches in
behavioral assessments for at-risk children (such as those with autism spectrum
disorder, which have typically been assessed using a subjective and sporadic
measure); and (2) Neuroscience: the planned research will enable computational
measurement of free-ranging activities of primate
subjects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.