* 1846811
* CAREER: Shallow angle subduction and tectonic underplating of magmatic arc root zones: a recipe for high-flux magmatism?
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Alan Chapman, Macalester College
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 511,548.00

This project evaluates the hypothesis that shallow-angle subduction of material
beneath a continent, and sticking that material to the base of the overriding
plate, can cause a "flare-up" in igneous activity (i.e., more voluminous
volcanic eruptions and subsurface intrusions). This hypothesis predicts that
subduction should shortly precede an uptick in upper plate igneous activity and
that upper plate magmatism should spatially overlap the underplated region. To
test this hypothesis, this research focuses on two sites where subduction-
related rocks underlie volcanic-plutonic materials: the Klamath Mountains
(northern California-southern Oregon) and the central California Coast Ranges.
This work has the potential to transform understanding of the relationships
between shallow-angle subduction and upper plate magmatism. This research
addresses the globally significant question of whether shallow-angle subduction
is a net producer or destroyer of continental crust, which has implications for
how the crust grows (or shrinks) over time. This project: 1) provides a field-
based research experience and instructor-student and peer-student mentoring for
approximately 54 students, increasing the likelihood that these students will
pursue continued study and careers in the STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics) fields; 2) exposes two underrepresented minority undergraduate
researchers and one post-baccalaureate researcher per year to modern analytical
techniques and active researchers across the United States; 3) accelerates the
career development of the principal investigator as a teacher-scholar, building
new and enhancing existing collaborations; 4) produces recruitment and
promotional materials aimed at increasing the visibility of underrepresented
groups in STEM fields; and 5) sustains an active outreach program with
elementary school students of the greater Twin Cities, Minnesota region.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to clarify the processes that control
the long-term stability of continental crust through investigation and mass
balance of system inputs (e.g., tectonic and magmatic underplating) and outputs
(tectonic erosion and delamination). Sites of shallow angle (i.e., a dip of less
than 30 degrees) subduction, representing about 10% of active subduction zones,
are a particular focus of this project, as rapid crustal growth and destruction
characterize these areas. For example, melt-fertile forearc materials are likely
conveyed into arc root zones during the slab shallowing process, providing a
possible catalyst for high-flux magmatism in the overriding plate. With this in
mind, the research objective of this work is to test the hypothesis that
tectonic underplating of forearc materials directly beneath active arcs during
shallow subduction events can trigger episodes of high-flux magmatism prior to
arc shutoff. The scientific merits of this research include: 1) the potential to
transform our understanding of the relationships between shallow subduction,
tectonic underplating, and arc magmatism; 2) constraining the rates of tectonic
erosion and underplating in exhumed shallow subduction systems for comparison
with modern systems; and 3) clarifying the original positions of, and lithologic
correlations within, the central California Coast Ranges and the central Klamath
Mountains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.