* 1846503
* CAREER: Imaging vesicular neurotransmitter dynamics with high-sensitivity stimulated Raman scattering microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Dan Fu, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 06/30/2024
* USD 635,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Dan Fu and his group at the University of Washington -
Seattle are devising new ways of studying neurotransmitters - the small
molecules (such as dopamine and acetylcholine) that play key roles as chemical
messengers between neurons in the brain. Specifically, the Fu group is
developing ultrasensitive imaging tools to probe the storage, release, and
recycling of neurotransmitters. Better understanding of these dynamics is
essential to understanding neuronal function in the brain. Professor Fu's
approach uses powerful imaging techniques that rely on the unique spectra of
neurotransmitters to quantitatively map their distribution in model neurons. The
project aligns well with the BRAIN initiative by providing missing chemical
information on neurotransmission. The ultimate goal is to gain insight into the
roles of various neurotransmitters in modulating brain activities in fundamental
processes such as learning and memory. The Fu group is leveraging their
expertise in spectroscopy and microscopy to develop demonstrations and teaching
laboratory experiments targeting students across all ages, especially
underrepresented minority students in local high schools and community colleges,
with the goal of enhancing their physical science skills and interests for
future careers in science and engineering. These activities are designed to
demystify "blackbox" research spectrometers by using 3D printing and off-the-
shelf consumer products to build cheap spectrometers for classroom use. The
impact of these new instruments and labs will be amplified by online
dissemination to resource-limited colleges and high schools through a dedicated
website and YouTube instructional videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing tools
for studying small molecule neurotransmitters (e.g. amperometry and cyclic
voltammetry) are often limited to detection of extracellular molecules and lack
the capability of quantifying spatially resolved vesicular neurotransmitter
content. Stimulated Raman scattering (SRS) microscopy is an emerging pulsed-
laser chemical imaging technique that efficiently excites intrinsic molecular
vibrations. To enable use of SRS for noninvasive monitoring of the distribution
and dynamics of various neurotransmitters, the Fu group is developing new SRS
imaging techniques based on a combination of ultrafast laser engineering, pulse
shaping, Fourier-transform detection, and new microscopy instrumentation to
improve the sensitivity of SRS microscopy by 50-fold. This improvement will
enable measurement of neurotransmitter content of single vesicles and multiplex
detection of different neurotransmitters in neuronal cells. Following validation
by electrochemical measurements, the approach will provide the first
nonperturbative measurements of neurotransmitter distribution, release
percentage, and recycling time in model neuronal cells. The educational plan of
this CAREER proposal focuses on developing low-cost, modular instruments and
designing science labs to fill unmet needs in (1) educating undergraduate
students on fundamentals of instrument science and technology, and (2) enhancing
academic preparation of underrepresented minority (URM) high school students for
STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.