* 1846855
* CAREER: Towards Forecasting Watershed Organic Carbon Fluxes across Flow Regimes and Ecoregions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Jay Zarnetske, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 470,000.00

When water flows through ecosystems it picks up dissolved organic carbon (DOC)
from plants and soils. As a result, water can control whether an ecosystem
releases carbon (a carbon source) or stores carbon (a carbon sink).
Consequently, the movement of water plays a key role in global carbon cycling,
but DOC is also an important control on water quality across the globe.
Understanding how water affects the production and movement of DOC can improve
society's ability to provide water for industrial, agricultural, and domestic
uses. How and when DOC moves through different types of rivers and ecosystems,
especially during floods, is a major knowledge gap in carbon cycling and water
quality research. This project will conduct analyses of river DOC dynamics from
geographically diverse areas. The project will examine movement of DOC into and
out of watersheds and evaluate if DOC dynamics can be estimated from local to
continental regions using river flow and watershed properties. This DOC research
is combined with an innovative education plan that will improve the translation
of hydrological sciences to public audiences via undergraduate curriculum
development and student-led scientific outreach. These advances will focus on
training students to be effective science communicators and outreach
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Given the global importance of riverine
dissolved organic carbon (DOC), and uncertainty in the light of climate and land
use change, the main objectives of this proposal are to test assumptions of
watershed DOC flux behavior and to develop new ways to quantify and forecast DOC
flux across understudied flow regimes and ecoregions. These objectives will be
addressed through multiple approaches, including data synthesis, modeling, and
new sensor technologies that will identify the key watershed and climate
conditions controlling DOC flux across diverse landscapes. The project
integrates these research objectives and general hydrologic science issues with
a long-term education plan to establish innovative curriculum development and
methods for creating effective outreach materials for multiple public
stakeholder groups, including K-12, life-learners, and policy makers. The new
curriculum employs novel human-centered design theory and partnerships with five
expert outreach institutions to create meaningful experiential learning
opportunities that are underrepresented in most science curricula. Through this
project, the PI and the associated students will be integrated with the NSF-
supported Kellogg Biological Station and Arctic Long-term Ecological Research
(LTER) site research communities and a broader impact network of five community-
serving outreach institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.