* 1846764
* CAREER: The Dynamics of Contextual Sensitivity in Multi-alternative Choice
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Jennifer Trueblood, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 12/31/2022
* USD 505,913.00

Making choices among multiple options with different features is a critical part
of everyday life, ranging from simple decisions such as choosing today's lunch,
to complex decisions such as selecting a retirement portfolio. Importantly, it
is well known that context (such as the presence of irrelevant options) can
influence these types of decisions. This can have good or bad consequences. For
example, a store's design can influence what products we buy, or how much we
spend. This project uses experiments and cognitive modeling to understand how
our choices are influenced by context. This knowledge can lead to strategies to
improve decision-making (for example, avoiding the traps of advertisers). This
project also promotes STEM education through the development of new materials to
teach decision science and cognitive modeling to middle and high school
students. In addition, the project supports increasing diversity in the
quantitative social sciences through the promotion of gender
equality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to advance
theoretical understanding of how context influences multi-alternative, multi-
attribute decision-making. This will be accomplished through a joint
experimental and computational modeling approach where new experiments provide
rich data sets for theory development. Empirically, the proposal will examine a
wide range of different types of choice problems across both value-based and
perceptual domains. These datasets will (1) provide valuable new knowledge about
the general nature of contextual sensitivity and (2) serve as benchmarks for
theory testing and development. To date, there are at least a dozen different
computational models of context effects in decision-making. The project will
first evaluate and compare these theories. The most promising models will be
developed further to build more complete theories of contextual sensitivity in
multi-alternative choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.