* 1846091
* CAREER:  Resource Aware Adaptability of Wireless Sensor Network Links in Variable Energy Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Steven Bowers, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 01/31/2024
* USD 524,000.00

Efficient wireless communication between energy harvesting sensor nodes can
enable greater efficiency and productivity in emergency services, agriculture,
smart cities, and defense applications, to name a few. Enabling this heightened
level of sensing has the potential to revolutionize greater understanding of the
surrounding environment and the ability to further optimize efficient operation
of homes and businesses. It will also provide early detection of potentially
hazardous situations and enable better quality of life for an aging population.
As the number and density of connected devices have increased, electromagnetic
spectrum at widely used frequency bands of 5 GHz and below has become
increasingly crowded and congested. At the same time, reducing the power
consumption and physical size of each individual sensor node is important to
keep the network hardware unobtrusive and more easily deployable. This project
seeks to bridge the power and size gap by enabling resource-aware wireless
communication network with energy harvesting sensor nodes where available energy
can have immense variation and utilize higher frequency spectrum at 24 GHz. The
reconfigurable transceivers of network sensor nodes will be capable of
maintaining critical services when available power is scarce while taking
advantage of higher power levels when power is abundant, with automatically
adaptable roles within the greater network based upon how that available power
is distributed. This project also includes several educational activities such
as STEM workshops for K-12 students, research experiences for undergraduates,
and course development. An entrepreneurial seminar and site visit series with
local startup companies will provide real examples for undergraduate and
graduate students to learn how to transform laboratory ideas to real-world
applications while benefiting their local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will investigate fundamental challenges at several layers in the
hardware hierarchy of wireless sensor network. These will range from link and
network considerations, such as adapting the link requirements based on node- or
network-level power availability, down to reconfigurable transceiver blocks that
enable higher level functionality in physical layer. These transceiver blocks
include multi-mode receivers that can dynamically trade off power for data rate
or sensitivity in real time as well as transmitters that are highly efficient
even at significant back-off power levels. Additionally, the project will push
ultra-low power wireless operation to higher frequencies in K-band (e.g., 24
GHz), which alleviates the issue of limited spectrum at lower frequencies, while
also allowing for drastically reduced antenna size with the same efficiency. The
project will also advance the co-design between the radio electronics and the
electromagnetics including impedance matching networks and antennas engineered
for low-power, high-frequency, high-impedance conditions. The fundamental
studies and underlying design principles developed in this project will be
demonstrated with proof-of-concept wireless sensor nodes. This project will also
advance the implementation of dynamically asymmetric links and role selection in
a mesh network of symmetric wireless sensor nodes to optimize the network
functionality based on available power. The research has important impacts
because it will bring together traditionally siloed design spaces, and leverage
fundamental research within RF, ultra-low power circuits, and antenna design to
address critical bottlenecks in deployment of future wireless sensor
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.