* 1846424
* CAREER: Design and Synthesis of Energy-efficient Time-domain Computing for Intelligent Edge Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Jie Gu, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 566,880.00

The rapid growth in Internet-of-Things (IoT) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) is
creating a huge demand for intelligent electronic devices with very low cost and
high energy efficiency. Conventional digital technology is faced with computing
bottleneck due to the difficulty of further technology scaling. As a result, new
computing methods are urgently needed to meet the demand from the machine
learning empowered applications. This project explores a non-conventional time-
domain computing technique with promise of bringing fundamental improvement to
the energy efficiency of computing. The project can potentially bring
significant advancement to the IoT/AI developments by enabling expensive machine
learning operations in small IoT devices or sensor nodes. This project will also
create significant outreach activities to the society by disseminating the study
of energy efficient edge processing to K-12 students and underrepresented groups
through a combination of workshops and training programs. New course materials
and hand-on experiments will be introduced to undergraduate and graduate
students to promote a cross-layer learning strategy from algorithm to hardware
design for computer engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims at
developing a systematic design approach for the emerging time-domain computing
which utilizes time for information processing. The proposed developments cover
a range of techniques including circuit design, electronic design automation,
implementation of machine learning algorithms and integration for near-sensor
computing. Specifically, the project will be dedicated to: (1) developing a
thorough design principles of the time-domain computing, (2) developing a design
automation methodology that is compatible with modern commercial tools and
capable of large-scale implementation of the techniques, (3) exploring its
strong benefits in machine learning and other popular computing algorithms, and
(4) performing system integration with sensor nodes for intelligent edge
processing devices. The project will deliver a highly automated systematic
design methodology enabling large-scale integration and enhanced energy-
efficiency for new time-domain computing techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.