* 1846109
* CAREER: Interplay of Symmetry and Topology in Condensed Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Meng Cheng, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education in novel quantum phases of matter. Interacting many-
electron systems, such as those found in a great variety of materials, are
distinguished in that they exhibit emergent behaviors and properties that do not
manifest in systems comprised of only few particles. The resulting rich variety
of phases of matter with wildly different physical properties, e.g. conducting
vs. insulating, many forms of magnetism, etc., underlie important technological
applications of solid-state materials. An organizing principle that has proven
extremely successful for describing conventional phases of matter is based on
the notion of symmetry. However, exotic phases of matter have been discovered
recently that transcend conventional wisdom and which are enabled by quantum-
mechanical effects and strong interactions. Examples include the fractional
quantum Hall effect that occurs when electrons are confined in a plane in an
external magnetic field, and liquid-like states of magnetic moments in magnetic
materials. These new phases of matter have remarkably rich and ordered, in a
sense, internal structure, which is termed "topological
order".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance the theoretical
understanding of topologically ordered phases. The PI will investigate how the
interplay between symmetry and topological order gives rise to new quantum
phenomena, by developing a theoretical framework to systematically study
topological phenomena in the presence of symmetries and to characterize new
quantum phases of matter enriched by symmetries. With these insights the PI will
also explore new ways to probe topological order in
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will achieve broad impact beyond
the condensed matter community, as the research touches on problems that are of
fundamental interest in related fields, such as high-energy physics and
mathematics. Beyond research, the project will seek to enrich physics education
in local communities with coordinated outreach activities. Through integration
with the Pathways to Science program at Yale, the outreach activities supported
by this project will provide opportunities to middle- and high-school students
from underrepresented groups in physics and STEM-related fields, as well as to
the general public, aiming to elucidate the physics underlying this research,
and more broadly to promote awareness of cutting-edge research on quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
towards advancing fundamental understanding of quantum phases of matter in
interacting many-body systems. In recent times, a synthesis between symmetry and
topological order has brought new insights into the subject, unifying several
important threads in the study of quantum matter. This research focuses on
identifying the multifaceted roles of symmetries in exotic topological phases of
matter and on characterizing universal quantum phenomena in these systems. The
PI will use analytical methods supplemented by numerical simulations to tackle
these problems. Specifically, this project has the following
objectives:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Developing a theoretical framework for
symmetry-enriched topological phases in fermionic systems. This includes a
general classification of symmetry transformations on emergent excitations and
potentially new quantum anomalies. Along the way, the PI will also investigate
intrinsically interacting fermionic symmetry-protected topological phases in
three dimensions, and will develop theoretical machinery to understand global
phase diagrams around symmetric topological phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2)
Developing a physical classification of gapped quantum field theories in three
spatial dimensions, and characterizing quantum statistics of loop excitations.
Another important aspect of this investigation is to advance new understanding
of fracton topological phases by unraveling their deep connections to
translation-symmetry-enriched topological order, with potential applications to
spin liquid materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Investigating novel experimental
probes of topological phases using dynamical measurements, building on the
theoretical insights gained in this project. The PI plans to explore
experimental signatures of symmetry fractionalization in dynamical and local
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will achieve broad impact beyond
the condensed matter community, as the research touches on problems that are of
fundamental interest in related fields, such as high-energy physics and
mathematics. Beyond research, the project will seek to enrich physics education
in local communities with coordinated outreach activities. Through integration
with the Pathways to Science program at Yale, the outreach activities supported
by this project will provide opportunities to middle- and high-school students
from underrepresented groups in physics and STEM-related fields, as well as to
the general public, aiming to elucidate the physics underlying this research,
and more broadly to promote awareness of cutting-edge research on quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.