* 1846524
* CAREER: High-Assurance Design of Learning-Enabled Cyber-Physical Systems with Deep Contracts
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Pierluigi Nuzzo, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 509,302.00

Next-generation cyber-physical systems (CPS) will increasingly rely on machine
learning algorithms for situational awareness and decision-making, with the
promise of enhancing human capabilities. Examples range from autonomous vehicles
and robots to computer-controlled factory lines and wearable medical devices.
However, learning-enabled systems have shown to be very sensitive to training
data and have difficulty in ensuring functional safety and robustness. The
undesired outcomes of recent deployments, such as the accidents involving semi-
autonomous vehicles, raise questions about the design principles needed to build
learning-enabled systems that are safe. This project aims to develop the
foundations of a novel methodology for the design and verification of learning-
enabled CPS. It will pursue a compositional framework and computational tools
that can reason about the uncertainty and approximation introduced by learning
components and enable system design via a hierarchical and modular approach. The
proposed research can have a highly positive influence on the design and real-
world deployment of safe and cost-effective autonomous systems for a variety of
applications, including autonomous driving, robotics, and industrial automation.
Moreover, it has the potential to offer a unifying framework for reasoning about
a number of robust and fault-tolerant design approaches that are currently based
mostly on ad hoc solutions. Collaborations with industry partners will be
pursued to facilitate transitioning the research findings into practice. An
educational plan including new undergraduate and graduate courses and a program
for pre-college students will complement the research effort, aiming to educate
the next generation of engineers and researchers on the concepts and the
multidisciplinary attitude needed to realize "intelligent" systems that are
safe, technologically and economically feasible, and seamlessly interacting with
people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a compositional framework for
reasoning about the probabilistic behaviors of CPS built out of unreliable
components. The framework relies on stochastic models of the interfaces between
the components and their environments, termed deep contracts, together with
rigorous rules for composing and refining them. Rich, quantitative, logic-based
stochastic specification formalisms and data-driven modeling techniques will be
leveraged to express and propagate computationally tractable representations of
uncertainty at different abstraction levels. The framework will be vertically-
integrated and offer mapping mechanisms to bridge heterogeneous models and
heterogeneous decomposition architectures in the design hierarchy. It will
provide computational tools to efficiently solve verification and synthesis
problems with stochastic contracts. Finally, it will offer mechanisms to monitor
requirements throughout the entire system life-cycle and provide assurance both
at design time and runtime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.