* 1846940
* CAREER: A Hybrid Physics-Based/Data-Driven Modeling and Mitigation Approach for Interdependencies Between the Electric Power, ICT, and Transportation Critical Infrastructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Ahmed Mohamed, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Improving the protection and resilience of critical infrastructures (CIs)
against natural disasters and manmade threats is an imperative short-term goal.
Three highly interdependent CIs are the focus of this research: electric power
systems, information and communication technologies (ICT), and electricity-
based vehicles/transportation (e-transportation). Network modeling of failure
modes and propagation is needed by managers to devise strategies that mitigate
the impact of failures across interdependent CIs. Although much progress has
been made in network modeling of CIs to date, these efforts fail to capture the
complexity of CIs, are based on inadequate or inaccurate assumptions, neglect
interdependencies, and are mostly empirical and statistically driven rather than
based on principles of physics. The objective of this research is to improve
failure and resilience modeling of interdependent CIs. This work will then be
expanded using reinforcement learning to aid in decision-making. The outcome
will be a framework to account for CI interdependencies that are critical for
failure and disaster planning and recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit. The influence graph-based model and reinforcement learning-based
interdependency mitigation framework eloquently address a key problem that has
long challenged city/infrastructure planners and operators: how to model,
forecast, and prevent cascaded failures that propagate through multiple critical
infrastructures. Current approaches lack accuracy and the ability to handle
complexities and interdependencies. This work applies detailed physics-based
bottom-up modeling coupled with the innovative application of reinforcement
learning to provide a transformative advancement to the field, resulting in a
much more flexible and accurate analysis methodology for use in CI design,
management, disaster planning, and recovery.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; Broader
Impact. This project will positively impact society by reducing the operational
cost of infrastructures, decreasing the likelihood and impact of blackouts, and
improving cities' responses to major disturbances. The educational components
will benefit hundreds of students from CUNY and neighboring high schools that
enroll significant numbers of students who are underrepresented in STEM fields.
This will increase the number of highly trained engineers and scientists with
multidisciplinary backgrounds who will have a major role in defining the future
of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.