* 1846900
* CAREER: Degron-based substrates:  A novel toolkit for biosensing and targeted inhibition
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Adam Melvin, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2024
* USD 526,325.00

Control of protein degradation is required for healthy cellular function. Loss
of control can lead to cancer and neurodegenerative diseases. One central
control system for protein degradation is referred to as UPS (ubiquitin-
proteasome system). The activity of the UPS is highly variable across individual
cells in a population. It is important therefore to be able to measure activity
on a single cell basis. This project will develop fluorescent sensors to measure
the UPS activity of individual cells. These sensors could enhance efforts to
develop new drugs and optimal treatment strategies on a patient by patient
basis. Hands-on learning modules will also be developed and presented to middle
school students in the Baton Rouge area. Undergraduates and high school students
will also be recruited to participate in extended research experiences in an
effort to develop and populate a robust biomanufacturing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) governs
DNA repair and protein degradation. Its specificity is governed by E3 ubiquitin
ligases, which recognize select degradation sequences, or degrons, on target
proteins. Unfortunately, our understanding of E3 ligase and proteasome activity
is incomplete. This translates into an inability to obtain a complete picture of
proteasome activity across a population of cells. The UPS could be harnessed to
inhibit proteins by directing them to the proteasome for degradation using
proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs). While effective, current PROTACs
suffer from reduced potency due to low cell permeability and high protease
susceptibility. Thus, there is a need for long-lived, cell permeable peptides to
be incorporated into the next generation of PROTACs. Our overarching hypothesis
is that degron-based substrates can be utilized as (1) a next generation method
to directly quantify proteasome activity and (2) a novel PROTAC with increased
lifetime and sensitivity. The proposed work will evaluate peptides containing a
&amp;#946;-hairpin motif as a new approach for quantifying proteasome activity
in intact cells and degrading difficult to inhibit targets. We will also
investigate the use of highly stable, non-natural amino acid sequences as a new
class of degron-based substrates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.