* 1846884
* CAREER: A Computational Hyperspectral Fluorescence Lifetime Camera
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Andreas Velten, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project develops a computational imaging system for the selective capture
of fluorescence images. Fluorescence is exhibited by many compounds and
materials and provides information about the objects' molecular makeup and
microstructure. While not usually directly visible to the eye, it can be made
visible using controlled illumination and optical filters. The fast response of
fluorescence to illumination is visible only to special ultrafast cameras.
Interpretation of these signals significantly enhances conventional imaging
capabilities, for example to distinguish between healthy and cancerous tissue,
detect blood and other bodily fluids, assess plant health, match gunshot residue
to a gun and gunpowder manufacturer, identify the paints used in paintings, and
classify minerals. However, capturing the fluorescence spectra for all different
possible illumination wavelengths along with their fast temporal behavior for
each pixel in an image would lead to a high dimensional dataset involving
immense amounts of data and is therefore impractical. To enable the use of
fluorescence, this project therefore will design a flexible computational
imaging system that is able to selectively and adaptively capture individual
pieces of the multidimensional fluorescence
signal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merit The high resolution
information available in the optical light field along&lt;br/&gt;multiple
dimensions presents a fundamental challenge to all imaging systems. The amount
of&lt;br/&gt;data available for sampling far exceeds the collection, processing
and storage capacities of even&lt;br/&gt;the most advanced computing equipment.
Capturing it ultimately is limited not only by technical capabilities, but also
by the total number of photons available to the imaging system. It is reasonable
that the answer to this problem is to design imaging systems that analyze light
specific to an imaging task. Imaging systems are designed where a joint
optimization is performed over computational feature space and available
hardware components to perform selective
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts This project will
educate laymen and students about the prevalence of fluorescence, fluorescence
lifetime and other "hidden" spectral phenomena in everyday scenes. We will also
provide an important step in the direction of application specific, high
dimensional selective imaging systems. This will result in smaller and more
practical computational imaging and compressive sensing
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.