* 1846740
* CAREER: Reconfigurable Electro-Fluidic Prescriptions (REFRx): Data-Driven Biosensors for Detection and Treatment of Multidrug-Resistant Cancers
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Mehdi Javanmard, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This proposal is to develop an instrument that can rapidly identify drug
resistant cancer cells in tumors and prescribe a course of treatment for the
patient that minimizes chance of cancer recurrence. Drug resistance is one of
the greatest impediments to treating both cancer and infectious disease and has
been identified as one of the greatest public health threats of the next several
decades. The proposed miniaturized instrument can be utilized for rapidly
screening cancer patients for drug resistance and identifying the key molecular
players involved and selecting optimal cancer treatment drugs. In this work, a
microfluidics/electronic/data-driven crosscut approach is proposed to enable a
rapid technology that can identify drug resistant cells using machine learning
and examine the key protein pathways resulting in resistance using a label-free
sensing array. The proposed platform is adaptive and reconfigures itself to
assay the relevant proteins on-demand and avoids a resource-hungry brute force
approach. This interdisciplinary project will engage and train both graduate and
undergraduate students in various areas. The PI will also engage K-12 students
through outreach workshops, local industry through educational lectures, and the
general public through development of an online course, resulting in broad
dissemination of knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new class of data-driven
biosensors will be developed that can adapt themselves on-demand to detect and
treat multidrug resistant cancers. Treatment of multi-drug resistance in cancer
is difficult using static analysis platforms because of the rapid ability of
tumor sub-clones to mutate and become insusceptible to a chemotherapeutic drug,
thus an adaptive approach can be more efficient. An all-electronic platform will
be developed for rapidly sorting drug resistant cells and adaptively analyzing
the molecular pathways involved in resistance using a reconfigurable array of
sensors. The analyzer will iteratively detect drug resistant cells using
reconfigurable impedance cytometry in conjunction with machine learning, then
sort them using dielectrophoresis (DEP), analyze them using a reconfigurable
array of label-free protein sensors, and then use a machine learning classifier
to further sub-type the drug resistant cells to select a drug combination to
test in the subsequent iteration. An integrated closed-loop feedback system will
be fabricated and characterized for sorting drug-sensitive and drug-resistant
cells, and analyze differential expression of potential drug-resistance pathways
iteratively against key drug candidates. The result of this research will be a
new class of data-driven biosensors that can detect and sub-type drug resistant
cancer cells from a breast tumor tissue that can be broadly applied to a
multitude of biomedical applications including anti-microbial
resistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.