* 1846069
* CAREER: Household Network Modeling and Empathic Learning for Integrating Social Equality into Infrastructure Resilience Assessment
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Ali Mostafavi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 01/31/2024
* USD 570,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project seeks to
understand the interaction between households and infrastructure networks in
disasters with the goal to break new ground on integrating social inequality
considerations into infrastructure resilience research and education. The
research will examine household network dynamics influencing disparities in
risks among vulnerable populations (e.g., older adults and low income families)
due to infrastructure service disruptions. The education objective is to
integrate empathy and human-centric considerations with technical concepts in
training next-generation practitioners and researchers of resilient
infrastructure. This scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare.
In this case, the anticipated outcomes will yield transformative ideas to
enhance how infrastructure systems can best be produced and managed to promote
socially just and resilient services for different subpopulations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves an integrative research, education,
and outreach plan. The research component of this project will: (1) empirically
characterize the influence of household-level socio-demographic characteristics,
expectations, norms, and other factors on service gaps and adjustment practices
when infrastructure disruptions occur; (2) model and analyze household social
networks at the neighborhood scale to determine the effects of social network
structure and stability on the diffusion of information and adjustment practices
through social media; and (3) analyze the interplay between infrastructure
networks and household social networks to examine the spatial patterns of risk
disparity among different sub-populations at the urban scale. The research
approach involves methodological fusion among household surveys, fine-grained
social media data analytics, and computational agent-based modeling to extract,
characterize, simulate, and examine household networks. The research approach
will be tested in the context of Hurricane Harvey in Houston with a focus on
electricity, water, and road disruptions. The education component of this
project will create and test an empathic learning model consisting of multiple
human-centric course modules, interdisciplinary service-learning projects, and
seminars to promote empathy and critical thinking skills in participating
students. The outreach activities and service learning projects will focus on
underserved neighborhoods in Houston and will involve deep community engagement
with stakeholders and residents to broadly disseminate findings. These
integrative research, education, and outreach elements will promote convergence
research for integrating social equality with infrastructure resilience and
better incorporate the needs of vulnerable populations in planning and
prioritization of infrastructure services. The project will also lead to
capacity building for underserved communities, as well as resilience-aware and
empathic engineers of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.