* 1846300
* CAREER: Statistical Inference Under Information Constraints: Efficient Algorithms and Fundamental Limits
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Jayadev Acharya, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 01/31/2024
* USD 552,654.00

Data science and machine learning systems have to optimize constraints on the
availability of data, computation time, memory for storage, and privacy
concerns. For example, while performing web search on mobile devices, one would
like the applications to be small in size, communicate as little data as
possible, and leak as little about the user as possible. These constraints are
often at odds with each other. A system that provides strong privacy guarantees
might require more data and computation, and a system that uses little data
might require more computation. A fundamental understanding of the limits and
trade-offs between constrained resources such as samples, time, memory,
communication, and privacy is critical for tackling the many challenges in data
science that lay ahead. In spite of many success stories of data science, these
trade-offs are poorly understood even in some of the simplest settings. This
project aims to establish the fundamental trade-offs between these resources, as
well as design efficient schemes that achieve them. The project outcomes can
help design faster, communication-frugal, privacy-preserving, and space-
efficient learning systems. The project seeks to involve the participation of a
diverse group of researchers in this project through outreach activities that
target undergraduate students and under-represented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will formulate and study
fundamental statistical inference tasks such as distribution estimation,
hypothesis testing, and distribution property estimation under the information
constraints mentioned above. A particular direction of interest is the impact of
the availability of shared randomness on the other constraints for distributed
machine learning systems. While the role of randomness has been studied in
problems in communication complexity, its role in machine learning systems is
often overlooked. The project will integrate ideas from computer science,
information theory, machine learning, and statistics, seeking to bridge
researchers from these communities. All findings of this project will be
disseminated through publications, and will be made publicly available on the
investigator's website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.