* 1846005
* CAREER:  Leveraging polycyclic tetramate macrolactam biosynthesis as a model for understanding actinobacterial metabolic silencing
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Joshua Blodgett, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 01/31/2024
* USD 975,470.00

Actinomycete bacteria produce a majority of our current antibiotics. Their
genomes may harbor many more novel antibiotics. However, harnessing the full
biosynthetic capacity of these microorganisms for drug and agrichemical
discovery is challenging. This is because the majority of their biosynthetic
gene clusters lack detectable products in the laboratory. This phenomenon, where
predicted metabolic pathways fail to yield expected products, is termed
biosynthetic silence. Representing one of the greatest biotechnological
challenges to bioactive molecule discovery, biosynthetic silencing effectively
hides much-needed new molecules from product development. This NSF CAREER
project is designed to reveal the biological underpinnings of biosynthetic
silence. Doing this will reveal new models of metabolic regulation that will be
useful for activating silent genes and isolating their products for human gain.
Importantly, this project demands a multidisciplinary approach and creates
immersive scientific education opportunities at the high school, undergraduate
and graduate school levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using polycyclic tetramate
macrolactam (PTM) biosynthetic clusters as a model, this proposal probes the
mechanisms responsible for biosynthetic cluster silencing in filamentous
actinobacteria. PTM molecules have therapeutically interesting activities and
their biosynthetic loci are well- conserved among these organisms. This
commonality enables comparative metabologenomics across actinomycete families.
Systematic assessment of PTM production within the Streptomyces griseus clade by
the PI's group suggests silencing is determined by two interacting mechanisms:
transcriptional regulation and metabolic control. Lessons learned from
characterizing these mechanisms will be extended to actinobacteria outside of
the S. griseus group towards understanding the evolution and induction of
secondary metabolic regulation. Together, this work represents the first
systematic application of comparative metabologenomics to reveal specific
molecular-genetic and metabolic causes of biosynthetic silencing. Mechanistic
understanding will likely reveal new strategies for therapeutic and agrichemical
discovery via synthetic biology, fundamental for development of enhanced
producing strains and more robust microbial functional genomic
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.