* 1846271
* CAREER: Understanding calcium communication in neurons with nanomagnetic forces and engineered network patterns
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Anja Kunze, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 05/31/2024
* USD 539,067.00

Calcium ions are essential signals to regulate communication and function in
cells, which are the basic biological units of living systems. Within the
central nervous system, physiological levels of calcium play an important role
in neural activity and in transporting signals across neuronal networks. In
contrast, highly elevated levels of calcium ions are associated with
dysfunctional communication and can lead to the degeneration of the neuronal
network. Recently, it has been demonstrated that magnetic nanoparticles can be
used to mechanically open calcium channels allowing calcium ions to enter
neurons through the cell membrane. How this intentional, force-mediated influx
of calcium ions interacts with structures inside neurons and how it spreads
within a neuronal network is highly important for understanding force-mediated
brain cell communication and degenerative diseases. This award will fund a
research program that links nanomaterials to neurobiological systems and aims to
capture and to quantify calcium signal transport in experimentally grown,
controlled neuronal networks. Both graduate and undergraduate students involved
in the project will benefit from an enhanced research infrastructure combining
nanotools and neuroengineering. These nanotools will also become available to a
broader research community interested in analyzing changes in communication
patterns during degeneration or stem cell development. Finally, the project will
involve the creation of an interdisciplinary bio micro-electro-mechanical system
(BioMEMS) course to advance the STEM workforce in Montana, and science
communication summer workshops for students specifically interested in
transforming engineering data into visual arts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stimulation through nanomagnetic forces is a tool that
operates magnetic nanoparticles within magnetic fields to impose a mechanical
force on associated objects. Within a biological context, this project considers
brain cells that express mechanically sensitive ion channels and receptors as
the target for nanomagnetic stimulation. Applying nanomagnetic forces to the
membrane of neural networks in vitro has been shown to trigger an influx of
calcium ions, recently. How the force stimulation relates to other
neurophysiological events, however, remains unknown. In particular, the
integration of subcellular biomechanics with innovative neuronal cell screening
platforms has not been used in combination with nanomagnetic force stimulation,
previously. This knowledge gap currently limits the broader experimental
applicability of nanomagnetic stimulation. Hence, this project addresses current
limitations of nanomagnetic force stimulation by unraveling how neuron-to-neuron
communication is impacted by force-mediated intracellular changes in calcium
signaling. The proposed work will systematically analyze how fast this force-
mediated calcium influx in neuronal networks occurs, and how the architecture of
a neuronal network impacts the spatial transport of evoked signals. Calcium
fluorometry will be employed in combination with electrophysiology to assess the
spatiotemporal aspects of subcellular calcium stimulation in rodent primary
neurons. Furthermore, this project develops highly parallelized arrays of cell
nano-manipulation and assessment tools with low-resolution live-cell calcium
imaging to map calcium signal propagation across neuronal cultures. Research
results from this proposal will pave the way to future use of mechanical
stimulation as a precise neurophysiological tool. Based on this knowledge, the
project will develop design guidelines for future neuro-therapeutics using
magnetic nanoparticle-mediated force stimulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.