* 1846350
* CAREER: Gradual Verification: From Scripting to Proving
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* David Van Horn, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 01/31/2024
* USD 451,703.00

This project contributes theories, tools, and a pedagogical framework to close
the gap between programming languages widely used in everyday programming tasks
and the few verification-integrated languages that offer strong correctness
guarantees. Inspired by two significant trends in programming language research,
namely gradual types and theorem proving languages, this work synthesizes
aspects of both to enable pathways to verified programming at every point along
the spectrum from scripting languages to verification-integrated languages. The
investigators develop a foundational theory of gradual verification, design and
implement a general purpose language with integrated gradual verification, and
devise pedagogical approaches to teaching verification to novice programmers. By
making verification easier to use in a gradual way, developers will be more
likely to make use of these techniques, bringing the known benefits of
verification to more programmers. This project develops methods to teach gradual
verification to beginner programmers and evaluates them in the new introductory
programming sequence at University of Maryland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research supports software development practices that integrate verification at
each step and removes impediments to fortified programming. At the core of the
technical approach is gradual verification, a technique that leverages run-time
enforcement mechanisms and systematically turns these mechanisms in to static
verification methods via abstract interpretation techniques. Moreover, due to
the basis in run-time enforcement, verification becomes a spectrum rather than a
binary, since properties that fail to statically validate can be enforced at
run-time. This approach enables programs to evolve over time along a less- to
more-verified gradient and opens up the possibility for a number of useful
programming tools that are reinforcing, productive, and
universal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.