* 1846752
* CAREER: Harnessing viscous streaming in complex active systems: mini-bots in fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Mattia Gazzola, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Artificial and bio-hybrid (partly synthetic, partly biological) miniaturized
swimming robots to navigate through the blood stream and deliver drugs have
great potential in biomedicine. Viscous streaming is a phenomenon where an
oscillating body generates stable, predictable and robust fluid flows that can
be used to manipulate the body's local surroundings. Viscous streaming is being
proposed for transport, mixing, and particle assembly, and it may be suitable
for transport of mini-bots intended for applications in biomedicine. One
limitation is that while streaming phenomena are well understood for simple
bodies, little is known in the case of complex geometries. This proposal
combines modeling and experiments to tackle the knowledge gap that relates
viscous streaming to body shape. This knowledge will connect biology and
robotics to enhance current capabilities of mini-bots and enables new ones. This
research will pave the way to transformative applications such as localized drug
delivery, precision manipulation, and fabrication. This is in line with the
national need to increase medicine effectiveness as well as competitiveness in
manufacturing via advanced computational methods. The proposed research has
broad educational impact at the cross-section of fluid mechanics, simulations,
robotics, and bioengineering. A set of outreach activities and intuitive
learning modules will be designed to spark interest in fluid mechanics and
engineering. A broad and diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students
from different disciplines will be engaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed
research delineates a roadmap to understand streaming beyond classic cases. The
role of curvature, an aspect largely neglected, is dissected from a
mathematical, dynamical and physical perspective via a conceptual framework that
combines simulations, method of successive approximations, bifurcation and flow
topology analysis, experiments. Then, (1) simple 2D and 3D shapes will be
considered to investigate the effect of symmetry breaking, corners and variable
curvature with respect to classical solutions; (2) most representative cases
will be experimentally verified; (3) insights will be exploited in untethered
synthetic and bio-hybrid mini-bots targeting biomedical applications. The
outcome is a set of design principles captured by scaling relations, phase
diagrams, and proof-of-concept demonstrations. This is complemented by methods,
algorithms, software and data made publicly available to lower barrier entries,
thus broadening the scope of this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.