* 1846575
* CAREER:Foundational Questions in the Theory of Incentives
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Matthew Jackson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 231,654.00

This CAREER award funds research in mechanism design and contract theory, the
economic theory of the effects of incentives. Current core mathematical models
are well-understood for simple environments but difficult to extend to more
complicated environments. This project will develop new basic modeling tools,
with the aim of broadening the scope of the theory. The tools will allow
researchers to better design incentive schemes for complex environments,
including incentive schemes that guarantee performance despite uncertainties
about the economic environment. The integrated education plan includes an
interdisciplinary conference to connect theorists in mechanism design with
experts in potential application areas; and outreach activities with high school
students and educators interested in advanced mathematical problem solving to
build awareness of this fruitful area of study. This research promotes the
national interest because it will guide the design of better incentive
mechanisms. Existing theory in this area has historically had many applications,
including taxation, regulation, procurement, and corporate finance. New theory
will allow further improvements and better efficiency in these and other areas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall project has three main components. (1)
Multidimensional mechanism design. Major workhorse models typically assume
agents' preferences are summarized by a one-dimensional parameter; extending
these models to multiple dimensions is widely viewed as challenging, yet
important. This research will adapt a new modeling approach, based on
uncertainty about the correlation across dimensions of preference, to study
several questions concerning when and why simple mechanisms can deliver good
guarantees. (2) Mechanism design when agents' information is endogenous. In many
situations, agents can take costly actions to either acquire relevant
information or influence others' information before an economic interaction, and
a planner designing the interaction may be concerned that this gaming is
socially wasteful. This project characterizes mechanisms that give robust
guarantees when such "information games" are considered. (3) Design of
incentives in situations of moral hazard, when it is unknown exactly what
actions agents can take. This project considers several theoretical questions on
this theme, focusing on understanding when simple incentive structures can be
optimally robust in complex situations. The research plan also includes some
related directions of study, including approximation of complex environments by
simple ones, and optimal experimentation by incentive
designers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.