* 1846152
* CAREER: A Generalized Quantitative Imaging Approach for Small Molecules using Genetically Engineered RNA Sensors
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Mingxu You, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,001.00

With support from the Biosensing Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems Division, and partial co-funding from the
Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr.
Mingxu You and his research team at the University of Massachusetts Amherst are
streamlining a generalized approach for imaging small molecules in living cells.
Revolutionary fluorescent biosensing probes have been engineered for the live-
cell imaging of proteins, nucleic acids, and small molecules. The outcome of
this project will provide ground-breaking methodologies in the field of live-
cell imaging of small molecules. The proposed project will allow researchers
from the life sciences, engineering, and physical sciences to measure cellular
levels and dynamics of a wide range of analytes with readily accessible sensors.
This project will also integrate sensor engineering research with scientific
education and outreach. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a new generalized
sensor system is developed by integrating emerging fluorogenic RNA aptamers, a
systematic evolution approach, and natural RNA machineries with nucleic acid
nanotechnology. Fluorogenic RNA aptamers, such as so-called "Spinach" and
"Broccoli", serve as the genetically encoded fluorescent reporters. Systematic
evolution is used to screen for aptamers that can selectively bind with target
small molecules inside live cells. Finally, RNA devices and circuits existing in
nature or enabled by nanotechnology provides signal amplification as well as
scaffolds for the ratiometric and multiplexed imaging and quantification of
target analytes. The major research objectives are: (1) to develop quantitative
RNA sensors with multiplexing ability for the cellular imaging of small-molecule
levels; (2) to engineer sensitive and robust RNA circuits and devices for
detecting low-abundance analytes in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells; and
(3) to generate a high-throughput screening platform to rapidly evolve
functional RNA sensors directly in a cellular milieu. Overall, RNA-based
fluorescent probes will be radically advanced through this project for
quantitative imaging of a wide range of small-molecule analytes in living cells.
Dr. You is an active faculty participant in the Eureka! Program of Girls Inc. of
Holyoke, and will continue to provide summer research opportunities for female
middle school students in this program. The You research team will also provide
lab tours for local middle school students and teachers. In addition, this
project provides training opportunities for the next-generation of U.S. trained
scientists. Undergraduate and graduate students involved in this project will
gain experience in bioengineering, analytical chemistry, and chemical biology.
Based on the proposed sensor design principles, Dr. You will assemble and mentor
a team of UMass Amherst undergrads for the International Genetically Engineered
Machine (iGEM) competition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.