* 1846732
* CAREER: Deformation and interfacial slip in two-dimensional material heterostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Arend Van Der Zande, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project will explore the
fundamental limits of friction and how to utilize slip at nanoscale interfaces
in atomic membranes composed of two dimensional materials. An important
capability of membranes is to relieve stress through the introduction of
interfacial slip or out-of-plane crumpling. Two-dimensional interfaces also
display emergent nanoscale properties like superlubricity where the friction
decreases by a factor of 100. Yet, it is not well understood how slip and
superlubricity at interfaces affects the mechanics of nanoscale membranes made
from heterostructures of multiple materials. The success of this study will lead
to the design of electronic materials which actively utilize slip and
deformation to become 10-100 times more pliable than state of the art
stretchable technologies like silicon microelectromechanical systems or organic
electronics. Slippable devices made from 2D materials have applications as low-
footprint, low power sensors, tunable signal processors, or energy harvesting
systems in wearable electronics. As part of the project, the PI will also create
a project-based educational outreach activity in which students will design a
laser light show and deliver them to schools with primarily minority populations
and summer STEM camps for underrepresented groups. The PI will continue creating
research mentoring opportunities for undergraduates including underrepresented
minorities and introduce a new project-based nanoscale engineering
course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of covalent bonds and the incommensurate
structure at van der Waals interfaces in 2D materials heterostructures leads to
superlubricity and easy slip between layers. This program will examine the
impact of interlayer friction and slip on 2D heterostructures under shear,
bending, and tensioning. Objective 1 will build a theoretical foundation to
quantify friction, adhesion, slip and superlubricity at incommensurate
heterostructure interfaces through atomic scale simulation and multiscale
modeling. Objective 2 will experimentally probe the friction of incommensurate
interfaces under shear by sliding micropillars built from 2D heterostructures
and measuring the forces with lateral force microscopy. Objectives 3 and 4 will
respectively study the impact of slip in crumpled 2D membranes and resonant
drumheads. These results are anticipated to reveal the interplay between
interlayer alignment and superlubricity, when smooth sliding or stick-slip
occurs, and slip-mediated nanomechanical scaling laws and moduli. The new
knowledge will be used to predict and design the pliability of 2D
heterostructure atomic membranes lying at the forefront of technologies and
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.