* 1846745
* CAREER: Transport Equations in Fluids and Biology: Singularity, Dynamics, and Mixing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,09/30/2021
* Yao Yao, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Eun Heui Kim
* 09/30/2021
* USD 108,942.00

This project is devoted to a mathematical study of transport phenomena that are
ubiquitous in nature. They relate to a transport of some substance, for example
a pollutant or particulate material, by a flow, be it a fluid or gas flow or an
intra-cellular flow. Mathematically, a certain scalar or vector field (e.g.
density, vorticity, temperature) is carried by some velocity field. These
phenomena can be described by partial differential equations (PDE), which often
involve both nonlocal (dependence on the history of the flow or on the not
necessarily close-by events) and nonlinear terms. Examples include the 2D
Boussinesq equation that models large scale atmospheric and oceanic flows, and
the diffusion-aggregation equation that models collective animal behavior. Due
to the nonlocal and nonlinear nature of these equations, it is often unknown
whether solutions exist globally in time or develop a finite-time singularity.
Even in the cases where solutions are known to be global, their long-time
behavior remains unclear for many equations. This project aims to develop novel
analytical tools for a range of transport equations arising in fluid dynamics
and biology, focusing on singularity, asymptotic, and mixing properties of the
solutions. An integral part of the project is the educational component
including developing advanced courses, supervising undergraduate research, and
conducting a young researchers' workshop on nonlinear PDE. The workshop features
mini-courses by established researchers and short talks by junior participants,
aiming to introduce young researchers to the forefront of PDE research and
facilitate collaborations. This project will advance the mathematical
understanding of nonlocal PDE and their applications in fluids and biology. The
project will also provide opportunities for education and training of junior
researchers in this vibrant field.

This project contains three different but related directions. The first
direction is to obtain finite-time singularity formation for some fluid
equations. The plan is to start with some one-dimensional model equations and
prove finite-time singularity by establishing some kind of global control up to
the blow-up time. The study of these model equations may shed new light on the
full dynamics of fluid equations in higher dimensions. A second direction is the
development of new tools for understanding the long-time dynamics of
aggregation-diffusion equations, where the gradient flow structure plays an
important role. A third direction is mixing by incompressible flows, and the
goal is to study how fast the density can get mixed given some quantitative
constraint of the velocity field.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.