* 1846381
* CAREER: Single Parenting in a Bi-Parental System: Discovering Changes in Brain, Behavior, and Reproductive Success
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Rebecca Calisi-Rodriguez, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 05/31/2024
* USD 1,999,961.00

Being a parent is hard. Being a single parent is even harder. Nearly 90% of bird
species exhibit a bi-parental care strategy, which means both mom and dad care
for their young. However, unpredictable conditions including predation,
sickness, and inclement weather can result in single parenthood. To continue
caring for their young as the sole caregiver, the surviving parent must often
compensate for the loss of a partner. To investigate the costs of single
parenting, investigations have focused on understanding how being raised be a
single parent affects offspring. However, what are the consequences of single
parenting on the single parent? Even lesser known is how might these
consequences differ between single mothers versus single fathers. The
investigator has been successfully using the socially monogamous, bi-parental
model of the rock dove (Columba livia) to study the neurobiology of parental
care. Now, the investigator will use an integration of behavioral, neural,
physiological, genomic, cellular, and evolutionary biology to produce a holistic
view of the causes and consequences of single parenting on the single parent,
between mothers and fathers, and at a scale and mechanistic depth unmatched by
previous work. The information generated will have broad potential applications
to be utilized by scientists in many fields, ranging from management of captive
breeding programs for conservation or agricultural purposes, to treatment for
neural deficiencies in parent-offspring bonding in humans and other animals.
This project will also support the innovation, evaluation, and enhancement of
the investiator's large, predominantly Latino/a/x undergraduate research
training program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will vertically integrate
and experimentally manipulate genome-phenome-fitness relationships across
biological levels, sexes, and time scales to investigate proximate and ultimate
mechanisms underlying single parent behaviors in a bi-parental system. The
central hypothesis is that single parenting in a bi-parental system will result
in sex-biased changes in neural genomic transcription and reproductive
behaviors, and these changes are related to trade-offs between current and
future reproductive success. The immediate and guaranteed significance of the
results gained from this project include the characterization of single and
paired male and female parental care behavior, neural transcription, and
reproductive success. Aims are necessarily independent and will generate their
own novel contributions; however, when assessed together, their synergy will
shine a bright light on genome to phenome to fitness relationships in single
mothers and fathers and paired counterparts. This project will generate large
genomic datasets and identify critical genes associated with tradeoffs
experienced during single parenthood. All data and computer code will be made
publicly available in established repositories and shared openly with the
scientific community. Vital to this project is the creation of substantial
research opportunities for predominantly Latino/a/x undergraduate trainees,
resulting in a reciprocal relationship between research and undergraduate
education while strengthening diversity in STEM. The investigator will leverage
her knowledge of running a successful and diverse undergraduate research program
in Integrative Animal Behavior to provide a framework for research-intensive
labs for how to offer quality, large-scale undergraduate research experiences
that in turn support the research progress of the lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.