* 1846390
* CAREER: Engaging high school students in the identification of genes that control skeletal growth and proportion
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kimberly Cooper, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Why do humans have short toe bones and long leg bones, and how does skeletal
proportion vary in species that dig, fly, run, and swim? Most mutations in genes
that are required for bone elongation produce a proportionately dwarfed
skeleton. Scientists know very little about how a bone's growth rate is locally
determined to be faster or slower than other bones in the skeleton. By comparing
gene expression differences in two rodents with very different skeletons, the
mouse and bipedal jerboa with extremely long feet, the Cooper laboratory
identified a number of genes that are excellent candidates to control growth
rate differences within and between species. The project detailed in this NSF
CAREER award will take advantage of the ability to quickly and easily over-
express genes in the developing chicken skeleton to test the prediction that 30
of these candidate genes, which are not known to control skeletal development,
are each sufficient to increase or decrease bone growth rate. The methods to
visualize and analyze these manipulated skeletons are ideally suited to engage
high school students in hands-on research experience. This project is therefore
designed to provide a potentially transformative learning opportunity for
hundreds of "at risk" students in an under-served community, in addition to
expanding knowledge of the genetic control of skeletal growth and proportion.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cooper laboratory has capitalized on the striking
difference in hindlimb proportions of the mouse and bipedal jerboa, similarity
of their forelimbs, and the relatively close phylogenetic relationship (last
common ancestor ~55 million years ago) to identify genes by RNA-Seq with
expression differences that robustly associate with relative growth rates. These
genes form a predicted interaction network that is highly enriched for pathways
that are known to influence skeletal growth (e.g. WNT, Notch, and proteoglycan
signaling), though many of the individual genes that were identified have no
known growth plate function. They will focus on a set of 30 genes that show the
strongest evidence for modular expression in the limb skeleton; gene expression
changed during the evolution of accelerated elongation of the jerboa foot and
remained unchanged in the forelimb that grows similar to mouse. In order to
identify causative mechanisms that modulate skeletal growth rate, the lab will
implement a powerful retroviral mis-expression system in the developing chicken
wing skeleton to test the hypothesis that each gene is sufficient to accelerate
or inhibit skeletal elongation. The objectives will rapidly expand what is known
of the molecular toolkit that controls skeletal proportion and will contribute
to mapping modular enhancers that control growth plate-specific gene expression
and thus the development and evolution of skeletal
proportion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.