* 1846321
* CAREER: Learning to solve problems in context-rich environments: A naturalistic study in STEM workplaces, research labs, project-based courses and lab courses
* EDU,DGE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Benjamin Zwickl, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 04/30/2024
* USD 486,124.00

This CAREER project investigates learning and assessment of problem-solving in
context-rich settings, such as research laboratories, project-based courses, and
STEM workplaces. It includes an education plan focused on transferring the
research to improve education. Because these context-rich, problem-solving
experiences more closely mimic professional work, they offer important venues
for STEM workforce development. However, these environments tend to be resource
and time-intensive compared to lecture courses, so it is important to understand
their unique benefits. The level of "context" refers to the complexity of the
goals, tools, and applications for learning. While there is a substantial amount
of education research related to lower-context learning, such as active learning
in lecture courses emphasizing knowing, concepts, and the acquisition of
knowledge, there has been less education research on high context ("context-
rich") environments. such as laboratories and actual research experiences that
involve practice. The project will support the improvement of context-rich
experiences that develop the science and engineering workforce, support
retention and diversity, create free and publicly available assessments for STEM
faculty, and guide policies on expanding and improving access to research
experiences and other context-rich environments. The project addresses a
national need for research that can inform the development, testing, validation,
and dissemination of assessments of learning in context-rich environments and
guide education policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will examine how
context-rich experiences prepare students for STEM workforce careers. The
research plan involves describing the experience, observing evidence for
learning, comparisons of activities, outcomes, and the development of new
assessments. The conceptual framework is based on applying Cultural Historical
Activity Theory (CHAT) to learning in context-rich settings. CHAT provides a
perspective that situates cognition within an activity system that relates a
subject, an objective, and a community as an activity system that accomplishes
practical outcomes. Data collection and analysis will utilize Social Cognitive
Career Theory (SCCT), particularly to understand mechanisms and factors within
context-rich problem-solving environments that support outcomes such as
development of professional identity, self-efficacy, and persistence. The
education plan involves a project based first-year physics course, as well as
the development of a set of validated tools that could be used for the
assessment of learning in context-rich environments. Thus, the education plan is
integrated with the research activities and would provide both local (course-
specific) and transferable (disseminated) outcomes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
CAREER program is a National Science Foundation (NSF)-wide activity that offers
awards in support of junior faculty who exemplify the role of teacher-scholars
through outstanding research, excellent education, and the integration of
education and research within the context of the mission of their organizations.
This project is supported by NSF's EHR Core Research (ECR) program. ECR supports
fundamental research that advances knowledge on STEM learning and learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM fields, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.