* 1846230
* CAREER: Securing Mobile Devices by Hardening their System Software
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Ardalan Amiri Sani, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2024
* USD 496,670.00

Modern mobile devices, such as smartphones, tablets, and wearables, are targets
of an increasing number of security attacks. Moreover, according to Google, an
increasing number of attacks on (Android-based) mobile devices are targeting the
operating system kernel. For example, 44% of attacks in 2016 targeted the kernel
versus 9% and 4% respectively in 2015 and 2014. Unfortunately, contemporary
mobile operating systems are large, complex, and full of vulnerabilities; hence
they fall victims to these attacks more often than not. This project attempts at
improving the state of the art in security of mobile devices through a
complementary and comprehensive set of approaches that can alleviate the problem
of operating system vulnerability to attacks. This project enhances the security
of mobile devices. As mobile devices play an increasingly important role in
today's world, this project will have a high impact on global societies and
economies. The project will also train students in systems software programming
through outreach and tutorial activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
targets three approaches to enhancing the security of mobile devices: (i) a
security monitor to provide important security and privacy guarantees despite a
compromised operating system, (ii) novel and mobile-specific tools to find (and
then fix) mobile operating system vulnerabilities, and (iii) a vetting layer to
efficiently safeguard the operating system interface against malicious
applications. This project will be conducted in three research thrusts, each of
which will address the challenges of one of the aforementioned approaches. The
first research thrust builds a trustworthy and extensible security monitor for
mobile devices. The key idea in this thrust is the use of security domains,
which are isolated domains each hosting a different security service providing a
unique security or privacy guarantee. The second research thrust investigates
techniques to find vulnerabilities in the mobile operating system. In
particular, it investigates solutions to apply existing dynamic analysis
techniques to mobile operating system codebase in order to find and patch its
vulnerabilities. Most such techniques are only applicable to software running
within a virtual machine (VM). Hence, the key idea in this research thrust is to
either automatically port mobile operating system code to run within a virtual
machine or run these techniques on the device itself. The third research thrust
investigates methods to safeguard the operating system interface against
malicious applications. It does so by incorporating an extensive set of security
checks on system calls and other operating system application programming
interface calls to limit the application's attack vector. This thrust consists
of two tasks including an in-process shield space capable of securely and
efficiently executing the vetting layer's security checks as well as solutions
to automatically generate such security checks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.