* 1846476
* CAREER: Uncertainty-Aware and Data-Driven Methods for Electronic and Photonic Design Automation
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Zheng Zhang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 510,272.00

Designing complex engineering systems such as self-driving cars, electronic and
photonic integrated circuits, requires design automation software to complete
many challenging tasks that are impossible or too time-consuming if done
manually. In practice, almost all engineering designs are subject to such
unavoidable uncertainties as noise, fabrication process variations and
insufficient knowledge about external environments. These uncertainties often
cause performance degradations, system failures and sometimes fatal accidents.
However, existing design automation software requires massive data samples from
time-consuming computer simulations or non-trivial measurement when
uncertainties are involved. This project uses electronic and photonic integrated
circuits as driving examples, and will develop novel design automation
algorithms to improve the performance and reliability under various
uncertainties. The education components of this project include creating two
graduate courses of uncertainty and data analysis, training future workforce
through undergraduate and graduate research. The outreach education and training
through the awardee institution and through academic conferences will enable
technology and knowledge transfer to a broad community. Although this project
targets on applications in electronics and photonics, the developed algorithms
and theory will be applicable to many other domains such as autonomous driving,
renewable energy systems, and medical imaging. Since uncertainty-aware photonic
design automation is still at its early stage, this project will enable a new
field of important research. The resulting algorithms and tools will support the
foreseeable large-scale photonic integration which will boost the performance of
future computing and communication systems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The technical
goal of this project is to develop novel uncertainty-aware electronic and
photonic design automation algorithms that require only a small data set and a
very low computational cost in the design flow. This project will span three
research topics: uncertainty-aware simulation, optimization and data-driven
variation modeling. Firstly, novel algorithms will be developed to address
several long-standing challenges in the forward uncertainty quantification of
electronic and photonic circuits, such as the coupled impact of fundamentally
different types of uncertainties and long-term probabilistic simulation errors.
Secondly, leveraging the developed forward uncertainty simulator, this project
will further develop ultra-fast optimization tools to improve the yield of
electronic and photonic circuits. The main focus will be investigating large-
scale "non-sampling" stochastic optimization algorithms. The developed
algorithms will enable rigorous yield optimization with "small" simulation data
sets and thus significantly reduce the software runtime on a computer. Finally,
rigorous statistical estimation algorithms will be developed to calibrate
critical device model parameters and to extract statistical variability
distributions based on limited and noisy indirect circuit-level measurement
data. The designed algorithms and prototyping software will be validated by
practical design cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.