* 1846611
* CAREER: The role of Nitrogen Photofixation on Agriculture and K12 Science
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Marta Hatzell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 555,000.00

The goal of this work is to produce fertilizer on farms using only inexpensive
and safe minerals. Producing fertilizers at a farm rather than at large central
facilities can reduce the carbon and nitrogen emissions released from current
fertilizer production practices. The research will develop a highly potentially
revolutionary technology that transforms air into fertilizer using only the sun
as the source of energy. The investigator will then evaluate the materials and
systems needed to increase fertilizer production from this solar-based device.
The education plan will develop a teaching component for K-12 science
classrooms, which will connect the nitrogen cycle with food production and clean
agriculture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will elucidate the
impact of nitrogen photofixation using advanced synchrotron-based techniques,
photocatalytic testing, and detailed thermodynamic analysis. The PI will
identify the active sites and environmental conditions that increase the rate of
photocatalytic nitrogen fixation at ambient conditions using titanium dioxide-
based minerals. Active site identification will occur using advanced in-situ
surface science and spectroscopy conducted at Georgia Tech and in a national
laboratory. Acquisition of kinetic data will occur through a series of bench and
in-field photocatalytic based experiments. Kinetic data will serve as the
foundation for a systems level analyses of energy and exergy focused on
discerning the environmental impacts of decentralized solar-driven fertilizer
production systems. In addition, the atomic scale insight coupled with field
tests will seek to discern the role earth abundant minerals (titanium dioxide)
play in the natural abiotic nitrogen cycle. The goal of the education plan is to
develop new approaches to communicate the complexity and impacts of the nitrogen
cycle at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels. At the K-12 level, the PI
will engage with high school teachers to develop new teaching modules focused on
the imbalance in the nitrogen cycle. Teachers will work in the PIs laboratory to
understand the research, and then develop a curriculum that actively
incorporates novel research findings. In addition, environmental engineering
practitioners will engage students in efforts that connect issues related to the
nitrogen cycle to actual environmental engineering. Broad dissemination of the
teaching modules will occur through an open access forum. This research is
transformative, as it will allow for the development of point-of-use nutrient
production and remediation based technologies that can aid a growing global
population through facilitating greater access to clean air, water, and
food.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.