* 1846984
* CAREER: Bio-Inspired Genetically Engineered Self-Healing for Cementitious Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ali Ghahremaninezhad, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The research objective of this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER)
project is to acquire a fundamental understanding of a genetic engineering
approach to self-healing cementitious materials. Concrete and other cementitious
materials are intrinsically brittle and prone to cracking under mechanical and
environmental stresses. Therefore, innovative materials with the capability to
self-heal after cracks formed are highly desirable in infrastructure. The
fundamental insights obtained from the results of this award will advance the
development of high performance and smart cementitious materials, contribute to
public safety, and benefit national economy by improving the durability and
reducing maintenance costs of infrastructure. The educational objectives of this
project are to promote participation, especially from under-represented groups,
in STEM disciplines and to increase the number of undergraduates who pursue a
graduate degree. A STEM Challenge Award, as well as annual summer camps, will be
designed with the goal of promoting participation from high school students from
minority communities in higher education STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mother Nature has created biological composite
materials, such as nacre of abalone shell, bone, and sea urchin, with
unparalleled mechanical and functional properties compared to engineering
materials. This is achieved in nature through biomolecules with specific
structures and functionalities directing growth, microstructure, internal
interfaces, and macroscopic performance of biological materials. Inspired by
nature, this project aims to use a recombinant method to identify specific
biomolecules that control and tune the formation, microstructure, and properties
of the healing material and adapt them to the chemical and physical
characteristics of cracked cementitious materials with the goal of transforming
the self-healing performance. Hydrogels are polymeric gels and their behavior
can be tuned in response to external stimuli. In this project, hydrogels will be
rationally designed as a delivery vehicle of biomolecules to impart self-healing
in cementitious materials. The results from this research will enable us (i) to
discover biomolecules with specific binding to the healing material (calcium
carbonate) and cementitious surfaces, (ii) to understand the effect of
biomolecules on the microstructure and nanoscale binding of calcium carbonate,
(iii) to reveal how hydrogels can modulate the microstructure and phase
composition of cementitious materials, and (iv) to establish the relationships
between biomolecules, hydrogels, and self-healing performance in cementitious
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.