* 1846174
* CAREER:  Revolutionizing Biodiversity and Systematics Research on Aplacophora  (Mollusca) and Training the Next Generation of Invertebrate Systematists
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Kevin Kocot, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,208,255.00

Aplacophora is a diverse group of shell-less, worm-shaped marine molluscs.
Although they are not common at intertidal depths (and are thus unfamiliar even
to many zoologists), aplacophorans are abundant and ecologically important
members of deep-sea communities. Around 400 species have been named, but it is
estimated that tenfold more are awaiting discovery. Aplacophorans are of
interest to evolutionary biologists because aplacophorans along with chitons
form the sister group to all other Mollusca, which is the second most species-
rich animal phylum and exhibits some of the most dramatically disparate body
plans in the animal kingdom. Unfortunately, in recent years, the number of
taxonomists working on this already understudied group has dropped significantly
as three of the world experts have passed away. This project will resurrect
aplacophoran biodiversity and systematics research in the United States through
training of a new generation of scientists and answer fundamental questions
about the biodiversity and evolution of these understudied animals. Three
taxonomy training workshops will be held with each providing training for 10-15
early-career invertebrate systematists in conjunction with collection of
specimens needed for this research. Further, the PI and his lab will speak in
Alabama middle schools and develop a museum exhibit at the Alabama Museum of
Natural History. Taken together, this work will provide fundamental information
on the diversity of life on Earth, which is essential to the fields of
conservation, ecology, and evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to revolutionize the study of aplacophoran biodiversity and
systematics using a combination of traditional and cutting-edge approaches while
training the next generation of invertebrate systematists on diverse taxa and
techniques. The PI and his lab will identify thousands of specimens, describe
&gt;50 new species, characterize the faunas of particularly diverse and
understudied regions, write monographs for select taxa in need of revision, and
develop a DNA barcode library to help future non-experts. Specimen
identification will employ a novel workflow combining light microscopy, micro-
CT, scanning electron microscopy, and DNA barcoding - all from the same
specimen. Further, the first aplacophoran genomes will be sequenced, enabling
target-capture phylogenomics to sample hundreds of molecular markers from
species broadly spanning the diversity of the group. Using these data,
aplacophoran phylogeny will be inferred, making possible a revised
classification that accurately reflects the group?s evolutionary history as well
as ancestral state reconstruction of key traits for Aplacophora, Aculifera
(aplacophorans + chitons), and Mollusca as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly supported between the Division of Environmental Biology
(Systematics and Biodiversity Sciences Cluster) and the Office of Polar
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.