* 1846747
* CAREER: Identifiability and Inferences for Structured Latent Attribute Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Gongjun Xu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 434,933.00

This research project will address fundamental statistical issues in Structured
Latent Attribute Models (SLAMs). These models serve as a basis for developing
diagnostic-based assessments in education, psychology, and other social and
behavioral sciences. This CAREER award will advance the theoretical and
computational development of these models. The project also will contribute to
improved understanding of cognitive processes involved in cognitive assessments
and learning sciences. From a societal perspective, the new methods will be
applied to various educational studies. The project will develop a diagnostic-
based learning tool to identify specific problems and difficulties that students
encounter in STEM domains and provide students with useful feedback. The
investigator will engage in K-12 educational outreach in collaboration with the
University of Michigan's Museum of Natural History, participating in activities
such as the Science Communication Fellows Program and the Science for Tomorrow
Program. Both undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the
conduct of this research. Publicly available software also will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the creation of increasingly rich
diagnostic datasets, great challenges are posed on existing SLAM theories and
techniques. This project will focus on a number of open questions. First, the
project will address the fundamental identifiability issue of SLAMs. A new
theoretical framework will be developed as a scaffold to show the
identifiability results for SLAMs, which will provide practical guidelines for
future diagnostic designs. Second, the project will develop novel procedures to
address the challenge in the estimation of the latent structures in SLAMs with
high-dimensional latent attributes. Third, the project will develop powerful and
robust statistical inference procedures for SLAMs with high-dimensional latent
attributes and observed covariates. In addition to theoretical and
methodological developments, the project will provide practitioners with a
computational tool to explore and expand the use of
SLAMs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.