* 1846426
* CAREER: Revealing spin-state-dependent reactivity in open-shell single atom catalysts with systematically-improvable computational tools
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Heather Kulik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2024
* USD 593,678.00

The project focuses on selective chemical conversion of hydrocarbons found in
natural gas to products of value as intermediates in the manufacture of a wide
range of chemicals and fuels. To that end, the project will investigate a new
class of catalytic materials known as single atom catalysts (SACs), specifically
by developing computational modeling tools that will aid the discovery and
design of SACs. The resulting fundamental understanding will enable rational
design of robust and stable SACs for targeted challenging chemical
transformations, thus providing the chemical and petroleum industries with new
catalysts needed to maintain our Nation's competitiveness in the chemicals and
energy sectors of the economy. These research advances will form the basis of
quest-based workshop activities that teach catalysis and computation to Boston-
area grade 6-12 students, advancing excitement about STEM.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Single atom catalysts (SACs) are emergent catalytic materials that
promise to unite the scalability of heterogeneous catalysts with the activity,
selectivity, and atom-economy of homogeneous catalysts, but the reactivity of
SACs is poorly understood. Short-lived, sub-nanoscale SAC active sites challenge
the resolution of experimental spectroscopic techniques, making computational
modeling essential to building understanding of the mechanism of SAC catalysts.
The project will advance understanding of how SAC structure imparts unique
reactivity for critical transformations (i.e., selective partial hydrocarbon
oxidation) through systematically improvable computational modeling. Although
SACs are poised as a new paradigm in selective but scalable catalysts, the very
features that make SACs reactive for essential catalytic transformations also
make conventional computational catalysis tools (i.e., semi-local density
functional theory or DFT) ill suited to predictive SAC study. This project will
identify and implement needed systematic advances beyond semi-local DFT for
predictive modeling of how ligand-field-influenced spin- and oxidation-state of
quantum-confined metals at SAC active sites alters reactivity. Advancement of
fundamental understanding of single atom catalysts will be achieved through
three aims: 1) quantifying spin state-dependent reactivity of SACs for selective
transformations, 2) understanding how support identity and active site
configuration/disorder influences electronic structure and reactivity of SACs,
and 3) developing descriptors to predict and optimize SAC activity and
stability. This will enable the tailoring of SACs for selectivity, activity, and
scalability needed to address the "holy grail" challenge in catalysis of partial
alkane oxidation. It will overhaul simulation methods for studying unique SAC
electronic structure properties, both providing accurate predictions and
incorporating disorder effects in rational SAC design. Development of SACs
robust for the industrial scale with earth abundant, atom economical metal use
will have a profound impact on the environment. The research advances will be
integrated into outreach activities in a twice-yearly workshop that teaches
catalysis and computation to grade 6-12 students, advancing excitement about
STEM. The workshop will introduce catalysis and bonding concepts through 3D
models, and students will design catalysts in a quest game adapted from software
developed as part of this project. The program will be assessed and improved by
quizzes before/after the workshop. Teaching materials for classroom instruction
and web tutorials posted on the PI's website and MIT OpenCourseWare will amplify
the reach of the education program. This program will benefit society by
advancing excitement about STEM through immersive and research-derived
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.