* 1846316
* CAREER: Towards Privacy and Availability of Inter-blockchain Communication
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2025
* Aniket Kate, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 01/31/2025
* USD 355,491.00

It has now become clear that blockchains represent much more than a financial
innovation. There are innovative public or private blockchain solutions for
supply chains, the "Internet of Things", and beyond. In our highly inter-
connected world, it is inevitable that these solutions will soon have to
interact with each other. Similar to the Internet today, this will eventually
result in formation of a network of blockchains where transactions flow across
disparate blockchains. Some ad hoc industrial efforts have already begun in this
direction; however, the scientific rigor is missing, and privacy and
availability issues are pervasive. This project formally defines inter-
blockchain communication (IBC) notions offering different privacy and
availability trade-offs and securely realizes those notions toward real-world
use by developing low-overhead cryptographic and/or crypto-economic solutions.
The project's novelties includes careful abstractions of IBC primitives,
efficient protocol designs offering innovative trade-offs between privacy and
availability, and security analyses for the proposed tools and protocols. As the
blockchains get connected over the coming years, numerous advances, particularly
in the form of access technologies (e.g., blockchain counterparts of Internet
transport protocols) will emerge, and the project's broader significance and
importance includes offering robust, secure, and privacy-preserving
communication platforms for development of these advanced technologies.
Furthermore, as the current altruism in the blockchain space fades out and
malicious activities become prevalent, the project's principled approach will
become a necessity for inter-blockchain interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research designs and implements privacy-preserving IBC protocols in presence of
malicious or crash-prone connector nodes as well as large-scale active network-
level attackers. The project also studies the inverse relationships between
privacy and non-blocking progress, and non-source routing and wormhole attacks,
and develops a privacy-aware blueprint and open-source code-base that can form
the basis of the transactions across the blockchains. The investigators actively
interact with the blockchain community (in the form of publications, seminars,
workshops, and course materials) to demonstrate the severity of privacy and
availability vulnerabilities, and to promote the developed solutions. By
improving fundamental understanding of privacy and availability of IBC, this
project enables its end-to-end security that will ultimately enhance public
confidence in the technology underlying the internet of blockchains and will
lead to its rapid acceptance for decentralized and highly-available asset
tracking across different domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.