* 1846673
* CAREER: Laser Direct Writing of Three-Dimensional Functional Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Heng Pan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/2020
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant supports
fundamental research that enables a new process for high-throughput
manufacturing of three-dimensional multi-material nanostructures. Over the past
years, nanotechnology has given rise to many novel nanotechnology-enabled
devices with unprecedented performance and properties, which promise to generate
a wide variety of products to improve our daily lives. Many devices require
multi-material integration of arbitrarily designed three-dimensional
nanostructures over large areas. However, conventional nanomanufacturing tools
for mass production are tailored for microprocessor manufacturing and are not
suitable for emerging nanotechnology applications. This project supports
fundamental investigations into enabling a new process for high-throughput nano-
patterning of functional nanocrystals. Such a capability allows mass production
of emerging nano-devices with enhanced mechanical, thermal, optical and
electrical properties for energy, healthcare, communication and defense
applications. A facile capability to generate three-dimensional multi-material
nanostructures accelerates innovation, commercialization and adoption of
nanotechnology-enabled products, which impacts U.S. manufacturing, economy and
security. This research involves multiple disciplines including manufacturing,
thermophysics, chemistry, optics and material science, and motivates individuals
from diverse backgrounds and underrepresented groups to pursue careers in
science and engineering. The project develops an integrated curriculum that
bridges the gap between nanomanufacturing science and industrial practice and
serves the needs of the current and future workforce in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-conventional patterning methods using
nanocrystals as building blocks, such as nanoscale printing, assembly and direct
writing, have many advantages in fabricating three-dimensional and multi-
material nanostructures. However, high-throughput and cost-effective patterning
of nanocrystals remains a major challenge. The objective of this CAREER project
is to understand the nanoscale transport phenomena in laser-nanocrystal
interactions and enable efficient, high-speed, scalable photo-patterning of
nanocrystals. Specifically, a basic understanding of optical excitation,
electron-vibration coupling, relaxation, and transformation processes that occur
over a wide range of time scales from femtoseconds to nanoseconds in nano-
confined systems is gained. Integrated numerical and experimental studies,
including Ab-initio and Molecular Dynamics simulations, ultrafast optical
probing and material characterizations are carried out to gain this
understanding and establish the process-nanostructure-properties relationships.
To demonstrate the scale-up capability and feasibility for targeted
applications, parallel laser direct writing of functional nanostructures over
large areas by scanning a massive array of beamlets at high speed are
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.