* 1846477
* CAREER:  Breakthrough Display Technology as a New Medium for Spatial Thinking in STEM
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Daniel Smalley, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2024
* USD 532,000.00

The goal of this project is to increase both interest and competence in STEM by
developing a new type of 3D display as a tool for teaching spatial reasoning.
Strong spatial reasoning skills have been important to many of humanity's
greatest advances in science and engineering. To help teach these skills, this
research will develop a display platform that is entirely different from all
preceding 3D display technologies. The display uses light to trap multiple
particles in air, then moves and illuminates these trapped particles to draw 3D
images. We perceive these "spatial images" as physical objects because they are,
in fact, physical objects in space. These full-color, high-definition images can
be seen from every direction. The technology makes possible, for the first time,
many of the 3D images portrayed in science fiction. In addition to the broader
impacts for STEM education built directly into the primary research objective, a
team of undergraduates under the supervision of the principal investigator (PI)
will also design a 3D-centric Saturday academy called 'Spatial Forces' for
middle and high school students from groups underrepresented in engineering,
with a focus on low-income and rural students. These students will create
interactive, revolving 3D content for a micro-museum aimed at exposing their
communities to STEM topics of local relevance (e.g., preserving Native American
artifacts, water conservation, the biology of native game fish, etc.). The
programming will include learning from, and creating content for, demonstration
installations to be incorporated into micro-museums. As part of the academy
experience, students will be evaluated for both affect and spatial ability, and
the results of the program will be assessed by an Education Advisory Board and
disseminated to both local and out of state partners. Opportunities for program
perpetuation and expansion will be provided through a collaboration with the
UTAH Stem Action Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this
research is to create glasses-free, interactive, 3D environments as tools to
expand human capacity and creativity. The PI's recent research has led to a
novel, non-holographic method of screenless 3D display with the potential to
change how we interact with our data by making it physically present. To this
end, the objective of the current project is to create and evaluate parallel
optical trap displays (OTDs) as tools for spatial thinking. Free-floating 3D
displays have been the "holy grail" of 3D imaging for over a century. Such a
display would be potentially transformative for many information visualization
applications; however, the application space with perhaps the greatest potential
scientific impact would be that of spatial thinking, a skill that has been
foundational to many of the greatest scientific achievements in history and
which is also strongly associated with both interest and achievement in STEM.
The PI's prototype OTD is a natively spatial 3D technology ideally suited to
spatial thinking that is currently capable of drawing full-color, video-rate
images of small objects with a single trapped particle. Achieving larger image
volumes will require a new "parallel" OTD approach that creates a large volume
OTD from multiple trapped particles illuminated independently and
simultaneously. The central hypothesis of this work is that parallel OTDs will
lead to better mastery of spatial concepts (as measured by standard spatial
thinking tests) by making data physical and interactive. To test this
hypothesis, the PI will optimize single particle traps, develop at least two
parallel display methods (e.g. point trap array and line trap array), and
compare parallel OTDs against screen-based tools for spatial reasoning. Parallel
OTDs will be capable of providing all of the 3D visual cues of holography
(accommodation, parallax, and potentially even occlusion) without being subject
to its limitations (aperture constraints and prohibitive computational
complexity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.