* 1846685
* CAREER: Transparent, passivating, and carrier-selective heterojunction contacts for silicon and cadmium telluride solar cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Zachary Holman, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to increase the efficiency of
conversion of sunlight into electricity by solar cells. The project will explore
the materials science and physics of electrical contacts to solar cells. In so
doing, it will advance the understanding of how these contacts limit the
operation of the cells. Every solar cell must perform two processes: convert
light into excited electrons and extract those electrons in the form of current.
The former process is performed by a semiconductor absorber material; the latter
by two electrical contacts between which the absorber is sandwiched. Although
solar cells are mass manufactured and now generate 1% of the electricity
consumed in the U.S., there are still fundamental questions that are unanswered.
The research community does not yet understand which properties determine if a
material will make an excellent electrical contact and how to quickly find and
make materials with the desired properties. This project will provide answers to
these questions with a combination of measurements and simulations applied to
existing model systems, as well as experiments to use the resulting
understanding to develop new contacts. Success in the project will lay the
groundwork for solar cells that are 10-15% more efficient than today's cells,
reducing the cost of solar electricity generation to below 3 cents per kilowatt-
hour. This, in turn, is predicted to accelerate the deployment of solar energy,
resulting in 17% of U.S. electricity being generated by solar in 2030 instead of
the 5% projected in a business-as-usual scenario. In addition to these
scientific, environmental, and societal impacts, this project will also train
community college, undergraduate, and graduate students for the 260,000 solar
jobs presently in the US through a week-long, hands-on "Solar Cell 101" course
in which they make cells and modules from start to
finish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;Many photovoltaic (PV)
technologies have arrived at absorber materials that have low non-radiative
recombination rates and thus could support cell voltages approaching the
detailed-balance limit, but no technology has developed comparatively ideal
electrical contacts that are transparent, that passivate the absorber surface,
and that selectively extract electrons or holes from the absorber. This project
targets key questions that inhibit rapid progress in heterojunction contact
understanding and technology using (1) a characterization suite that links
together the properties of carrier-selective layers, contacts containing those
layers, and PV cells containing those contacts, and (2) a new deposition
technique using dry-cluster spraying to enable intimate control of the
stoichiometry of contact layers without sputter damage. These two platforms will
be applied to crystalline silicon and cadmium telluride PV cells as model
systems, as these technologies have readily available high-quality absorbers
(which makes interpretation of the function of the contacts more apparent), a
collection of previously developed contacts for these materials is available for
analysis but ideal contacts have yet to be discovered, and any advances in
understanding and technology resulting from the project will have large research
and commercial impact. After studying the underlying physics of state-of-the-art
existing contacts, the project will progress to depositing and testing
heretofore unexplored carrier-selective layers, including wide-bandgap, heavily
doped, amorphous or polycrystalline III-V materials. This research will address
the critical impediment--excellent contacts--to 27%-efficient silicon PV cells
and 25%-efficient cadmium telluride cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.