* 1846059
* CAREER: Multiscale Modeling of Axonal Fiber Bundles in the Brain
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Reuben Kraft, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 01/31/2024
* USD 570,000.00

Brain injuries are a significant health concern for civilian and military
populations. Many of these injuries result from damage to the axons, the long
extensions of neurons that allow communication between brain cells. This Faculty
Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will contribute to the
understanding of brain trauma by developing advanced computer models that link
neuroimaging results, biomechanical assessments, and computational modeling of
the brain. Specifically, this project will develop and validate a model of
axonal damage using controlled experimental methods. More broadly, the continued
pursuit of the development and validation of numerical diagnostics is
anticipated to advance the emerging field of computational medicine. This
project will integrate education and outreach activities with the research,
including a mobile "NSF Sideline Science" curriculum that teaches and promotes
awareness of brain science and computational medicine for K-12 students and the
general public. In addition, a systematic multiyear study will examine the
effectiveness of a new junior-level computational tools course on improving
undergraduate performance in other core engineering and design courses. Also, a
graduate-level, semiannual colloquium will enhance students' understanding of
the power of advanced cyberinfrastructures to solve diverse problems in science
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diffuse axonal injury is a common
pathology associated with traumatic brain injury in which deformation of axonal
cells leads to rupture and axonal degeneration; yet, there remain difficulties
with interpreting the degree of injury based on imaging of structural changes.
Axonal fiber tracts formed from organized collections of neural cells can be
visualized using magnetic resonance diffusion imaging. These images will be used
in conjunction with a new multiscale embedded finite element technique that
models the complex nature of axonal tracts in the brain. The research objective
is to develop a validated multiscale computational method that explicitly
includes axonal fiber tracts from diffusion-weighted neuroimaging and predicts
primary and secondary effects of axonal injury over time. The central hypothesis
is that changes in diffusion tensor imaging can be fully explained through the
use of computational predictions of axonal fiber bundle strain. This project
will develop a new computational tool, or "Digital Brain," that leverages
advanced cyberinfrastructures and expands capabilities in the emerging field of
computational medicine. This will be accomplished through the implementation of
a new multiscale embedded finite element technique to model the complex nature
of axonal tracts in the brain as well as a time-dependent, inelastic damage
model for the axonal fiber tracts and surrounding extra cellular matrix. Both
will be validated using controlled experimental methods. The model will extend
from the molecular to the organ level to study axonal injury mechanisms. Single
cell-to-fiber tract coupling will enable the transfer of structural and
functional information across scales. This multiscale modeling will thus provide
insight into primary and secondary Wallerian injury cascades associated with
brain injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.