* 1846078
* SBIR Phase I:  Development Of An Orally Administered Gene Delivery Platform For Induced Protein Secretion Via The Gastrointestinal Tract
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Timothy Day, DNALITE THERAPEUTICS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2020
* USD 224,684.00

This SBIR Phase I project will further the development of an orally administered
gene delivery vehicle called the Crypt-Reaching Particle (CRP) that is able to
overcome the physical barriers of the mucus to deliver DNA-based drugs to the
cells of the gastrointestinal tract. The therapeutic agent will then be
expressed as a protein locally in the gastrointestinal tract or be secreted into
the bloodstream to treat the full body. Development of this vehicle will lead to
novel scientific insights on DNA delivery that will benefit and educate the
field of fundamental science and engineering. Successful commercialization would
benefit pharmaceutical companies by providing an oral drug delivery platform for
approved and novel drugs, U.S. patients by reducing the need for injectable
drugs and thereby increasing compliance and quality of life, and payers by
reducing costs associated with injectable drugs and improving outcomes by
increasing patient compliance via oral administration. The drug-agnostic feature
provides broad and diverse market opportunities within the rapidly expanding
market for biologics, among other therapeutic agents leading to substantial job
creation. As an example, a potential addressable market in four areas (i.e.,
delivering TNF inhibitors, protein replacement, peptide hormones, and blood
factors) exceeds $90 billion per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
designed to prepare a stable oral formulation of the Crypt-Reaching Particle
(CRP), a novel drug-agnostic drug delivery vehicle, and demonstrate that it can
deliver a functional DNA cargo for expression and secretion in intestinal
epithelial cells in vitro and in vivo. This project focuses on the technical
challenges associated with preserving the functionality of a DNA cargo as an
example of a challenging drug delivery scenario that is difficult to replicate.
The innovation is the design of the vehicle to penetrate through the mucus and
transfect underlying epithelial cells by mimicking the enteric poliovirus. This
will lay the foundation for the first oral gene therapy. Briefly, the project
will address three objectives. First, preparation of a formulation for the CRP
for oral administration via lyophilization with analyses to assess formulation
and DNA stability as a function of time, temperature, and pH. Second, testing
the ability of the orally formulated CRP to deliver a functional DNA plasmid
encoding Gaussia luciferase to Caco-2 intestinal epithelial cells in vitro by
measuring both cellular and secreted expression. Finally, testing the ability of
the orally formulated and administered CRP to deliver a functional Gaussia
luciferase plasmid to intestinal epithelial cells in vivo in Fischer 344 rats to
assess expression and secretion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.