* 1846795
* CAREER: Tackling Congestion in Smart Cities via Data-Driven Optimization-Based Control of Connected and Automated Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Kuilin Zhang, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports
fundamental research needed to use real-time high-frequency data from many
connected vehicles to automatically control driving and routing decisions. This
research is interdisciplinary in nature as it requires the understanding of
research and education approaches in various fields including transportation
systems, operations research, control theory, vehicle dynamics, data science,
and computer science. The project will contribute to training the next
generation of scientists and engineers in multidisciplinary perspectives through
curriculum development and research involvement. The PI will work closely with
high school teachers and students, targeting underrepresented minorities,
through a Summer Internship Program for first-generation college students and a
Youth Development Mentoring Program using a set of online tools and case
studies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is to provide real-time, online, and
predictive robust optimal driving and routing decisions to connected and
automated vehicles. Ultimately, the project will help address traffic congestion
in smart cities. This research will fill knowledge gaps in the integration of
real-time high-frequency connected vehicle data into online robust automated
driving and routing control systems. Specifically, this research will (1)
suggest data-driven optimization-based model predictive control (MPC) models
through the concepts of "forecasting the forecasts of others" and online
learning for cooperative connected and automated driving under traffic
uncertainty; (2) integrate n-person dynamic routing games and MPC models for
non-cooperative connected and automated routing under player and capacity
uncertainties; and (3) balance cooperative automated driving and non-cooperative
automated routing through optimizing platoon formation to increase network
efficiency. To address computational scalability issues in large scale networks,
this research will also explore fictitious play type algorithms to solve the
n-person dynamic routing games, as well as leverage distributed optimization to
address computational issues in platoon formation problems. Simulation analysis
and road testing will be conducted for feasibility analysis of the models using
a fleet of connected and automated vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.