* 1846142
* CAREER:  Towards Understanding and Improving Crowd-based Software Video Tutorials
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Sonia Haiduc, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 494,989.00

One of the most common and time-consuming activities performed by software
programmers is searching for information to help them with their programming
tasks. With the widespread use of the internet, programmers' information seeking
is shifting more and more towards web resources, especially when knowledgeable
colleagues or good internal documentation are not available. Information found
in online resources has become indispensable for programmers, and online
programming video tutorials are an important resource frequently consulted by
both novice and experienced programmers. Therefore, it is of paramount
importance to ensure that programmers can search, access, acquire, understand,
and use this information efficiently and to develop tools and techniques that
facilitate these actions. To achieve this one must first find answers to a few
important questions. How do programmers use video tutorials to support their
tasks? What information do they find useful? What tasks are improved? How one
can better support programmers' information needs through leveraging video
tutorials? The goal of this project is to address existing gaps and improve the
body of knowledge about the topic coverage, usage, and quality of crowd-based
programming video tutorials. The project will develop techniques to improve the
way video tutorials are used and created by programmers. The outcomes of this
project will transform the way programmers and computer science students acquire
knowledge from video tutorials. The goal is to support better learning and
instruction in software engineering settings and in the classroom. This can lead
to time and effort savings that in turn can result in decreased software costs.
The project will also organize a Scratch summer coding camp for middle schoolers
which aims to broaden participation in the field of Computer Science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus in scope on publicly available
video tutorials related to popular programming languages. The goals will be
achieved through the application of novel techniques and tools that facilitate
the extraction of correct source code, audio transcripts, and the topic coverage
of programming video tutorials. A taxonomy will be developed to characterize the
properties of quality programming video tutorials. Evaluation will be done using
interviews, user studies, and surveys. A novel model of the quality of crowd-
based programming video tutorials will be synthesized from user data and data
automatically mined from video tutorials. The research will involve the
application of techniques for information retrieval, program comprehension, and
natural language processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.