* 1846829
* CAREER: Thermal stability and scaling of  nanoscale spin-electronic devices based on novel inverse-Heusler alloys
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Dipanjan Mazumdar, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2024
* USD 513,833.00

Many high-tech gadgets from smartphones to laptops employ nanoscale electronic
switches for their functionality that rely exclusively on the charge property of
the electron. The electron also has another intrinsic property, called spin,
which is intuitively analogous to a spinning ball of charge. In the area of
spin-electronics, or spintronics, the spin property of electron is exploited to
make new devices. For example, the read-head sensor in magnetic hard-disk drives
is a spintronic device. The next technology step for spintronics is to realize a
spin-switch where the added benefit of non-volatility will be novel compared to
charge-based technologies. But several performance-related parameters require
significant improvement in order to achieve a nanoscale spin-switch with long
lifetime and high energy-efficiency. One approach is to modify the material
components inside spintronic devices to address the challenges. Such is the
objective of the research plan. Several pre-identified novel magnetic materials
and their combinations will be implemented in an advanced spintronic device
using thin-film growth and nanoscale device fabrication techniques. The
nanoscale spin devices will be characterized for their switching, scaling,
energy-efficiency, and speed characteristics to test the feasibility of the
materials. Successful implementation of the research plan has the potential for
a high payoff and lead to energy-efficient spin-devices. A broad-based training
and education of several graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will
be accomplished in materials, device physics and device design, fabrication and
characterization. The program will actively focus on promoting interest in
science, technology and engineering disciplines among undergraduates and local
high school students through several synergistic outreach efforts within the
local southern Illinois area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spintronics is recognized as
a promising technology to address the scaling problems of current semiconductor
devices. In emergent Spin-Transfer Torque Random-Access Memory, parameters such
as thermal stability and switching current density, in addition to ON/OFF ratio,
are important for such technologies to be viable below the 20 nm node. In this
proposal, several new material combinations will be investigated in spin device
configurations to directly address the challenging issues of spintronics
technology. Several inverse-Heuslers magnetic materials that show perpendicular
magnetic anisotropy and high spin-polarization will be investigated. Magnetic
Tunnel Junction and Spin-transfer Torque devices will be designed, fabricated
and tested for their ON/OFF ratio, switching current/efficiency, and thermal
stability. In the initial phase, the tunnel magnetoresistance properties will be
tested on micron-scale devices to establish the viability of the various
materials combinations. In the second phase of the project, devices will be
tested down to sub-20 nm level to investigate the scaling behavior of all
relevant parameters. Nanoscale manipulation of spins in a device geometry will
be conducted using shape anisotropy. Synergistic interface characterization of
fundamental magnetic properties will be accomplished using synchrotron radiation
at various national lab facilities. Successful implementation of project goals
can lead to greater integration of spintronics technologies into current
semiconductor devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.