* 1846962
* CAREER: EMBRACE STEM (Endothelial MechanoBiology Research And multiCultural Education in STEM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Eno Ebong, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2024
* USD 548,000.00

Fluid (blood) and solid (blood vessel wall) forces are both part of the natural
mechanical environment of blood vessels and determine blood vessel function.
Changes in the properties of blood vessels -- often due to age or disease - can
influence the activity of the cells that line the blood vessels (endothelial
cells), which can subsequently respond and further affect the properties of the
vessel. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) research project
will test a two-tier hypothesis to further understand this interaction. First,
it is hypothesized that the fluid and solid forces work together to regulate
behavior of the endothelial cells that line the blood vessel wall. These cells
detect these forces, and, in response, guide blood vessel function to maintain
health. Second, it is hypothesized that the biological response to force by the
endothelial cells (a process called mechanobiology) occurs via the glycocalyx,
which is a sugar layer that is anchored to and coats endothelial cells. This
CAREER research project will address a critical gap in knowledge about how these
vascular lining cells respond to their mechanical environment, a knowledge gap
which has limited the success of vascular disease prevention and treatment. New
knowledge will make it possible to engineer innovative approaches to control
endothelial cell mechanobiology and transform how we repair or regenerate
endothelial cell function in blood vessels. STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and math) education and outreach activities will be integrated with
the research in a manner that will positively impact both mechanobiology
research and the STEM workforce. General and underrepresented minority
populations of K -12, undergraduate, masters, and doctoral students will be
engaged and trained through experiential learning activities -- ranging from
hands on challenges for K-3 students to science fair projects to dissertations
-- which will be catalyzed by the CAREER research project. The principal
investigator will serve as an underrepresented minority coach, and opportunities
will also be provided for older students to mentor younger students. This goal
of the educational portion of this project is to, in the near future, expand
STEM education at all levels and, in the long-term future, expand the diversity
of the STEM workforce to enhance innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
research goal of this project is to define the endothelial cell and glycocalyx
mechanisms of blood vessel regulation through mechanobiology. Three objectives
have been established. First, to characterize the architecture of the glycocalyx
over a range of combined fluid-solid mechanical stimuli. Second, to link the
mechanically-controlled architecture of the glycocalyx to the activation of both
protagonist and antagonist molecular mechanisms that drive the response of
endothelial cells. And finally, to clarify the extent to which cooperative
mechanical, glycocalyx, and molecular stimuli evoke a response within the
endothelial cells that impacts blood vessel function. The overall educational
objective of this CAREER proposal is to coach and champion culturally diverse
students to broaden the future workforce, leverage new perspectives, and enhance
endothelial cell mechanobiology research innovation. This will be approached by
building an inclusive STEM community that includes research experiences,
mentoring, and financial support for graduate, undergraduate, and high school
students -- with special emphasis on students from underrepresented groups --
who then reach back to K-8 students to excite them about
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.