* 1846068
* RAPID: Documenting the development of a lava delta at the 2018 Lower East Rift Zone eruption of Kilauea Volcano
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Samuel Soule, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Deborah K. Smith
* 08/31/2019
* USD 26,343.00

In April 2018, a dramatic shift took place in the ongoing eruption of Kilauea
volcano. Both the summit lava lake and the vent at Puu Oo, active for 35 years,
catastrophically drained, sending magma to the Lower East Rift Zone where it
began to erupt. During much of the time since then, lava erupting from rift zone
fissures has traversed the coastal plains and reached the ocean, where it breaks
apart and is deposited in coastal waters. The objective of this study is to
conduct a multibeam bathymetric survey at the sites of the ongoing ocean entry
to map the extent and volume of lava deposition and characterize the mechanisms
of deposition and collapse that shape the submarine lava delta and influence the
stability of the newly formed coastline. Ocean entry sites on Kilauea Volcano
are among the most volcanically hazardous areas in Hawaii, as recurring
collapses of lava deltas can cause significant explosions and local tsunamis.
These collapses occur largely without warning. This project will collect the
data necessary to evaluate the mechanisms of lava delta collapse that are
required to mitigate this hazard. The United States Geological Survey's Hawaii
Volcanoes Observatory is a partner on this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although lava can cross the land-ocean interface
intact and build shallow submarine lava flows, more commonly lava is fragmented
due to lava-seawater interaction as it enters the ocean. As a result, lava
deltas are largely constructed with volcaniclastic material along with lava
blocks generated during the collapse of the landward portion of the deltas.
Several studies have examined the formation of lava deltas from subaerial
observations, but few studies have been able to directly observe the submarine
portions of deltas during formation. As such, the ongoing eruption of Kilauea
offers an excellent opportunity to characterize how lava deltas are formed, the
magnitude and mechanisms of collapse, and the relationship of these processes to
lava flux (e.g., across the land-ocean interface) and other environmental
parameters (e.g., seismicity, wave climate). Mapping the early stages of lava
deposition in the submarine environment will serve as a baseline for repeat
bathymetric surveys that could close the loop on the relationship between
geophysical and geochemical monitoring of the magmatic system (e.g., seismicity,
deformation, gas geochemistry) and the volumes and rates of lava
erupted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.