* 1846158
* CAREER: Self-Driving Database Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Andrew Pavlo, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 502,140.00

Over the last four decades, both researchers and vendors have built advisory
tools to assist human administrators in database management system (DBMS) tuning
and physical design. All of this previous work, however, is incomplete because
they require humans to make the final decisions about any changes and they are
reactionary measures that fix problems after they occur. What is needed for a
truly "self-driving" DBMS is a new software architecture that is explicitly
designed for autonomous operation. With this, the DBMS will remove the need for
humans to oversee and maintain the software. It also enables new optimizations
that are important for modern high-performance DBMSs, but which are not possible
today because the complexity of managing these systems has surpassed the
abilities of human experts. Such a system will remove the human capital
impediments of deploying databases and allow organizations in all facets of
society (e.g., business, science, government) to more easily derive the benefits
of data-driven decision-making applications. The techniques developed as part of
this research are also applicable to other problem domains where autonomous
operation could improve a software system's performance and efficiency,
including both larger systems (e.g., distributed DBMSs, data centers) and
smaller devices (e.g., mobile devices, IoT sensors).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project investigates techniques for self-driving DBMSs that combines state-of-
the-art methods from database systems, machine learning (ML), and control
theory. Achieving autonomous operation in a DBMS is now possible due to
algorithmic advancements in ML, as well as improvements to storage and
computation hardware. What makes this different than earlier attempts is that
all aspects of the system are controlled by an integrated planning component
that not only optimizes the system for the current workload but also predicts
future workload trends before they occur so that the system can prepare itself
accordingly. This work will produce on-line methods for discovering relevant
optimization actions based on these workload forecast models, thereby enabling
the planning component to converge to a better configuration with less training
data. In addition to this, this research will study how to deploy these actions
without hindering the DBMS's performance (e.g., downtime due to restarts) or
causing incorrect behavior. The outcome will be a set of first principles for
efficient self-driving DBMS architectures that can deploy these modifications
and provide the necessary feedback for their integrated models. Such principles
are timely in identifying issues that inhibit automation of existing systems and
influencing the design of future DBMS architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.