* 1846467
* CAREER: Analysis and Repair of Build Scripts for DevOps Software Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Xiaoyin Wang, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 508,358.00

DevOps is a software development methodology that combines software development
(Dev) with information technology operations (Ops). The goal of DevOps is to
enhance software productivity and reliability by shortening the software
development life cycle while delivering features, fixes, and updates in close
alignment with business objectives. The key to adopt the DevOps methodology is
to automate the whole process of software configuration, build, testing, and
deployment, so that they can be performed after any software code changes. Such
automation requires developers to write comprehensive and complicated build
scripts and maintain them frequently. Since build scripts often consist of
heterogeneous code components and have significant dependency and impact on
system environments, they raise unique challenges to traditional code analysis,
defect detection, and repair techniques. This project targets an integrated
suite of techniques supporting maintenance and quality assurance of build
scripts, so that developers may have a similar level of confidence on their
build scripts as on their source code. If successful, the project will lead to
higher-quality build scripts, more productive build script maintenance, fewer
delays in software integration process, as well as more robust software
products, especially for those supporting different system environments and
configurations. The project will also develop set-up tutorials for popular
software frameworks based on analysis of their build scripts to help novice
software developers learning the frameworks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome
the challenges on analyzing and repairing build scripts, the project will
develop (1) concolic analysis of build scripts which enables executions of build
process under different system environments and configurations, (2) partial
static analyses based on data collected during concolic analysis to detect
defects in unexplored paths, and (3) techniques to repair build failures by
learning script revisions from software projects with similar build
configurations. During the development of above techniques, the project is
expected to advance knowledge boundary in four ways. First, it will lead to
better understanding of software build practice and common failures. Second, to
address system-environment dependencies and impacts, the project will provide
comprehensive knowledge on how build scripts interact with system environments,
and develop novel symbolic operators, constraint solvers, and abstractions to
support system-environment states in concolic and static analyses. Third, to
address code heterogeneity, the project will reveal common correlation patterns
among different components of build scripts and develop novel algorithms to
transfer symbolic expressions and static analysis results across script
boundaries via dynamic analyses. Fourth, the project will study the redundancy
among build scripts revisions, system environments, configurations, and build
logs from different projects, and develop techniques on summarizing common
repair templates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.