* 1846046
* CAREER: Learning-Based Hardware and Software Techniques for Quality-of-Service-Aware Cloud Microservices
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Christina Delimitrou, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 05/31/2024
* USD 401,601.00

Datacenters support a large and ever-increasing fraction of the world's digital
computation power, including search engines, social networks, and machine
learning analytics. As modern cloud services grow in popularity, their design
shifts from supporting complex monolithic applications, to supporting
collections of specialized, loosely-coupled microservices. Such microservices
impact resource requirements by requiring fast network processing and low-
latency memory accesses to achieve their quality-of-service (QoS) constraints.
Dependencies among microservices also complicate compute cluster management, and
can cause cascading QoS violations, hurting availability and service
reliability. Guaranteeing the responsiveness expected from cloud services while
using datacenters efficiently requires instead a joint hardware-software
approach. This project takes a holistic view towards designing a system stack
for interactive cloud microservices running on large-scale datacenters that is
QoS-aware, and resource-efficient. By pursuing automated, learning-based
techniques, this project highlights the value of leveraging practical machine
learning techniques to better navigate the increasing complexity of the cloud,
as more datacenter services switch to this new application
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the hardware level, this project first quantifies
the implications microservices have on server design, and second, explores their
potential for hardware acceleration. At the software level, this work is
developing a new cluster manager that accounts for the dependencies among
microservices in an automated and transparent-to-the-user way, and guarantees
end-to-end performance. Finally, to eliminate the cascading effects of QoS
violations between microservices, this project includes a data-driven, online
performance forecasting system. This system leverages the massive amount of
monitoring data collected by cloud systems to anticipate upcoming QoS
violations, and act on them before they degrade performance. By innovating in
both hardware and software, this work will achieve performance and efficiency
gains that neither hardware- nor software-only approaches can
provide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.