* 1846758
* CAREER: Material-Process-Property Relationships of Additive Manufacturing with Polymer Nanocomposites
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2025
* Bulent Gozen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2025
* USD 569,952.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will support
research into polymer nanocomposites or PNs, consisting of nanoparticles within
a polymer matrix. These systems combine favorable properties of the polymers,
e.g. light weight, mechanical toughness and flexibility, and the fillers with
their high strength, electrical and thermal conductivity, in a tunable fashion.
Such combinations lead to unique overall properties that cannot be achieved by
conventional materials. These materials are utilized in many emerging
technologies such as energy storage, biochemical sensing, flexible electronics
and artificial tissue engineering important to the national prosperity and
competitiveness. A primary challenge in realizing PNs involves the development
of new manufacturing methods to process these materials with high resolution and
precise control over filler morphology within the final product that dictates
the final part properties. Emerging additive manufacturing methods, particularly
direct-ink-writing (DIW), where the PN "inks" are dispensed through nozzles and
deposited with high spatial control, has been shown to achieve high resolution
manufacturing of PN parts with controllable filler morphologies. This award
supports the fundamental research that will provide the knowledge needed for
additively manufacturing PN parts having "as-designed" properties with high
customizability, precision and accuracy. This capability will enable many
emerging technologies critical to societal health, national security and the
energy sector such as customizable biochemical sensors, high performance energy
storage devices and lightweight high-strength military equipment manufacturing.
The educational effort will provide a model for integration of additive
manufacturing into the mechanical engineering curriculum which in turn will
equip the next generation manufacturing workforce with a much needed skill-set.
The outreach activities that will be realized in this project will increase the
public awareness and readiness for the additive manufacturing and flexible
electronics concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the promising potential of
additive manufacturing in processing of PNs, there exists a knowledge gap in
regard to relationships between raw material properties-process parameters-final
part properties. This research will address this knowledge gap through an
experimental and computational modeling framework that will reveal the
deposition mechanisms influencing the final part properties. To this end, PN
inks will be modeled through a new viscoelastic material model that incorporates
the effect of temporally and spatially varying filler morphology on the bulk ink
rheology. This model will be used in experimentally validated computational
fluid dynamics simulations that will output critical stress and strain
parameters in the deposited filaments during the printing process. Finally,
studies will be conducted to understand how these model outputs translate to
specific morphologies of nanoparticles as well as the electrical and mechanical
properties of the manufactured parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.