* 1846857
* CAREER: Alternative Non-Opioid Therapies for Low Back Pain
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Rebecca Wachs, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 04/30/2024
* USD 510,389.00

While the majority of the population will experience low back pain during their
lifetime, over 25% of these people will go on to suffer from chronic unresolved
low back pain. Pain medicine is a common treatment for chronic low back pain
patients and often results in addiction, which is a huge problem in the United
States. This problem can be reduced by creating treatments that target pain
directly at its source and thus reduce the need for the systemic pain medicines.
Chronic low back pain can arise from the discs in the spine. Nerves can grow
into these discs and be a source of pain. The hypothesis of this project is that
local delivery of treatments can reduce low back pain by causing existing nerves
to retract and by preventing re-growth of new nerves. As such, the research goal
of this project is to understand undesired nerve growth and to engineer
treatments for local delivery to prevent and reverse nerve growth. The project
will identify and test compounds that cause retraction of and prevent regrowth
of nerve fibers. In parallel with the research goal, the major education goal is
to present this new back pain research to both scientific and public audiences
and to train students to communicate with varied audiences. Therefore, this
project will train students and peer faculty in the communication of science and
educate the local community over the age of 50 about low back pain. Taken
together, the completion of this project will provide the foundation for the
principal investigator's career in low back pain research while preparing the
next group of engineers and increasing knowledge among the general public about
low back pain and treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's
long-term career research goal is to develop novel biomaterial-based treatments
for musculoskeletal pain. Toward this goal, this project will engineer targeted
biomaterials that will prevent and reverse the sprouting of painful
(nociceptive) sensory nerve fibers into the previously nerve-free nucleus
pulposus (NP) core of intervertebral discs (IVD), which is one of the major
causes of chronic low back pain (LBP). The project's overarching hypothesis is
that local delivery of therapeutic biomaterials and compounds can alleviate pain
and prevent chronicity by causing existing nerves to retract or dieback and
prevent re-growth of painful nerve fibers. The Research Plan is organized under
three objectives. The FIRST OBJECTIVE is to identify and test compounds that
cause dieback of undesired sensory nerve fibers and characterize mechanisms of
dieback. Studies will be performed in 3D cell cultures in which neurite
extensions have been grown from trimmed dorsal root ganglion (DRG) harvested
from rat pups. Myelin associated glycoprotein (MAG) and Resiniferatoxin (RTX),
two compounds associated with dieback after spinal cord injury and in cell
culture studies, will be added to the culture medium and dieback of neurite
extensions will be assessed. Studies are designed to determine ideal
concentrations of MAG and RTX to cause dieback of sensory neurons in vitro, to
assess cell health of DRGs and NP cells with dieback compounds and to
differentially assess how MAG and/or RTX impact gene expression of pain-
associated ion channels in sensory neurite subsets, and therefore downstream
pain. The SECOND OBJECTIVE is to develop novel materials to prevent undesired
nerve growth. Studies will be performed in 3D gel cocultures consisting of a
human derived NP core surrounded by a gel containing rat derived DRGs and matrix
support for the NP core. Various compositions of microparticles containing
methacrylated chondroitin sulfate A and C (MA-CS-A and MA-CS-C), which are known
to be neuro-inhibitory, will be incorporated into the NP core and their ability
to prevent nerve ingrowth will be assessed. Studies are designed to develop a
neurological 3D in vitro mimic of NP with tunable composition for long term
culture of NP cells and DRGs, to determine CS concentration and type effects on
DRG growth in vitro, to verify mechanism of inhibition and to fabricate
microparticles for injectable delivery of neuro-inhibitors, enabling in vivo
delivery. The THIRD OBJECTIVE is to test efficacy of identified materials and
compounds to prevent and reverse LBP in an animal model. Studies will be
performed in a rat lumber disc puncture model that has been used extensively as
a model of disc degeneration. Ten weeks after puncture, animals will be divided
into 5 treatment groups depending on results obtained in objectives 1 and 2: MAG
or RTX dieback compounds, MA-CS-A or MA-CS-C microparticles, dieback compound
and microparticles, type I collagen control or sham surgical control. The degree
and resolution of pain will be assessed using a novel rodent gait analysis.
Studies are designed to identify novel biomaterial and compound combinations
that alleviate pain and stabilize the disc in an animal model of LBP and to
increase understanding of the effects of biomaterials/compounds on neurites in
the NP. Determining the effectiveness of these therapeutics to directly treat
LBP without the use of addictive pain medications has the potential to lead to
new treatments that will greatly benefit patients and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.