* 1846628
* Symposium: Nanomaterials and Nanomanufacturing for Sustainability; 2018 Materials Research Society Fall Meeting; Boston, Massachusetts; 25-30 November 2018
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2018,04/30/2019
* J. Ardie Butch Dillen, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2019
* USD 10,270.00

This award is for the partial support for the Nanomaterials and
Nanomanufacturing for Sustainability Symposium at the Fall Materials Research
Society (MRS) Meeting in Boston, Massachusetts, 25-30 November 2018. The award
provides funds for the conference travel and registration expenses of graduate
students, postdocs, early career faculty, and underrepresented minority and
women researchers. The MRS Meeting is the premier international conference,
where academic, government laboratory and industry representatives participate,
speak and discuss topics in advanced materials and manufacturing. This
Symposium's topic is Sustainable Nanotechnology, with a specific focus on
Nanomaterials and Nanomanufacturing. The Symposium advances knowledge in in
emerging and advanced nanomaterials and nanomanufacturing for sustainability and
environment, which impacts the nation's prosperity and health. The Symposium is
a networking and workforce development opportunity by providing a forum for
students and young faculty to meet attendees from industry, government labs and
other academic institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Nanomaterials and
Nanomanufacturing for Sustainability Symposium's goal is to advance knowledge in
emerging and advanced nanomaterials and nanomanufacturing for cleaner, more
efficient technologies for transportation, energy management, environmental
monitoring and depollution. The topics are nanomaterials and nanomanufacturing
for sustainability; air, soil and water quality management; renewable energy;
lighter and stronger materials; nanotoxicology; and life cycle analysis. The
symposium is a venue for tutorials, keynote lectures, oral and poster
presentations, and networking for students, faculty and industry. It is a forum
to learn new methods and exchange research results. A novel sub-event involves
rapid-fire presentations to give an opportunity to all poster presenters to
pitch their poster for 1 minute during the oral sessions and on a LCD screen
next to the outside signage of the session. Winning pitches are
recognized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.