* 1846853
* CAREER: Integrating quantitative biomarkers of mitochondrial structure and function through endogenous cellular fluorescence
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Kyle Quinn, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Mitochondria are dynamic energy-producing structures within cells that play a
central role in cellular metabolism. With advanced age, mitochondrial
dysfunction can arise and contribute to many common degenerative diseases.
Reduced mitochondrial efficiency, increased internal stresses, and altered
mitochondrial organization within cells are associated with the biology of
aging. Therefore, there is a need to establish quantitative, non-invasive
readouts of these age-related changes in mitochondria. This project will develop
new image analysis tools and statistical models based on the natural
fluorescence of two metabolic molecules, called cofactors, that are critical for
the energy producing processes. Distinct optical signatures will be identified
through statistical models based on measurements of the intensity, time-based
response, and spatial organization of the two cofactors within individual cells.
These models of mitochondrial function will be validated and then applied to
assess cells during anti-aging treatments. The models will also be used to
understand how aging and obesity affect cellular metabolism. This research will
be incorporated into educational and recruitment efforts to promote science and
engineering. In particular, the project will allow for the expansion and
development of new content for a biomedical engineering camp that exposes high
school students from underrepresented groups to multidisciplinary biomedical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's long-term career
goal is to push the capabilities of imaging metabolic cofactors NADH and FAD to
offer truly new insights into the dynamic changes in metabolism observed during
development, repair, aging and disease. Toward this goal, this project will
develop advanced multiphoton imaging and analysis techniques to provide
quantitative biomarkers of metabolic dysfunction based on the natural
fluorescence of NADH and FAD, i.e., label-free imaging, and to use these
biomarkers to advance understanding of the biology of aging. The project will
build on the PI's previous experience in NADH and FAD autofluorescence imaging
and will establish a new analysis technique for rapid, single cell assessments
of mitochondrial fractal dimension (FD) within cells. The Research Plan is
organized under three objectives. The FIRST OBJECTIVE is to establish a set of
optical biomarkers and statistical models to predict changes in mitochondrial
structure and function. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that
different combinations of multiphoton metrics can be used to separately predict
different metabolic responses. This will be accomplished by validating the FD-
based method to rapidly quantify mitochondrial organization in individual cells
and developing a linear mixed-effects model to predict redox state, ETC
(electron transport chain) activity, and oxidative stress based only on
endogenous cellular fluorescence. The SECOND OBJECTIVE is to characterize the
sensitivity of mitochondrial biomarkers to chronological age and common anti-
aging treatments. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that decreased ETC
activity and increased oxidative stress will be detected in cells from older
patients and that sensitivity to anti-aging treatments will be dependent on
their mechanism of action. This will be accomplished by evaluating differences
in mitochondrial metrics between young and old (31 and 88 year old)
keratinocytes (skin cells) donated by healthy females and assessing the
sensitivity of optical biomarkers to anti-aging treatments such as rapamycin.
The THIRD OBJECTIVE is to monitor the aging process over the entire lifespan of
mice through non-invasive skin imaging and to evaluate the effect of normal and
high-calorie diets. Studies are designed to test the hypothesis that significant
metabolic changes will be most strongly associated with HFD (High Fat Diet) mice
and female mice upon the onset of peri-menopause at approximately 18 months of
age. This will be accomplished by quantifying the age-dependent changes in
mitochondrial structure and function of keratinocytes in individual mice (50:50
sex split) every 2 months over their entire lifespan (approximately 2.5 years.)
Though the project's efforts are focused on cellular aging in keratinocytes,
findings could be applicable to other cell types and applications in which
metabolic changes have been reported, including cancer, cardiovascular disease
and wound healing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.