* 1846578
* CAREER: Contingent Learning in a Structured World
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Erie Boorman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 07/31/2024
* USD 753,918.00

How the brain forms, tunes, and uses predictive models that specify the causal
links between stimuli in the environment, our choices, and their outcomes is a
fundamental question in Psychology and Neuroscience. In order to make good
predictions in a complex world, the brain needs to attribute good and bad
outcomes to their most likely causes, a problem known as "credit assignment".
There is presently limited understanding of how people attribute outcomes to
their most likely causes in real-world environments. Recent evidence suggests
that humans can use an understanding of the environment's causal structure to
attribute outcomes to their most likely causes ("model-based credit
assignment"), rather than only attributing them to the most recently made
choices ("model-free credit assignment"), as standard models posit. Dr.
Boorman's research will develop the first neurally-inspired theory of model-
based credit assignment. The insights from this basic science research have the
potential to inform (1) theories about human cognition more broadly; (2)
targeted education programs that leverages a better understanding of how
learning works in the human brain; (3) mechanistic predictions for application
to Artificial Intelligence research; and (4) principled investigations into
potential biomarkers and treatment targets for psychiatric disorders such as
Schizophrenia and PTSD, with deficits that include abnormal credit
assignment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to
elucidate how the human brain attributes reinforcement outcomes to their likely
causes, or "credit assignment". Recent evidence suggests the brain can harness a
model of the environment or task structure to assign credit for outcomes
adaptively ("model-based credit assignment"), in addition to the most recently
made choices ("model-free credit assignment"). Dr. Boorman's proposed research
will integrate multivariate analysis methods with Bayesian models that formalize
updating and inference, and apply them to fMRI, EEG, and TMS data. Insights from
this fundamental research will inform mechanistic models of human learning,
theories of cognition more broadly, reinforcement learning in Artificial
Intelligence research, and investigations into psychiatric disorders with
deficits that include abnormal credit assignment, such as Schizophrenia and
PTSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.