* 1846792
* CAREER: Consumer Behavior-Aware Learning for Revenue Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Shipra Agrawal, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports research
on novel, consumer behavior aware design of online marketplaces through advances
in online machine learning techniques. This grant will benefit U. S. consumers
and service providers and contribute to an increased competitiveness of the
e-commerce sector by addressing critical challenges faced in revenue management
and operations of modern marketplaces. With the ubiquity of online customer
review platforms, price aggregators, discussion forums, and connected
communities, the modern consumer displays increasing tendencies to form socially
influenced opinions, imitate other users, learn and anticipate prices, and time
their purchases. Market mechanisms that fail to account for such consumer
behavior can result in significant losses in terms of revenue, inventory, and
consumer welfare. This project will leverage the opportunity presented by the
abundance of consumer activity data to learn and account for consumer behavior
when designing market pricing and allocation mechanisms. The research conducted
will benefit both consumers and sellers through a more efficient matching of
demand and supply. The educational and outreach initiatives of this program will
enable inclusive participation and engagement of students at all levels, and
promote interdisciplinary, hands-on education in data science and decision
making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan of this project addresses some
critical gaps in the current online machine learning techniques, which are
typically designed assuming independent and identically distributed or
exogenously generated data; and therefore, are ill suited to handle the
endogeneity that may result from frequent social interactions and strategic
consumer. The research plan investigates new learning techniques for dynamic
pricing, recommendation, and allocation under three broad classes of commonly
occurring consumer behavior: (1) social influence and imitation, (2) forward-
looking and planning behavior, and (3) consumer learning behavior. For each of
these categories, it will develop new models and decision-making frameworks that
can capture natural and uncertain consumer behavior while being conducive to
learning. New methods for exploration-exploitation, dynamic learning, and online
optimization will be developed, which will build upon and advance tools from
multi-armed bandits, online convex optimization, dynamic programming, and
reinforcement learning. These new solution techniques will be accompanied with
rigorous theoretical analysis as well as performance evaluation in real markets
through collaboration with industry partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.