* 1846021
* CAREER:  Molecular architecture of ion selective paracellular barriers
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Fatemeh Khalili-Araghi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,215,000.00

Tight junctions are multiprotein complexes in cells that control the
permeability of ions and small molecules between cells, an essential feature in
multicellular organisms. However, recent evidence suggests that tight junctions
are not always tight, and small molecules and ions can pass in between cells.
Yet, how this "loosening" of the tight junction barrier is achieved is not well
understood. In this project, the investigator will use a combination of
computation and experiment to examine how the structure of tight junctions
influences their function. The PI will integrate her research into outreach and
undergraduate education by focusing on three major activities: (1) the PI will
design and develop a new course series specifically designed to apply physics to
biological topics, (2) she will partner with the Museum of Science and Industry
in Chicago to engage high school students and expose them to research careers in
science, and (3) will partner with the Oak Park Education Foundation to develop
one-day hands-on workshops for kids age 8-11 on the 'biology of the cell'. She
will continue working with the UIC PAP-STEM program to recruit high-achieving
UIC undergraduate students from under-represented groups into her research
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins known as claudins are one of the major
components of tight junctions that control its permeability to ions and small
molecules. Little is known about the assembly and organization of claudins into
networks of tight junction strands that surround the cell and the architecture
of claudin pores. In this project, computational investigations will be
performed to study the paracellular transport as a function of tight junction
architecture and molecular permeability of claudin pores. Atomic scale molecular
dynamics simulations will be combined with Brownian dynamics calculations to
study (1) molecular basis of claudin pore gating and selectivity, (2) claudin
assembly and tight junction architecture, and (3) to develop a global model for
paracellular transport across tight junctions. The results of computational
modeling will be validated by in vitro measurements of claudin function and
mutational studies, which in turn will be used to refine the atomic model of
tight junctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.