* 1846408
* CAREER: Innovation: The Three R's: A Model-Building Toolkit for Rational, Reproducible, and Rigorous Computational Enzymology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Nathan DeYonker, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 08/31/2024
* USD 742,139.00

Enzymology is the study of the structure, energetics, function, and chemical
reactions of catalytic proteins. Atomic-scale computer modeling of enzymes is
part of the multibillion-dollar research effort that aids the design of new
pharmaceuticals, helps investigate protein structure and function, and advances
our understanding of the molecular basis of disease. Despite the widespread use
and success of computational enzymology, quantitative relationships between the
composition / size of the models and accuracy of simulations are still poorly
understood, and comparison of methodologies is nearly impossible. This project
will design an automated protocol for the computational study of enzymes using
rationally-created and reproducible models, where hypotheses can be rigorously
tested via a data-driven approach. In keeping with the Division of Biological
Infrastructure?s focus on empowering biological discovery by investing in the
development and enhancement of biological research resources, the developed
protocol will be made available via a web platform and user interface. In
addition, the project will establish a laboratory module for introductory
biology courses to familiarize undergraduate students with the Protein Data
Bank, enzyme kinetics, and computer modeling. Rule discovery and model building
automation will pave the way to a reproducible, rational, and rigorous approach
to computational enzymology. Improved research and project design standards will
allow, for the first time, a truly quantitative assessment of accuracy in
biochemical simulations. This research will impact a large, multidisciplinary
swath of the STEM research community, from structural biologists,
pharmacologists, and computational chemists in academia and industry, to the
next generation of biology and biochemistry undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project is to design
an automated protocol for the computational study of enzymes using rationally-
created and reproducible models, where hypotheses can be rigorously tested via a
data-driven approach. Software design of an automated, rules-based software
toolkit (RINRUS, short for Residue Interaction Network-based ResidUe Selector)
will allow the computational study of enzymes at the atomic-level using
reproducible and rationally-created models. RINRUS will guide research workflows
by selecting crucial atoms in a protein structure to be included in
computational models. RINRUS will then produce an enormous library of
computationally tractable and chemically rigorous enzyme models, ready for
production-quality simulations using molecular modeling software packages.
Automated project design and standardization of research practices will allow
the biochemical community to focus on higher-impact phenomena in protein
structure and function. Community data sharing and calibration of enzyme models
at an unprecedented scale will be facilitated by creation of a web-based
repository and discussion forum. This research will create a fundamental,
multidisciplinary shift, as computational and data scientists in several domains
obtain an improved quantitative understanding of why their findings agree or
disagree with experimental observation. Through novel, interactive lecture
materials and a laboratory module, undergraduates in introductory biology and
chemistry courses will be exposed to Nobel Prize-winning research and
methodologies. These activities will forge bonds between introductory STEM
courses and real-world scientific research to increase student attraction and
retention, especially among underrepresented minority undergraduates in the STEM
community. Results of this project can be found at www.memphis.edu/chem/faculty-
deyonker/publications.php.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.