* 1846043
* RI: CAREER: Task-Oriented Model Identification for Robust Robotic Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Abdeslam Boularias, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2024
* USD 535,896.00

Robots typically rely on models of their mechanical components and of the
objects in their surroundings to perform their tasks reliably. The models
describe the shapes and the mechanical properties of objects. The models are
used to simulate different actions that a robot can perform, and the actions
with the best forecasted outcomes are selected for execution in the real
environment. In practice, the forecasted outcomes are often different from the
real outcomes due to the inaccuracies of the models, this difference is what is
called the reality gap. Manually-designed models are inherently inaccurate.
While this problem is less pronounced in industrial robots that typically
operate in closed, structured and controlled environments, it severely limits
the deployment of robots to open environments where they constantly encounter
novel objects with unknown or uncertain models. For example, an assistant robot
in a repair shop needs to manipulate various tools and operate on new objects
everyday. The goal of this project is to develop automated and data-driven
object modeling methods that will allow robots to build geometric and mechanical
models of objects on the fly while manipulating them cautiously. Anticipated
improvements have the potential for impact in several application areas, such as
job shops that require high flexibility in product engineering, household
robotics, and debris removal in rescue operations. This project fosters these
potentials by creating a new course and textbook in robot learning, and
releasing general purpose object modeling tools, while organizing museum
exhibitions that will expose automated object modeling and manipulation
techniques to a wider audience. Additionally, the project seeks to involve
undergraduates in research activities at Rutgers, The State University of New
Jersey, which serves a diverse student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
approach pursued in this project is to automatically generate and gradually
fine-tune mechanical models of objects by searching for models that minimize the
gaps between simulation and reality. Specifically, the goal here is not to
identify the most accurate model of an object, but rather to infer models that
are sufficiently accurate to perform a given manipulation task. Therefore, the
automated modeling process is strongly guided by the given manipulation task,
unnecessary computational modeling efforts are thus avoided. The main technical
objectives of this project are to: 1) Provide theoretical guarantees on the
performance of control techniques using imperfect models inferred from data. 2)
Develop black-box Bayesian optimization tools for inferring models of objects
from limited vision and interaction data. 3) Develop white-box model
identification tools using differentiable 3D renderers and physics engines. 4)
Demonstrate the developed methods on a diverse range of tasks related to
manipulating unknown objects in cluttered
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.