* 1846785
* CAREER: Allosteric Activation of SIRT6 by DNA
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Yana Cen, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 463,995.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Yana Cen from Virginia Commonwealth University to study
the allosteric regulation of the human SIRT6 enzyme by breaks in damaged DNA.
The role of human DNA in the transmission of hereditary information is supported
by enzymes that support or suppress the transfer of information or repair DNA
damaged by environmental factors. Sistuins are a family of such enzymes. SIRT6
is a member of the family that has weak in vitro activity and robust in vivo
activity. Based on this information, scientists have formulated the hypothesis
that the enzyme can be activated in response to DNA damages in cells. This
project aims at elucidating the molecular mechanism underlying this activation
using innovative small molecule probes and novel biochemical and cellular
assays. The study seeks to elucidate how the regulation of SIRT6 activity takes
place in cells and to suggest possible strategies for effective SIRT6
activation. The concurrent aim of this proposal is to provide a broadly
accessible research experience for a large number of students across multiple
academic levels. The comprehensive plan includes the mentoring of
undergraduates, graduates and PharmD students as well as an outreach program
offered to high school AP biology students. A PI-graduate student working group
is to be established to develop and implement new guidelines for training in the
interdisciplinary field of chemical biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SIRT6 is a
chromatin-associated enzyme that plays a role in the epigenetic modification of
DNA and has been implicated in the regulation of gene silencing, genome
stability, DNA repair, and glucose homeostasis. The research objective of this
project is to take a highly integrative chemical biology approach to interrogate
the allosteric activation of SIRT6 by DNA strand breaks. The research seeks to
identify the site where DNA binds to SIRT6 and to elucidate the activation
mechanism triggered by this interaction. The project also involves a detailed
spatio-temporal analysis of how SIRT6 is recruited and activated by DNA lesions
using a combination of cellular and biophysical approaches. Additionally, the
effect of DNA strand breaks on SIRT6 deacylation, a recently discovered activity
of SIRT6, is assessed using wild type SIRT6 as well as a mutant SIRT6 with
robust deacylase activity but significantly reduced deacetylase
activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.