* 1846541
* CAREER: Earable Systems: Enabling Ear-worn Sensing and Actuating Systems for Health Care and Brain-Computer Interactions
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Tam Vu, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2024
* USD 540,387.00

The human head houses many important physiological signals such as brain signals
(EEG), facial muscle signals (EMG), eye signals (EOG), etc. which have
tremendous value in inferring the user's mental, physiological, and physical
states. In addition, it also serves as an ideal body part for applying brain
stimulations. However, most of the existing head-based sensing and stimulation
methods are cumbersome, intrusive, and expensive, mostly suitable only for
stationary and short-term usages such as in clinics or hospitals. This project
aims to fill that gap by enabling a novel form of wearable sensing and actuating
systems that can unobtrusively, continuously, comfortably, and simultaneously
sense a multitude of head-based physiological signals and actuate to stimulate
the brain while remaining minimally visible to the public. While the well-
accepted form factors for wearable devices are watches, glasses, and other kinds
of body-worn form factors, this work takes a drastically different approach, an
ear-worn sensing and actuation approach (called Earable Systems) to tame a
problem that has long hindered the deployment of head-based wearable systems,
namely user acceptance, by making the wearable devices more socially acceptable
and less visible to the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project stems from the key research activities. The activities include:
formulating multiple head-based signal propagation models to and from human ears
using superposition principle of wave propagation; developing algorithms,
experimental hardware blocks, analytical models, and software libraries for
sensing individual head-based physiological signals; developing closed-loop
stimulation techniques, associated hardware, analytical tools, and safety
guidelines for effective and safe just-in-time brain stimulation from the ears;
and evaluating Earable Systems and the proposed platform in-lab for a compelling
and practical application. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's broader impacts
stem from an integrated program of education, research and outreach that will
translate the research results into demonstrations and hands-on experiences for
under-served middle school students and local teachers through lab visits and
summer workshops. It will also provide a unique interdisciplinary education for
future engineering and healthcare workforce. It will also provide insight to
future healthcare technologies through two Open Online Courses (MOOCs) for
clinicians and undergraduate engineering students. And, both undergraduate and
graduate students will be involved in advanced interdisciplinary healthcare
projects using Earable Systems concepts. The research has the potential to
translate scientific discovery and technical knowledge into beneficial
commercial products through industry outreach and
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.