* 1846969
* CAREER: Reverse Engineering Human Leg Mechanics to Transform Control of Robotic Prostheses
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Elliott Rouse, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2024
* USD 549,626.00

Advances in assistive devices that enable individuals with leg amputations to
walk, e.g., robotic prosthesis, orthoses and exoskeletons, have been
considerable in recent years. However, existing systems have trouble operating
in dynamic, real-world environments that include unexpected disturbances. Thus,
the goal of this CAREER project is to address the need for assistive robots that
can naturally respond to disturbances by exploiting the underlying dynamics of
human locomotion, i.e., by providing the device, in real time, with the same
abilities to change joint stiffness and damping properties that humans
unknowingly regulate through muscle activations. The key idea is to understand
how the nervous system regulates leg joint stiffness and resistance throughout
walking, and use this information for a new, bio-inspired blueprint for design
and control of assistive robotics. This project will also provide insight into
how the human body responds to disturbances. The results from this project will
significantly improve quality of life and productivity for over a million lower-
limb amputees in the U.S. alone. Throughout the project, the integration of
research and education will have broad impact through the 1) promotion of STEM
and disability awareness to K-12 students through targeted events that showcase
the formal and "maker" sides of engineering, 2) implementation of
interdisciplinary mechanisms for knowledge transfer between engineering students
and clinicians, and 3) sponsorship and mentoring of student senior design
projects that directly support this research through co-oversight with
clinicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's long-term research
goal is to advance a transformative approach to the design and control of
assistive robots that embrace and exploit the underlying dynamics of human
locomotion. Towards this goal, this project will measure the mechanical
impedance of the knee joint during walking and use the information obtained to
develop a new generation of bio-inspired control systems that will enable users
of assistive robots to move more freely in dynamic environments that include
unexpected disturbances. Studies will make use of assistive devices already
developed or under development in the principal investigator's lab: a torque-
controllable exoskeleton for the knee and an Open-Source Robotic Leg prosthesis
(OSL, developed under an NSF award) that has powered knee-ankle joints. The
Research Plan is organized under three aims. The FIRST AIM is to investigate
techniques for measuring knee mechanical impedance using the torque-controllable
exoskeleton, which will be quantified in able-bodied subjects during walking.
Methodologies will be validated in a passive mechanical system of springs and
masses for which impedances are known before involving human subjects. Data that
can be used to determine mechanical impedance of the knee during locomotion will
be recorded from human subjects wearing the knee exoskeleton while walking on a
split-belt treadmill in which small perturbations (e.g. increased ramp angle)
can be applied and response torques measured by the exoskeleton. Perturbations
will be applied such that a snapshot of impedance can be obtained at each point
during the gait cycle. Point impedances will be quantified by fitting inertia,
stiffness and damping parameters to a second-order differential equation. The
SECOND AIM is to derive governing equations for bio-inspired impedance control
of the leg that will be implemented in an open-source library for control of the
OSL. The results obtained under Aim 1 will be synthesized with preliminary work
estimating the impedance of the ankle to derive a unified control law that
enables simultaneous regulation of knee-ankle kinetics, kinematics and
mechanical impedance. The governing equations will be translated into a software
library that is able to command the OSL and enables real-time control of knee-
ankle impedance, i.e., stiffness, damping and equilibrium position parameters
will be altered as a function of gait phase and, thus, not predisposed to a
single speed. The ability of the OSL to achieve the desired stiffness and
dampening coefficients will be validated in a benchtop testing setup. The THIRD
AIM is to understand the effect of the impedance-based control system in above-
knee amputees using the OSL, tested during ambulation with/without disturbances.
Subjects will be studied while ground walking at a self-selected pace with both
the impedance-controlled system and each person's prescribed prosthesis. A
subsequent study will investigate the effect of disturbances while subjects are
walking on an instrumented treadmill. Kinetics, kinematics, metabolics and
stability measures across conditions will be compared to better understand how
the bio-inspired control approach affects amputee mobility and how these
measures compare to able-body mechanics. Though several disturbances will be
applied, this project will focus on understanding the effect of walking on
inclines and declines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.