* 1846201
* Human Origins and Comparative Neurochemistry
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Mary Ann Raghanti, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2024
* USD 309,999.00

Neurochemicals, like dopamine and serotonin, are important in the regulation of
behaviors and cognitive functions. Humans have unique neurochemistry within
areas of the brain involved in motivation and language. In this project, the
neurochemistry of the striatum and amygdala in human and nonhuman primate
postmortem brains will be analyzed to test hypotheses about the evolution of
pro-social behaviors, including language. This research will include
undergraduate and graduate student training and mentoring, as well as public
science outreach activities. Also, because the neurochemicals under
investigation are involved in various human-specific neuropathologies, including
autism and Parkinson's disease, the results have the potential to inform and
advance our understanding of disease etiology and treatment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microscopic alterations within the brain can have major
implications for cognitive and behavioral development. Accordingly,
microanatomical analyses of human and nonhuman primate brains can contribute to
our understanding of human brain evolution. Neurochemical changes can have a
major impact on social behavior and may have been pivotal for the emergence of
the human lineage. This project incorporates advanced laboratory and microscopy
techniques to examine the neurochemistry associated with social and life history
variables. Humans have a unique neurochemical profile within the striatum, a
subcortical region of the brain that regulates behaviors involved in social
reward and is a critical component of both language and personality styles. The
ventral striatum is intimately connected with the amygdala, which governs
aggression levels by modulating aversive stimuli. Stereologic methods will be
employed for quantitative analyses of striatal and amygdala neurochemistry
visualized using immunohistochemical techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.