* 1846124
* Workshop on Large Ultrahigh-Vacuum Systems for Frontier Scientific Research Instrumentation
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Alan Weinstein, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2024
* USD 46,367.00

Major new scientific instruments now planned for forefront research in physics
and astronomy will require very large ultrahigh-vacuum facilities. In some
areas, such as the next generation of laser interferometer gravitational wave
observatories, the vacuum system is expected to form the dominant construction
cost. Vacuum systems are also expected to be major cost drivers for advanced
plasma fusion and particle accelerator concepts now under development. This
workshop aims to compare vacuum needs of these future research facilities and to
explore recent advances, new insights, and novel concepts that could render
major cost savings in their realization. Doing so will help assure continued
leadership in exploring our physical universe and in educating, enlightening and
informing the public, with minimal future burden on public funds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LIGO Laboratory will host the workshop at the LIGO
Livingston or LIGO Hanford observatory site in calendar 2019. Approximately 21
recognized vacuum experts will be invited to represent leading US and
international research facilities and key supporting industries involved in
applying large-scale vacuum system technology to fundamental research. They will
join LIGO Laboratory faculty and staff for 3 working days with a mixture of
presentations and panel-mediated discussions. Expected outcomes include the
cross-pollination of technology paradigms between disparate fields and projects,
and possible synthesis of entirely novel construction and fabrication concepts
for future development. Upon conclusion of the Workshop, the Organizing
Committee will publish a publicly accessible synopsis highlighting these
findings and recommending directions for future
pursuit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.