* 1846114
* CAREER: Quantum Systems with Deterministic Disorder
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ilya Kachkovskiy, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 327,582.00

Disordered quantum systems are fundamental objects in modern mathematical
physics, since, due to presence of heat, any real-life system has some level of
noise in it. Systems with noise/disorder are often studied by probabilistic
methods and assume that the noise is random. The main scope of the project is to
study systems where the noise has additional structure and has deterministic
(non-random) nature. In physics, strong random disorder often implies that the
system becomes an insulator and prevents electrons in it from moving freely.
Would it also be true for some systems with non-random disorder? If yes, which
properties make non-random systems behave like random and can it be measured?
Are there any additional effects if the disorder is not strong? The main goal of
the project is to address these questions on many levels, which will include
work with undergraduate and graduate students, development of graduate courses
on dynamics and spectral theory, and developing a course for high school
students that would illustrate connections between basic linear algebra and
physics, providing them skills and motivation for possible further education in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project incorporates teaching and research
activities on the analysis of a class of models of mathematical quantum physics,
including developing abstract techniques of operator theory and establishing
rigorous results on more concrete systems. All proposed models involve disorder,
however, unlike usual probabilistic view on disordered systems, the main goal
will be studying the disorder in a completely deterministic setting, or with a
very small number of random/ergodic parameters. An example of such system would
be a Schrodinger operator with dynamically-defined potential, where the
underlying dynamical system has small dimension and low degree of mixing (for
example, irrational rotation). Typically, quantum systems with large random
disorder tend to prevent electrons from moving freely (Anderson localization).
To answer even basic questions about electron transport in deterministic
disordered systems, one must replace usual probabilistic methods by methods of
number theory, ergodic theory, semi-algebraic geometry, and other deep areas.
The main directions of the project involve analysis of
localization/delocalization for systems of interacting quasiperiodic particles
and the effect of interaction, perturbative methods for single-particle
operators with rough potentials, perturbation properties for spectral bands of
periodic operators, and abstract methods of operator theory applied to almost
commuting operators and matrices, with applications to quantum
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.