* 1846827
* CAREER: Unravel the Nature behind the Smart Polymer-Induced Microalgal Biomass Enrichment and Cell Wall Disruption
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yi Zheng, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 501,800.00

Microalgae is one of the most studied biomanufacturing technologies for the
sustainable production of fuels, chemicals, food, and feed. However, biomass
enrichment and intracellular product recovery are critical technical hurdles and
cost contributors impeding the commercialization of microalgae biorefinery
technologies. This proposal aims to develop an integrated research and education
program that focuses on a bio-manufacturing technology for making biofuels and
bio-based products. The long-term research goal is to establish a cost-efficient
and environmentally-friendly cell harvesting and intracellular product recovery
technology for producing renewable bioenergy and bio-products. The research
results will be integrated with educational and outreach activities aimed at the
university, K-12, and community levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main research
goal of this CAREER project is to develop a new thermoresponsive polymer
(TRP)-based technology for microalgal cell enrichment and intracellular product
recovery to enable cost-efficient and environmentally friendly algae
biorefineries. The proposed research will focus on: (1) establishing
relationships between TRP features and algae enrichment; (2) understanding the
fundamentals behind the interactions between TRP and algal cells; and (3)
elucidating the mechanisms of TRP-induced algal cell disruption. The project
will also aim at establishing the relationships between the properties of the
polymers and their thermodynamic and kinetic phase behavior with algae
harvesting efficiency. The proposed educational and outreach plan promotes
diversity and includes plans for attracting underrepresented students to STEM
fields, educating the public, and training the next generation of scientists and
engineers in the field of biomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Process Systems, Reaction Engineering, and Molecular
Thermodynamics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.