* 1846480
* CAREER: Time-Resolved Multi-Pulse Spectroscopy of Solvated Aza-Aromatics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Cody Schlenker, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2024
* USD 685,000.00

Molecules that can absorb light and use the energy to drive chemical reactions
are potentially interesting for new technologies in energy storage, water
treatment, and industrial chemical production. However, understanding and
controlling these processes is challenging because energy is generally expended
quickly but stored slowly. For example, filming a speeding bullet (energy flow)
poses different challenges than filming a flower growing (energy storage). In
this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanisms (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Cody W. Schlenker of the University
of Washington (UW) is using advanced laser techniques to provide fundamental
understanding of how light absorption drives chemical reactions, two processes
with rates as different as the velocity of a speeding bullet and the growth of a
flower. The scientific knowledge gleaned from this project has the potential to
improve sunlight-to-fuel conversions, solar water decontamination, and possibly
even new avenues for light-driven industrial chemical production. Professor
Schlenker's Research-Integrated Science Education (RISE) Program focusses on
helping to equip low-income and potential first-generation college students with
the tools needed to apply to college, succeed in STEM majors, and enter the STEM
workforce. The group integrates research and education to develop new peer-
generated science tutorials presented by students from the most ethnically and
culturally diverse public high-schools in Washington State (e.g. Chief Sealth
High School in Southern West Seattle through a partnership with the UW's Math
&amp; Science Upward Bound program). One example product of the RISE Program:
Step-by-step, peer-led-learning video science experiments are distributed freely
on a RISE-dedicated YouTube channel. The research group also leverages existing
UW resources, for example, through a partnership with the UW Clean Energy
Institute. Organic photochemistry may lay the conceptual groundwork for new
research in the field of solar water splitting. Cheap and scalable solar
hydrogen could positively impact energy and food sustainability, since ammonia
fertilizer production is resource intensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific
objective of this project is to understand the role of inter-molecular excited
states in the photochemistry of hydrogen-bonded molecular complexes. This
research is focused particularly on understanding how nitrogen-containing
molecules known as azaarenes photochemically react by removing hydrogen atoms
from water and alcohols. To achieve this goal, the research team uses
spectroscopic and electrochemical signals associated with transient,
photogenerated, excited-states and free radicals. The population of these
species are monitored as a function of the temporal delay between an initial
ultrafast visible laser pulse (pump) and a subsequent infrared pulse (push)
using transient absorption, photoluminescence, and electrical current detection.
This approach is notable because it has the potential to extract ultrafast time
information from the relative yields of much slower chemical reactions.
Azaarenes play critical roles in photosynthetic assemblies, DNA photo-
protection, photo-stabilization of industrial pigments, and they are common
chromophores in renewable energy research focused on proton-coupled electron
transfer (PCET). In these capacities, azaarenes can hydrogen-bond with hydroxyl
groups. These hydrogen bonding interactions often alter the chromophore's
photophysics and photochemical reactivity in seemingly unintuitive ways. The
critical mechanistic links between the branching ratio among ultrafast
photophysical pathways and the much slower subsequent photochemical reactions of
azaarene molecules may constitute a step forward. Broader impacts of this work
include potential societal benefits resulting from clarifying whether inter-
molecular electronic excited-states that arise from hydrogen bonding
interactions serve as a chemical gateway to photon-initiated reactions.
Additionally, this project provides training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, integrating research concepts into public engagement
activities for science outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.