* 1846852
* CAREER: Flow distortions of quiet serrated structures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Justin Jaworski, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 565,173.00

Acoustic noise is an unavoidable byproduct of flows near aerodynamic structures,
where noise is amplified by turbulence interactions with solid bodies. Flow-
borne sound contributes to environmental noise levels that are targets for
national and international aircraft noise regulations. However, noise also
constrains the commercial footprints of wind turbines, emergent commercial
unmanned air vehicles, and new paradigms for efficient urban air travel. To
address this challenge, serrated edge designs have been adopted in engineering
practice, which can affect both the noise level and the fluid dynamics. An
acoustic understanding of serrations based on their flow physics remains
underdeveloped, where the prevailing noise theory cannot reliably predict
changes in noise level. The principal aim of this project is to develop new
theoretical models for how edge serrations affect their local fluid flow and
their acoustic signature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the proposed
theoretical research program are to: (1) understand via data reduction of noise
experiments how serrations distort incoming flow turbulence; (2) model and
predict the distortion of flows pertinent to leading edges and trailing edges;
and (3) compute the effect of distorted serrations on local unsteady pressures
and the radiated noise. The integrated research and education plan aims to
furnish a predictive theoretical framework for serration noise generation, which
will be coordinated with global research partners for experimental and numerical
validation and will provide international research exchange opportunities for
graduate students. This project will also include K-12 educational outreach with
the DaVinci Science Center (Allentown, PA), as well as integrate undergraduate
research involvement through the Lehigh Biosystems Dynamics Summer Institute (in
partnership with Northampton Community College).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.