* 1846663
* CAREER: Model-Free Input Screening and Sensitivity Analysis in Simulation Metamodeling
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Xi Chen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will contribute to
national health and prosperity by improving modeling and analysis using large-
scale simulations. Simulation is a widely used method to model stochastic
systems, but analysis of these models becomes computationally and statistically
difficult when the models involve a large number of potential input parameters.
In order to improve model tractability, it becomes important to identify a
subset of significant input parameters, and then to design effective simulation
experiments using these input parameters. This project will provide new input
screening and sensitivity analysis techniques for improving the decision-making
capability within performance and schedule requirements in large-scale, complex
systems applications. The techniques have the potential to apply to a wide range
of application areas, such as biomedical studies, health care, manufacturing,
and defense and homeland security operations. This project will also positively
impact engineering education and broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in the engineering enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will develop methods to enhance the scalability and sampling efficiency of
metamodel-based simulation analysis. The key technical components include (1) a
model-free method based on the Morris elementary effects method for sequential
input screening with rigorous statistical performance guarantees, (2) theory and
methods for constructing knowledge- and data-driven scalable heteroscedastic
dual metamodels, and (3) a rigorous metamodel-based global sensitivity analysis
approach to quantifying the impact of each active input under heteroscedasticity
with finite-sample and large-sample performance guarantees. This project will
generate novel methodology and practical algorithms for effective and efficient
online input screening and global sensitivity analysis. The methods and
algorithms developed will be tested on complex stochastic systems through two
ongoing research collaborations with biomedical informatics researchers. The
educational plan includes development of pre-college outreach programs,
undergraduate and graduate curricula, and career development-related workshops
for female engineering students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.