* 1846707
* CAREER: Introducing synthetic feasibility predictions in large scale computational screening of open-framework materials (OFMs)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Diego Gomez Gualdron, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 02/29/2024
* USD 506,502.00

Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are materials with tunable nanoscale structures
that have the potential to revolutionize a wide spectrum of technologies,
including catalysis, energy storage, and chemical separations. The proposed
research project aims to accelerate the discovery of synthesizable MOFs with
tailored properties using advanced computational methods including high-
throughput computational screening and machine learning tools. The proposed
educational and outreach plan aims to develop research internships for students
from underrepresented groups in STEM and to engage a broader audience via
interactive web-based activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project
would provide fundamental knowledge and new understanding of MOF formation
mechanisms which would allow experimentalists to explore a much broader range of
the vast parameter space of potential MOFs. This could have a transformational
impact on the important field of MOF synthesis and its numerous applications.
MOF synthesizability will be determined by estimating (i) lattice energy, (ii)
MOF free energy, (iii) solvent-loaded MOF free energy, and/or (iv) free energy
barriers for key self-assembly steps. The gained knowledge will be used to
provide a MOF synthesizability factor, which will be calculate efficiently for
large databases using machine learning tools. The proposed approach will create
MOF databases that provide synthetic feasibility for each hypothesize MOF.
Validation of the predictions will be performed through collaborative work with
experimentalists. The proposed integration of research and education will target
underrepresented groups in STEM through a research experience program for high
school and undergraduate students. The knowledge obtained from MOF databases
will be incorporated into educational movies. An interactive pedagogical website
that allows performing virtual chemistry experiments will be developed and made
accessible to general audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.