* 1846507
* CAREER: Analog-Assisted Transceivers for Next-Generation Millimeter-Wave Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Taylor Barton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 528,872.00

Driven by the need for increased radio spectral access, commercial and national
security systems are increasingly moving to millimeter-wave carrier frequencies.
In addition to reducing physical size and weight, this frequency scaling is
beneficial because it enables higher-bandwidth signals which, in turn, produce
higher data rates. At the system level, however, frequency scaling is
problematic because of the digital signal processing elements used in the
majority of radio systems to generate and operate on signals. As the signal
bandwidth is increased, the clock rate required for digital signal processing is
also increased, leading to more power consumption and performance degradation.
Successfully expanding to millimeter-wave frequencies therefore requires novel
radio architectures with alternative solutions for broadband signal processing.
To address this issue, the project investigates both linear and nonlinear analog
techniques, operating in the millimeter-wave circuit domain, to substantially
improve the signal processing of next-generation wireless systems. The resulting
analog-assisted architectures will address the needs in areas where high-
performance wireless systems are critical, such as communications, internet of
things, autonomous vehicles, and healthcare applications. These technologies
will be incorporated into the principal investigator's educational goals as
modules with focus on experimentation with radios, with topics ranging from
system to component level. The principal investigator will partner with
established pre-collegiate and pre-engineering programs at the University of
Colorado Boulder as a way to engage underrepresented and first-generation
college students in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research
is to systematically investigate the application of analog signal processing and
classical control techniques to wideband millimeter-wave (mm-wave) systems
employing wide-bandgap device technologies. Fundamental principles of scaling
indicate that analog techniques become increasingly attractive in mm-wave
systems due to the relatively low fractional bandwidths at high carrier
frequencies even when instantaneous bandwidths increase dramatically. Techniques
from analog circuit design and classical control theory will therefore be
leveraged as a way to compensate for digital-domain bandwidth limitations. An
architecture study is proposed to analyze the impact of the digital / radio-
frequency (RF) domain boundary on power consumption, complexity, and size when
bandwidth and power are prime resources. A specific focus will be the nonlinear
analysis of load-modulated power amplifiers as a targeted driver of this digital
/ RF interface design in efficiency-enhanced transmitters. Realizing analog-
assisted architectures will, in turn, require novel supporting circuits at the
component level. To this end, the research will develop analog and mixed-mode
circuits in GaN technology, leveraging its high transconductance and transition
frequency. Proposed techniques include integrated low-frequency control paths
for, e.g., bias-based gain correction, and developing fundamental building
blocks for signal generation and control. To validate the design methodologies
developed in this work, the demonstration of these technologies will be a novel
wideband transceiver with built-in linearity correction. Through this research
project, the performance of linear and efficient wideband mm-wave systems will
be substantially improved, enabling new and innovative uses of the
electromagnetic spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.