* 1846831
* CAREER: Synthetic Strategies to Optimize Luminescence and Photoredox Properties of Organometallic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Thomas Teets, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 589,181.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Thomas S. Teets of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Houston is designing new synthetic
strategies to prepare luminescent and photoactive iridium complexes. The first
aim of the research develops compounds that emit blue light and may function in
long-lived, high-efficiency organic light-emitting diode (LED) color displays.
The second aim develops compounds that emit in the near infrared (NIR) region of
the spectrum. Such compounds may be useful for biological sensing and imaging.
The third aim targets compounds for photocatalysts in organic synthesis, which
is important for the development of new pharmaceuticals. These research
directions are complemented by an education and outreach component that aims to
improve general chemistry instruction, introduce K-12 students to concepts of
photochemistry, and to engage the general public in scientific learning.
Professor Teets is creating an online, freely available multimedia general
chemistry textbook to benefit low-income students. He also develops a K-12 lab
module titled "Lighting Up Molecules" that introduces young students to the
interactions of light with chemical compounds. Finally, he produces a public
lecture series called "The Chemistry of Color" to introduce art enthusiasts to
the chemical principles behind the creation of colors in visual
art.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Teets studies a new class
of blue phosphorescent cyclometalated iridium complexes supported by acyclic
diaminocarbene and other unconventional carbene ligands. These carbene moieties
destabilize interfering ligand-field states and thereby improve the quantum
yield and stability of these blue-emitting compounds. In the opposite extreme of
the spectrum, NIR-emitting bis-cyclometalated iridium complexes supported by
electron-rich, pi-donating ancillary ligands are prepared. The electron-rich
ancillary ligand destabilizes the iridium-centered Highest Occupied Molecular
Orbital (HOMO), which increases the excited-state metal-to-ligand charge-
transfer (MLCT) character, augments radiative rates, and improves
photoluminescence quantum yield. Using similar design elements, potent visible-
light photoreductants are developed. These cyclometalated iridium compounds have
very reducing excited states and function as photocatalysts for organic
transformations that involve photoactivation of strong substrate
bonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.