* 1846861
* CAREER: BIOCATALYTIC SYNTHESIS OF ENANTIOENRICHED NITROGEN-CONTAINING HETEROCYCLES
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2019,09/30/2021
* Todd Hyster, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 09/30/2021
* USD 800,000.00

With this CAREER award, The Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport System Division are funding
Professor Todd Hyster in the Department of Chemistry at Princeton University.
This research develops new catalysts based on the modification of enzymes, i.e.
biocatalysts, for the synthesis of heterocycles. Aromatic heterocycles are and
important component of agrochemicals and pharmaceuticals. Strategies to prepare
and modify aromatic heterocycles using environmentally-friendly biocatalysts are
underdeveloped. Professor Hyster's laboratory uses light and enzymes to develop
new biocatalytic reactions that produce heterocycles. Consequently, the students
who undertake the research acquire work skills that are essential for a variety
of science and engineering careers. In concert with this research, the Hyster
lab engages in a series of outreach activities to expand the public's awareness
of the role of biocatalysis in daily lives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzymes are
attractive catalysts for chemical synthesis because they can be tuned to provide
unparalleled levels of efficiency and selectivity for even the most challenging
organic reactions. However, the use of biocatalysts has been relegated to
reactions found in nature. The goal of this project is to develop novel
biocatalysts for the selective synthesis of novel, nitrogen-containing
heterocycles. This is achieved by developing enzymatic strategies that affect
the redox properties of the heterocycle to facilitate single electron transfer
reactions. Fundamental studies are conducted to elucidate how the enzymes
activate the heterocycle for electron transfer and control the stereochemical
outcome of subsequent transformations. The education plan focuses on outreach
events that target a broad range of people, from K-12 students to college
students and to the public at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.