* 1846260
* CAREER:   Genetic architecture and the construction of complex social traits
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jeremy Van Cleve, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 05/31/2024
* USD 781,397.00

Groups of organisms including animals, plants, and even microbes can often
accomplish tasks together that individuals cannot do alone. However, individuals
who do not help their neighbors erode the benefits of group living, which can
destabilize the group. In the long run, the balance of these forces leads some
populations and species to live in complex groups while others live solitary
lives. Examples of species living in complex groups include ant and bee
colonies, hyena clans, and human societies. Mathematical tools from evolutionary
biology and economics have been used to predict when the benefits of group
living might outweigh the costs. Although these predictions can explain broad
patterns across the tree of life, they have not been updated to incorporate
recent advances in DNA technology. These advances have revolutionized how
scientists understand the influence of genes on human disease and have also
helped biologists link genes to social behavior and the propensity to act
cooperatively in groups in many different animals species. This research will
develop new mathematical and computational tools for the scientific community
that will explicitly incorporate these data so that biologists can better
understand the history and function of genes that affect social behavior and
group living. This knowledge will not only shed light on the evolutionary
origins of cooperation and conflict, it will help biologists dissect the genetic
basis of group living, which is important for understanding the mechanisms by
which changes in the social environment might negatively impact human health.
Students of all ages will be supported by this research and gain important
mathematical and computational training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will bridge evolutionary theory for social behavior with population genomics by
creating new mathematical and computational tools that specifically address the
role of genetic linkage, recombination, and epistasis in the evolution of
complex social traits. These tools will include: (i) new population genetic
methods and simulation tools for evaluating the role of reduced recombination in
enhancing the evolution of cooperation; this could be a precursor to the
evolution of "super genes" found in a number of social species; (ii) new methods
for studying the coevolution of multiple traits and recombination itself, which
will allow the study of the long-term evolution of supergenes; and (iii) new
simulation approaches for investigating how gene regulatory interactions evolve
when those genes underlie social traits, which will allow a better understanding
of how social behavior affects the evolution of gene networks. High school
students, undergraduates, graduate students, and a postdoctoral fellow will
benefit from this research. &lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by Evolutionary
Processes in the Division of Environmental Biology, Behavioral Systems in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.