* 1846521
* CAREER:   Experimentally integrated modeling of quality control during eukaryotic mRNA protein synthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Arvind Subramaniam, FRED HUTCHINSON CANCER CENTER
* Continuing Grant
* Arcady Mushegian
* 02/29/2024
* USD 919,154.00

To grow and divide, living cells need to produce proteins rapidly. However, in
cases of chemical damage or nutrient scarcity, cells use a kind of safety valve
to slow the speed of protein production. This so-called quality control
mechanism serves as a fail-safe to make sure that proteins are produced
accurately and in the right quantities. Then, as the cellular environment
becomes more favorable, the block on protein synthesis needs to be removed.
Understanding how cells resume normal function is the goal of this project.
Successful completion of this research will enable scientists to accurately
predict the quantity of proteins that cells produce under different conditions.
The research will use both computational and experimental approaches, which will
provide valuable interdisciplinary training opportunities for graduate students
taking part in the research. Related training will be offered through a graduate
course, "Tools for Computational Biology," for first year students in the
Molecular and Cellular Biology Ph.D. program run by the Fred Hutchinson Cancer
Research Center and University of Washington. Participation in summer research
programs will engage undergraduate interns and high school students in research
related to the project goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the process of protein
production by translation, ribosomes typically move rapidly along mRNAs while
catalyzing addition of amino acids to growing peptide chains. At times,
ribosomes can encounter roadblocks and stall their motion for long periods. To
rescue these stalled ribosomes, cells rely on several enzymes that are
collectively referred to as quality control factors. A major unresolved question
in the field of translation research is how quality control factors recognize
and rescue stalled ribosomes, without any adverse effect on normally translating
ribosomes. Recent results have provided an important clue: efficient quality
control occurs only on mRNAs with high rates of translation initiation. Using
data from high resolution measurements of protein and mRNA levels in the budding
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, computational models have been formulated to
test the hypothesis that collisions between multiple ribosomes serve as the
trigger for quality control. Computational models will provide predictive
information to guide experiments aimed at exploring this idea. Genetic and
biochemical experiments will be used to dissect the enzymes that mediate the
effect of ribosome collisions on quality control and to identify mRNAs in the
cell whose translation is affected by ribosome collisions. The results will
provide unprecedented insights into the mechanisms and dynamics of this
important quality control process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.