* 1846917
* CAREER:Semiconductor-Based EMI Mitigation Architecture for Future Power Electronics Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Fang Luo, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Title: CAREER: Semiconductor-Based Electromagnetic Interference Mitigation
Architecture for Future Power Electronics Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power
electronic converters use switching semiconductor devices to realize various
forms of electric energy conversion. High-speed switching operation generates
electromagnetic noise interference (EMI) problems in power electronic systems,
which can cause system failure and malfunction. Furthermore, no product can be
sold unless passing standard EMI qualifications. EMI issues are considered to
have high complexity and nonlinearity, with passive EMI filters being the
dominating solution to mitigate this problem. These passive filters tend to be
bulky, lossy, costly, sensitive to circuit parasitics, and requiring ?error-and-
try? design iterations to achieve satisfactory filter performance. Moreover, EMI
problem becomes even more serious with the emergence of wide bandgap (WBG)
devices as these new devices have much higher di/dt and dv/dt than silicon
devices, so traditional passive filters turn out to affect adversely the power
density for modern power electronic converters. This proposed project provides a
disruptive semiconductor-based active filtering method which could essentially
replace passive filtering solutions that have been used for decades. The success
of this project will not only significantly improve the power density and
efficiency of future power electronic systems, but also changes the design
philosophy for EMI mitigation in such systems. The proposed program integrates
cutting-edge research with education, and thus, providing a platform to
integrate STEM interdisciplinary knowledge together with hands-on activities
with the focus on establishing a pipeline of STEM students in electrical
engineering from pre-college to graduate level. With the support of the College
of Engineering Career Awareness Program (ECAP) at the University of Arkansas,
this project will also foster women and underrepresented students participation
in this STEM field. Therefore, this program will enhance the infrastructure for
next-generation multidisciplinary diversified STEM education aimed at supporting
power engineering workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Targeting the
fundamental EMI problem in modern WBG electronics conversion, the research
objectives of this project are to: (1) establish a new semiconductor-based
electromagnetic noise mitigation architecture replacing existing passive-
dominated filtering systems and achieving very-high power densities, (2) create
and demonstrate a family of semiconductor-based filtering solutions suitable for
different applications, (3) investigate the so-called high-frequency-EMI-model-
based, real-time, noise compensation framework as a more general plug-&amp;-play
EMI solution, and (4) develop a guideline for high-density EMI filter
integration. This proposed semiconductor-based EMI mitigation architecture uses
active components to ?eliminate? EMI noises at real time, and thus, it can be
self-commissioned in various applications. This proposed research is
transformative in the sense that it opens a new area of traditional research.
The research activity will advance the knowledge of this nonlinear problem not
only in the existing power conversion framework, but also across other
electrical engineering subfields as well as physics
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.