* 1846239
* CAREER: Finite-Absorption-Bandwidth Nanomaterials for Multijunction Photovoltaics and Narrow-Band Photodetectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Susanna Thon, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

CAREER: Finite-Absorption-Bandwidth Nanomaterials for&lt;br/&gt;Multijunction
Photovoltaics and Narrow-Band Photodetectors&lt;br/&gt;ECCS #1846239; PI:
Susanna Thon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nontechnical:&lt;br/&gt;The color of materials
used in devices such as light sensors and solar cells is important because color
determines how these devices respond to incident light. There is a lack of
natural materials that only absorb invisible infrared light. This problem limits
the efficiency of next-generation solar cells and infrared light sensors. This
project addresses this problem by artificially structuring light-absorbing
materials on the nanometer scale to control their color. These new materials
will be used to make high-efficiency solar cells and color-selective light
sensors. The insights and new technologies developed through this project could
have wide-ranging applications. Areas that could be impacted include sustainable
energy harvesting, hazardous gas sensing, night vision systems, and biomedical
imaging. The research activities will be integrated with interdisciplinary
educational and outreach activities. These include curriculum development for
undergraduate and graduate level classes on nanotechnology and renewable energy.
Research team members will also serve as STEM mentors for elementary school
students in Baltimore City public
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical:&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the
proposed research are to design and build new color-tuned nanomaterials with
finite-absorption-bandwidths (FABs) based on photonic band engineering in
strongly absorbing materials and use them to make cost-effective multijunction
solar cells and narrow-band photodetectors. The proposed research aims to solve
the problem of a lack of infrared (IR) optical materials with spectral
absorption and transmission profiles that can be independently controlled
through the development of new FAB materials composed of colloidal quantum dot
thin films for IR responsivity and photonic structuring for visible transparency
via control of the in-plane photonic band structure. Methods to be employed
include electromagnetic simulations, chemical synthesis, solution-processed
device fabrication, and optoelectronic device characterization. The main goals
of the project are to (1) establish a quantitative theory for how photonic band
structure depends on material absorption using electromagnetic simulations and
coupled oscillator theory, (2) build FAB materials using photonic band
engineering and self-assembled fabrication techniques, and (3) use the FAB
materials to build multijunction solar cells and narrow-band IR photodetectors.
If successful, the proposed work will result in a new method for improving the
efficiency of current solar cell and photodetector technology by introducing a
new class of optoelectronically-active materials that absorb only in the
infrared. The project seeks to advance the understanding of fundamental energy
transfer processes in nanostructured materials on multiple length scales and use
emergent bulk effects to build new optoelectronic devices. These new insights
and devices have the potential to enable research in other fields where
photoactive materials with controllable spectral profiles could be used for
lighting, sensing, and imaging applications, e.g. In addition to the
experimental work, the goal of providing a theoretical and computational
underpinning for understanding materials behavior on multiple length scales
should broaden materials and device research in general by adding to the toolbox
of materials and effects that can be exploited for novel applications. The
integrated educational and outreach components of the project are designed to
engage elementary, undergraduate, and graduate students in the fields of
nanotechnology and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.