* 1846234
* CAREER: Mapping the proteomic landscape of neural systems
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Yevgenia Kozorovitskiy, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 01/31/2024
* USD 656,254.00

The purpose of this research is to reveal changes in the proteins expressed by
brain cells of mice that control goal-directed planning, locomotion, and reward-
seeking behaviors. Different types of these cells are located in a part of the
brain called the striatum, where they are intermixed together. New molecular
genetic tools will be used to isolate and characterize the sets of proteins
(proteome) of these different striatal neuron types across development, and to
track changes in the proteomes of these neurons in response to changes in the
incoming information that they receive. Based on this work, new, genetically-
modified mouse lines will be generated that will allow members of the wider
scientific community to pursue proteomic studies with other cell types in both
the brain and the body. A major educational goal involves the development of an
enrichment course on imaging neuronal proteins for freshman in a Chicago public
high school. Imaging offers young science students an intuitive way to learn
about cell biology and cell function. This project will yield deep insights into
the development of the striatum, and the ways in which brain circuit activity
changes brain circuit function. The tools and analysis systems established by
this project will be of broad use in diverse areas of developmental and cellular
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are few existing techniques for genetically-
targeted proteomic studies within native neural circuits that preserve the
cellular context of the neurons being studied. This proposal introduces a
powerful suite of techniques for unlocking the proteome of any cell type in the
brain or in the body. The approach leverages the power of peroxidases, enzymes
that can be induced to biotinylate neighboring proteins. This approach is based
on the development and application of a new set of flexible recombinant adeno-
associated viral vectors (AAVs) that conditionally express a modified peroxidase
throughout the cytosol or targeted to neuronal cell sub-compartments. These
techniques will be used to address a critical question in neurobiology
concerning the development and use-dependent neuromodulation of cell types in
the striatum. In addition, new conditional proteomic reporter mouse lines will
be created and made available to the scientific community that will have a
lasting impact by enabling a new generation of proteomic studies of neurons,
glia, and non-neuronal cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.