* 1846837
* CAREER: Understanding Microbial Heterotrophic Processes in Coastal Antarctic Waters
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jeff Bowman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* William Ambrose
* 06/30/2024
* USD 868,107.00

The coastal Antarctic is undergoing great environmental change. Physical changes
in the environment, such as altered sea ice duration and extent, have a direct
impact on the phytoplankton and bacteria species which form the base of the
marine foodweb. Photosynthetic phytoplankton are the ocean's primary producers,
transforming (fixing) CO2 into organic carbon molecules and providing a source
of food for zooplankton and larger predators. When phytoplankton are consumed by
zooplankton, or killed by viral attack, they release large amounts of organic
carbon and nutrients into the environment. Heterotrophic bacteria must eat other
things, and function as "master recyclers", consuming these materials and
converting them to bacterial biomass which can feed larger organisms such as
protists. Some protists are heterotrophs, but others are mixotrophs, able to
grow by photosynthesis or heterotrophy. Previous work suggests that by killing
and eating bacteria, protists and viruses may regulate bacterial populations,
but how these processes are regulated in Antarctic waters is poorly understood.
This project will use experiments to determine the rate at which Antarctic
protists consume bacteria, and field studies to identify the major bacterial
taxa involved in carbon uptake and recycling. In addition, this project will use
new sequencing technology to obtain completed genomes for many Antarctic marine
bacteria. To place this work in an ecosystem context this project will use
microbial diversity data to inform rates associated with key microbial processes
within the PALMER ecosystem model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses
critical unknowns regarding the ecological role of heterotrophic marine bacteria
in the coastal Antarctic and the top-down controls on bacterial populations.
Previous work suggests that at certain times of the year grazing by
heterotrophic and mixotrophic protists may meet or exceed bacterial production
rates. Similarly, in more temperate waters bacteriophages (viruses) are thought
to contribute significantly to bacterial mortality during the spring and summer.
These different top-down controls have implications for carbon flow through the
marine foodweb, because protists are grazed more efficiently by higher trophic
levels than are bacteria. This project will use a combination of grazing
experiments and field observations to assess the temporal dynamics of mortality
due to temperate bacteriophage and protists. Although many heterotrophic
bacterial strains observed in the coastal Antarctic are taxonomically similar to
strains from other regions, recent work suggest that they are phylogenetically
and genetically distinct. To better understand the ecological function and
evolutionary trajectories of key Antarctic marine bacteria, their genomes will
be isolated and sequenced. Then, these genomes will be used to improve the
predictions of the paprica metabolic inference pipeline, and our understanding
of the relationship between heterotrophic bacteria and their major predators in
the Antarctic marine environment. Finally, researchers will modify the Regional
Test-Bed Model model to enable microbial diversity data to be used to optimize
the starting conditions of key parameters, and to constrain the model's data
assimilation methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is an extensive education and
outreach component to this project that is designed to engage students and the
public in diverse activities centered on Antarctic microbiota and marine
sciences. A new module on Antarctic marine science will be developed for the
popular Sally Ride Science program, and two existing undergraduate courses at UC
San Diego will be strengthened with laboratory modules introducing emerging
technology, and with cutting-edge polar science. A PhD student and a post-
doctoral researcher will be supported by this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.