* 1846512
* CAREER: Chemical Synthesis and Biophysical Study of Noncanonical Membrane Lipids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Noah Burns, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 03/31/2024
* USD 621,522.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry is supporting the research of Professor Noah Burns at Stanford
University. The research improves our fundamental understanding of lipid
membranes by synthesizing them from readily available starting materials and
then measuring their physical properties. Lipid membranes are universal features
of living systems, constituting protective inner and outer barriers of cells.
Nature has produced a fascinating array of lipid structures that dictate the
function of biological membranes, and organisms devote considerable energy to
the synthesis and maintenance of such compositions. Professor Burns is
investigating new synthetic reactions to make lipids that are not readily
available from natural sources. This research increases our understanding how
lipids are formed and how they can be utilized biological and non-biological
systems. This research is multidisciplinary and extends beyond the typical
boundaries of synthetic chemistry or biology. Through a strong established
collaboration, synthetic chemists are working with physical chemists to study
the properties of the synthesized lipids, thus tackling larger scientific
questions regarding the function of molecules. In order to impact the broader
community, Professor Burns and his research group are making use of social
media. Platforms such as Twitter and Instagram offer unique opportunities for
cross-talk. Twitter (@burnschemistry) is used to communicate findings from the
Professor Burns' lab in order to alert the chemical community to exciting new
advances. Instagram (@burnschemistry) is used to promote the fun, exciting, and
human side of organic chemistry research. The use of social media is intended to
excite more young people to consider advanced degrees or careers in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Burns is developing selective and
efficient syntheses of three classes of noncanonical membrane lipids in order to
fully investigate their biophysical properties. Highly unusual polycyclobutane-
containing ladderane phospholipids, monocyclohexane- and polycyclopentane-
containing tetraether lipids, and polychlorinated sulfolipids have been
identified from anaerobic ammonium-oxidizing bacteria, archaea, and freshwater
algae, respectively. This research is establishing approaches for accessing each
of these three classes of noncanonical membrane lipids. This chemical synthesis
is impacting the broader synthetic community by providing new reaction
methodologies and new strategies for accessing functional group motifs that are
of interest in other contexts. The biophysical properties of natural and non-
natural lipids are analyzed utilizing modern techniques to verify self-assembled
structures, to measure monolayer density and compressibility, to evaluate
permeability of ions and small molecules, and to interrogate membrane thickness
and structure. This information has general implications for manipulating
membrane properties and designing new soft materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.