* 1846206
* CAREER: Spectroscopic Imaging of Nanoscale Structure and Chemistry at Soft-Hard Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Pinshane Huang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 591,924.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, combines research, education, and outreach in electron
microscopy and its application to characterizing soft-hard interfaces.
Understanding the structure and chemistry at soft-hard interfaces is a key
challenge across materials science, chemistry, and medicine. Surface atoms
represent a large fraction of each nanocrystal, making their surface chemistry a
defining property. This project aims to develop methods to visualize the
arrangement of molecules on the surfaces of nanoparticles by using the latest
generation of scanning transmission electron microscopes in combination with new
methods to prepare nanoparticles for high resolution imaging. Together, these
techniques will enable studies that measure how the density and uniformity of
molecular distributions are related to properties of the metal nanoparticle
surface, including its local composition, crystal orientation, and geometry. The
insights gained will speed the design and development of next-generation
technologies including minimally-invasive cancer therapies, high-efficiency
photovoltaics, and medical imaging agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to
the research described above, this project includes an education and outreach
plan that aims to broaden the reach of cutting-edge electron microscopy to the
next generation of scientists and engineers. Electron microscopes are becoming a
widespread, cross-disciplinary tool for characterizing the composition of
materials on the scale of atoms. This project includes outreach, teaching, and
training in electron microscopy spanning K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students. These efforts include: engaging the public through exhibits on
electron microscopy and nanoscience, enhancing the national research
infrastructure via high-throughput, active learning methods for user training,
and redesigning an electron microscopy course for graduate and undergraduate
students. These efforts also support a diverse, nationally-recognized user
facility and have direct impact in training over 100 new users in the theory and
practice of electron microscopy each year. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, aims to produce a fundamental understanding of the surface chemistry
at soft-hard interfaces of colloidal nanoparticles using electron microscopy and
spectroscopy. Experiments will generate new insights by increasing the scale of
quantitative information generated through electron microscopy, and then mining
the resulting datasets to study trends and statistical distributions in surface
chemistry that occur within and between individual nanoparticles. A particular
focus will be understanding the origins of inhomogeneous and anisotropic
distributions of molecules on nanoparticle surfaces. This work will make it
possible to directly test and refine theoretical models of molecular packing and
provide insight into how molecular coatings can be tailored on the nanoscale.
This project includes outreach, teaching, and training in electron microscopy
spanning K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students. These efforts include:
engaging the public through exhibits on electron microscopy and nanoscience,
enhancing the national research infrastructure via high-throughput, active
learning methods for user training, and redesigning an electron microscopy
course for graduate and undergraduate students. The project's education and
outreach plan will utilize newly available open-source software for image
simulation, data processing, and remote operation in order to broaden the reach
of cutting-edge analytical electron microscopy across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.