* 1846547
* CAREER: Dielectric Screening in Structured Polymer Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Jian Qin, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical and
computational research, software development, and education efforts on ion-
containing polymeric materials. This family of materials has demonstrated great
promise for use as a separation component in batteries that power light-weight
electronic devices such as cell phones. Energy storage and release in batteries
relies on the directed shuttling of positively charged chemical species inside a
separation medium or electrolyte. The conventional electrolyte is normally a
liquid which conducts ions efficiently. Often the liquid can be too chemically
reactive, leading to safety concerns. Polymers are promising replacements.
Polymers are large, chain-like molecules from which, for example, plastic bags,
fibers, and tires are made. They can be engineered to behave as solids at room
temperature and show modest chemical reactivity. In this project, the PI aims to
develop theoretical and computational tools to understand the physical and
chemical properties of these kind of materials.&lt;br/&gt;The PI plans to
develop theoretical concepts and computer simulation algorithms to address the
critical material science problems underlying the design of polymer
electrolytes. At the heart of this problem is an intimate connection among the
structure or the architecture of the material at the atomic scale, the
morphology or the form of the material, and functionality or how the components
interact with each other. To understand the multitude of possible properties,
theoretical approaches and computational algorithms will be developed to enable
simulation of candidate polymer electrolyte materials across length scales.
These efforts will be backed by extensive experimental collaborations, which
will provide the fundamental understanding necessary to advance the rational
design of these polymeric materials.&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
research include training high school students through the Raising Interest in
Science and Engineering program of Stanford University. The students will
participate in the design of novel simulation algorithms and in the creation of
a database of materials properties that will be accessible to the broader
scientific community to aid in the design of materials. The PI will work to
broaden the diversity of the scientific community by educating leading
theoretical researchers to solve tackle challenging questions crucial to
quantitative material design. These efforts will be integrated through
interaction with a local community college. The developed software package
facilitating the experimental screening will be shared with the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a
theoretical and computational study and education focused on dielectric
properties of ion-containing block copolymers, a particularly promising
candidate for use in electrolyte membranes in lithium-ion batteries. The ability
of block copolymers to self-assemble into spatially heterogeneous morphologies
provides a unique opportunity for engineering the mechanical properties and ion-
conductivity simultaneously inside the same material. At the same time, it poses
fundamental challenges on studying the electrostatic interaction in structured
electrolytes with a low average dielectric permittivity. Low permittivity
implies strong correlation inside the materials, and structured electrolytes
demand expensive calculations to resolve the electrostatic potential from
Poisson's equation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four interrelated research objectives
are identified that address different aspects of dielectric screening in
structured block copolymers with comparatively low permittivity. The first
objective develops field theory for heterogeneous polymer electrolytes and a
symmetry-adapted software package, based on ionic polymer self-consistent field
theory. The second objective identifies the distinct phase behaviors governed by
the competing effects of entropy and electrostatic interaction and enables the
development of analytical theory near critical points. The third objective
examines how strong ionic correlation impacts the miscibility of polymer blends
by combining experiments with modeling to generalize the Debye-Huckel theory.
The fourth objective aims to extract mesoscale solvation and screening
parameters from atomistic simulations, which will reveal the microscopic
dielectric screening mechanism in these materials and provide the foundation for
continuum field theory. These four objectives, which span theory, simulation,
and experiments, are expected to provide a coherent picture of ionic
interactions in structured polymer electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;This research
represents a fundamental multi-scale study of the electrostatic interactions
between ionic species in structured polymer electrolytes. Developing field
theories enables efficient screening of the parameter space. Performing
atomistic simulations enables the estimation of phenomenological parameters used
in field theory, and thus allows assumptions to be tested. Combining these two
approaches presents an opportunity to elucidate the fundamental physics which
dictate non-local and nonlinear electrostatic interactions in dielectrically
heterogeneous media. This serves as a stepping stone for designing coarse-
grained simulations to investigate the dynamics and effects of composition
fluctuations. The developed methodology will prove useful for the study of other
electrostatics-driven self-assembly phenomena at the molecular
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the research include training
high school students through the Raising Interest in Science and Engineering
program of Stanford University. The students will participate in the design of
novel simulation algorithms and in the creation of a database of materials
properties that will be accessible to the broader scientific community to aid in
the design of materials. The PI will work to broaden the diversity of the
scientific community by educating leading theoretical researchers to tackle and
solve challenging questions crucial to quantitative material design. These
efforts will be integrated through interaction with a local community college.
The developed software package facilitating the experimental screening will be
shared with the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.