* 1846153
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Dental function and tooth wear in the evolution of primate molar form
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Kaye Reed, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2020
* USD 21,687.00

Old World monkeys are the most geographically widespread and ecologically
diverse group of living primates, with a wide range of diets made possible by
the combination of their gut adaptations and the unique shape of their molar
teeth. Old World monkeys acquired "bilophodont" molars, with cusps united into
two pairs of wedges, soon after diverging from a last common ancestor with apes.
This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the functional significance
of this shift in molar form, drawing upon, and contributing to, a framework that
considers how dental wear alters the shape and function of teeth throughout an
organism's life. This project will also provide opportunities for public
outreach and undergraduate research engagement, including students traditionally
underrepresented in STEM careers. The large number of 3D scans generated by this
project will be made publicly available through MorphoSource, where they can
have further use for scientific and educational purposes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Primates, like all herbivorous mammals, face selective
pressures to maintain function of their permanent teeth in the face of tooth
wear. This project will use 3D dental topographic methods to measure the
shearing and crushing/grinding potential of molars at varying wear stages in a
sample of extant and fossil catarrhines (i.e., Old World monkeys, apes, and
humans). First, the investigators will establish a baseline of how extant
catarrhine molars are altered by macroscopic wear and use phylogenetic
comparative methods to test whether diet or tooth morphology has a greater
influence on maintenance of shearing function. Second, these methods will be
applied to measure the shearing and crushing/grinding potential from molars of
Oligocene and Miocene catarrhines. While extant Old World monkeys have two fully
developed lophs on their molars, early members of this clade exhibit partial
loph development in some molars. The investigators will test whether these early
stages of bilophodonty gave stem cercopithecoids greater persistence of certain
tooth functions relative to their non-cercopithecoid catarrhine relatives.
Ultimately, this project will contribute to our understanding of the functional
origins underlying a key adaptation that contributes to the dietary flexibility
and evolutionary success of Old World monkeys.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.