* 1846017
* CAREER: Utilizing Fine-Grained Knowledge Annotations in Text Understanding and Retrieval
* CSE,IIS
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Laura Dietz, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 12/31/2023
* USD 549,955.00

All members of our information society are constantly in need for quick access
to knowledge for work, education, and personal interests. Often the necessary
knowledge cannot be found on a single web page or article but deserves a longer,
query-specific complex answer. Examples are questions about causes of political
events, about nutritional benefits of chocolate, or about the economic viability
of wind energy. However, today's search engines that merely provide a list of
multiple sources, but leave users on their own to synthesize sources into
knowledge. This project develops novel algorithms that distill relevant key
concepts, text passages, and relational information to provide users with a
single summary of comprehensive information. The summary is structured into
different sections, each covering a different facet of a complex topic. The
focus of this project is to identify the relevant facts and connections that
will enable users to form their own opinions and make strategic decisions.
Embedded in a self-directed-learning environment, it allows users to learn about
new topics at their own pace. Integrated educational activities will make use of
the software to inspire STEM-interest among middle school students and
undergrads of other disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today's algorithms fall
short to identify relevant resources for complex topics, as these require
knowledge about the world. Utilizing knowledge graphs for information retrieval
has led to several important advances, such as the Entity Query Feature
Expansion model (EQFE). This project takes a novel holistic approach towards
developing representations of knowledge in a knowledge graph, corresponding text
annotation algorithms, and retrieval algorithms that work hand-in-hand. The
project focuses on three thrusts: (1) Entity aspect linking, which determines
the topical context of entity mentions to facilitate a high-precision paragraph
ranking. (2) Utilizing relation extractions for open domain information
retrieval, where the presence of many non-relevant relations is explicitly
addressed. (3) Selecting the query-specific subgraph of the knowledge graph that
is suitable to identify relevant entities through long-range dependencies while
avoiding concept drift. All three thrusts lead to fine-grained machine-
understanding of relevant connections and aspects of entities, aligned through
supporting passages that provide provenance for their relevance. The impact of
all three thrusts extends beyond information retrieval: many applications that
build on entity links will gain topical precision from entity aspect links. Most
technology that utilizes relations as-is, will be improved when relational
information is considered in context. Any method that extracts information from
the knowledge graph structure will perform better when spurious edges are
eliminated. Overall, this research effort will lay the foundation for
identifying query-relevant complex information in natural large
collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.