* 1846935
* CAREER:  Opening the Door to Emerging Functional Multicomponent Oxides via a Novel Crystal Growth Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Mariya Zhuravleva, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2024
* USD 601,369.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research this research
project investigates how gravity can be exploited to grow new and interesting
crystal structures. Using a crystal growth technique that is unique in a U.S.
academic institution, Prof. Zhuravleva prepares novel materials with functional
properties that could facilitate clean energy, reduce the cost of lighting,
improve medical devices and imaging, and lead to new discoveries in fundamental
physics. Specifically, this project examines how gravity-controlled melt flow
can be used to engineer uniformly distributed rare earth ions into crystals,
which is critical in order to unlock the potential of these materials.
Understanding how the dynamics of crystal formation under microgravity lead to
stable formations provides foundational knowledge for future materials
engineering research. This project is complimented by an outreach and education
program that integrates high-temperature crystal growth under microgravity with
new, hands-on curricula to engage underrepresented groups in science and
engineering and encourage the next generation of research professionals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This project,
supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of
Materials Research, addresses the need for novel routes for synthesis of
unconventional materials. It aims to enable the full scientific potential of
single-phase multicomponent equiatomic rare earth oxides as a new class of
functional materials. These oxides have not been explored nearly as extensively
as high-entropy metallic alloys and until now have existed only as
polycrystalline ceramics. A revolutionary method, micro-pulling-down technique,
is used for the first time to demonstrate crystal growth and investigate
mechanisms that govern gravity-controlled melt convection during directional
crystallization of such complex systems. The project exploits the interplay
between the convective and diffusive melt flow patterns in order to enhance melt
mixing near the growth interface and achieve stable growth conditions. As a
result, phase stability and homogeneous cation distribution in the grown
crystals leads to novel phenomena and properties for applications in clean
energy, lighting, medical, national security and fundamental physics research
that may surpass functionality of traditional one-component compounds. A large
number of possible combinations opens a pathway to compositional feasibility of
a large number of complex systems. Additionally, the micro-pulling-down method
as a tool for materials discovery and synthesis is introduced to the US academic
community for both research and education through this research project.
Availability of modern crystal growth techniques improves the national
competitiveness in materials research and provide opportunities for educating
and training future crystal growth scientists. The latter aspect is accomplished
by an outreach and education program that integrates high-temperature crystal
growth under microgravity with new, hands-on curricula to engage
underrepresented groups in science and engineering and encourage the next
generation of research professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.