* 1846367
* CAREER: Regulation of Stem Cell Migration by Extracellular Matrix Plasticity
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Ovijit Chaudhuri, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Stem cell migration is a critical aspect of fracture and wound healing, and many
emerging treatment systems require the migration of stem cells to or from
implanted biomaterials. During migration through tissues, stem cells must crawl
through an extracellular matrix with pores that are sometimes 100 to 1,000 times
smaller than the cells themselves. Physiological tissues and their extracellular
matrix often exhibit mechanical plasticity, undergoing irreversible deformations
in response to mechanical force. In these tissues, cell generated forces can
permanently -- or plastically -- expand pores in the matrix. Thus, the
mechanical properties of the extracellular matrix, including how mechanically
plastic or permanently deformable the matrix is, could play a critical role in
regulating stem cell migration. The role of extracellular matrix plasticity in
regulating stem cell migration will be investigated in this Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) research project. The research will be integrated
with both educational and outreach activities that involve the training of
graduate students, undergraduates, and high school teachers. Research results
will be incorporated into both undergraduate and graduate level courses.
Teaching modules, including hands-on activities, suitable for high school
classrooms and the broader public will be developed on the topics of
biomaterials, stiffness, plasticity, and engineering models of living tissues.
This integrated effort will broaden understanding regarding tissue mechanics and
stem cell migration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate how
tissue mechanical plasticity regulates stem cell migration. The researcher
hypothesizes that cells, through the generation of forces, can plastically open
up pores in the matrix to facilitate migration. Using biomaterials for 3D
culture, 2D culture, and microchannel-based migration assays, this award will
test this hypothesis through three research objectives. Objective 1 will examine
the impact of matrix mechanical plasticity on stem cell migration in tunable 3D
hydrogel matrices developed from both alginate and hyaluronic acid-collagen
copolymers. Cell migration will be tracked and changes to the collagen
architecture in the HA-col matrices will be quantified. Objective 2 will
establish the impact of mechanical plasticity on stem cell migration on 2D
surfaces and in microchannels using confocal fluorescence microscopy to assess
measurements of migration as well as cellular and nuclear morphology. Objective
3 will elucidate the biophysical and molecular mechanisms that stem cells
utilize to migrate through matrices with different levels of mechanical
plasticity. In particular, matrix strains will be measured during migration and
correlated with actin dynamics, cell morphologies and volume, and nuclear
morphologies. Finally, 3D migration assays will be repeated while perturbing
molecules to determine how they affect migration. These studies will reveal
fundamental new insights into stem cell migration, which will advance knowledge
of natural regenerative processes that can then be applied to advance
regenerative medicine&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.