* 1846692
* CAREER: Photolysis of intracellular and extracellular antibiotic resistance genes in the environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Andrea Silverman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The spread of antibiotic resistant bacteria (ARB) that cause infections
resistant to treatment with antibiotics is a growing global public health
threat. Antibiotic resistance genes (ARG) are the DNA molecules within ARB that
code for antibiotic resistance. Monitoring of ARG in the Nation's waterways has
increased as they are now considered a "contaminant of emerging concern".
Despite their prevalence, there is limited information on ARG persistence and
decay in surface waters. The objective of the proposed work is to fill this
critical gap in our understanding of ARG risk. This will be achieved by
evaluating the rates and mechanisms of ARG decay in surface water focusing on
sunlight-mediated reactions. Results will provide the necessary information to
predict public health risk due to ARG. Further benefits include the ability to
identify key environmental control points for surveillance and deployment of
treatment technologies. Integrated with this research will be an educational
program that includes new courses and activities for high school and college
students. The goal of which is to train the next generation of environmental
engineers. Outreach will increase scientific literacy and public awareness of
ARG and the connections between the environment and public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sunlight-driven photolysis is an important process
for the degradation of many microorganisms and organic molecules. Therefore, the
underlying hypothesis for this research project is that ARG will undergo
degradation in the environment due to photolysis, and that decay rates and the
dominant photolysis mechanism will vary among ARG depending on their DNA
sequence and the environmental conditions such as water chemistry and incident
irradiance. To evaluate this hypothesis, the research objectives are to: 1)
systematically evaluate direct photolysis, indirect photolysis, and sunlight-
independent decay of key ARG under simulated sunlight and a range of
environmental and water quality conditions; 2) conduct bacterial transformation
experiments with sunlight-exposed ARG to determine whether a reduction in the
quantitative PCR (qPCR) signal for an ARG corresponds to a reduction in its gene
function; 3) use experimental data to develop broadly applicable numerical
models that can predict photolysis rates of ARG under different environmental
conditions; and 4) investigate the effect of DNA sequence on direct photolysis
rates through the use of a novel sequencing-based assay to map the locations of
sunlight-induced damage (e.g., formation of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers) on
each DNA target. The integrated education component of this project will include
research and course-based activities for high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students that incorporate antibiotic resistance concepts, and introduce
students to the field of environmental engineering. The PI will also develop and
disseminate an engaging class module for high school students on the urban water
cycle that will incorporate findings from the proposed research, and highlight
engineering in service to society and the connections between the environment
and public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.