* 1846143
* CAREER: Mechanical unfolding and refolding of multidomain proteins as a new signaling mechanism, studied using a novel single molecule approach
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Ionel Popa, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 04/30/2024
* USD 805,082.00

This project will improve our understanding of how proteins function in vivo
under force. Proteins are a major component of tissues and organs and, to
perform their function, they acquire a specific 3-dimentional structure via a
process known as folding. A key mechanism regulating the functioning of proteins
may be the use of their unfolding/refolding transitions in response to their
biomechanical environment. Little is currently known about this process, as its
investigation requires novel experimental approaches that can reproduce the
force experienced by individual proteins. This CAREER project aims to look
beyond the established view of protein folding as a mean to acquire a
characteristic 3-dimentional structure and show that proteins operating under
force use domain unfolding and refolding in vivo regularly. Understanding these
processes will have widespread consequences in comprehending the normal
functioning of tissues. Protein folding, as a mechanism of function, is a
multifaceted topic, wherein biology meets chemistry, engineering and physics.
Educational and outreach activities, integrated with the proposed research
goals, include: establishing a new science and technology exhibit, which will
explain how protein unfolding and refolding works at molecular level; improving
and expanding a biophysics internship program for K-12 students; introducing new
graduate-level courses in biophysics and related disciplines; and implementing
computer programing as a new "second language" for undergraduate students. The
PI will engage students in outreach and education activities from several areas
of science, while encouraging participation of women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the relation
between the structure, function and unfolding and refolding dynamics of proteins
under force and how this process can swiftly change the stiffness of a tissue,
perform useful mechanical work, efficiently store and release energy, and act as
an on/off switch to recruit and release ligands. The PI will take advantage of a
novel single molecule approach based on magnetic tweezers and covalent
attachment. Using this approach, single protein molecules can be exposed to
force protocols resembling those experienced in vivo, for up to 15 days, and in
the presence of various buffers. This project aims to establish the rules of how
protein unfolding and refolding under force determine the behavior of several
important systems in nature. Furthermore, this project will provide biomedical
researchers with a new perspective on the relation between protein folding and
function, which will likely spur development of new therapeutic
interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.