* 1846603
* SBIR Phase I:  Scalable Manufacturing Of Optical Lenses For Complex Systems Integration
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Jeremy Goeckeritz, MOMENTUM OPTICS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Steven Konsek
* 10/31/2019
* USD 173,673.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of an advanced manufacturing
technology that will enable the production of high-quality optical glass lenses
that are customizable and affordable, without the use of laborious machining or
expensive tooling common in traditional lens manufacturing. The technology aims
to reduce lens production costs by at least 5x while increasing throughput by
~6-8x. In addition, the project will address a key industry need to improve
integration of optical components with electro-mechanical systems such as those
found in compact camera modules. The methods and tools developed here will
enable systems integration at a wafer level, thereby simplifying assembly,
reducing cost/weight/size and improving the overall performance of many next-
generation devices. This outcome will have a significant impact on imaging
technology used in smartphones, wearable electronics, miniature aerial vehicles,
medical endoscopes, and advanced automotive driver assistance systems. Hence,
the project has the potential to benefit a diverse number of industries and
strengthen U.S. economic competitiveness within the optics sector. In a broader
sense, the technology developed in this project will also help revitalize
American manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
demonstrate a new method of lens manufacturing by leveraging semiconductor
processing techniques and developing an innovative lens fabrication tool. The
new tool will measure key optical metrics in real-time during lens creation for
on-the-fly process adjustments. Closed-loop feedback during fabrication will
improve tolerances and yields and produce higher quality lenses compared to
traditional methods. This approach represents a paradigm shift in manufacturing
as all commercial lenses today are created through iterations of lens forming
and ensuing optical metrology. Furthermore, the tool will enable rapid
production of customizable lens shapes, including a novel planar lens. The flat
lens will be compatible with surface modification technologies such as those
used to create electronics and micro mechanical structures, thus enabling, for
example, thin film transistors or sensors to be fabricated with the optics at a
wafer level. Specific research activities will include (1) designing and
constructing manufacturing tools and fixtures, (2) experimentally correlating
tool configurations with lens shapes, (3) constructing and characterizing
concave, convex and planar lenses and (4) developing a software model of the
lenses based on realistic manufacturing constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.