* 1846340
* CAREER:  Abstraction Barriers for Embodied Algorithms
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,10/31/2021
* Nils Napp, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 10/31/2021
* USD 419,419.00

Computers have fundamentally changed society by being able to solve ever more
complex problems quickly and reliably. One key to their utility is that
programmers can quickly develop algorithms to solve new problems as by using
well-understood mathematical abstractions of the underlying computational
machinery. Ideally, modern robots should behave in the same way. They should
perform useful tasks for people, and they should be easy to program so that
roboticists can quickly adapt them to solve new problems as they arise. However,
in practice, the process of developing robots is much more convoluted when they
operate in unstructured, i.e., real-world, environments and requires iterative
adjustments of the robot and its programming. The problem is that physical
interaction is difficult to model, so that a robot action can inadvertently
change the state of the world, sometimes directly causing accidents or causing
problems in future robot-world interactions. This project addresses this problem
in the context of robot construction by developing representations of the world
state that robots can reason about and use for planning. These allow programmers
to treat robots and embodied algorithms and to make robots that reliably operate
when modifying the environment and building structures. This algorithmic view of
robot-environment interaction is one approach to accomplishing the urgent
societal need for innovative construction techniques that are adaptable and
scalable and will help humans adapt to changing societal and infrastructure
needs.

This project develops abstraction barriers with di&#64256;erent amounts of
physical detail, which can be combined to produce robots that reliably work in
highly unstructured environments. Project outcomes will impact several
&#64257;elds including 1) assemblies with pre-fabricated materials, 2) mixed-
material assemblies with found objects, 3) embodied algorithms, 4) plan
synthesis, and 5) probabilistic guarantees on construction processes.
Speci&#64257;cally, this involves partial orders to encode motion, reachability,
and mechanical assembly constraints with a variety of rigid materials; and
geometric abstractions that can be used to provide correctness guarantees for
robots that interact and modify highly irregular environments by using
composable geometric primitives. This work can be directly useful for commercial
construction robots. The proposed research comprises complementary ways in which
physical constraints are represented, and will enable transformative cyber-
physical systems able to reliably modify unstructured environments

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.