* 1846815
* CAREER: Controls on the host and transfer of hazardous genes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* NICOLE FAHRENFELD, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 551,011.00

Antibiotic resistance (AR) infections are a pressing environmental health issue.
Many AR infections in humans come from exposure to soil, water, and air. New
methods are thus needed to measure the risk associated with environmental AR.
This project seeks new techniques to identify genetic markers for AR microbes in
different environmental settings. This information will be used to track the
transmission of these markers through the environment. The project will educate
students in environmental engineering and interdisciplinary problem solving to
tackle complex problems like AR transmission. Research opportunities will also
be created for Puerto Rican and Hispanic students to broaden understanding and
participation in STEM. Results will be shared with the public in English and
Spanish to educate diverse communities on the link between the environment and
human health. Knowledge gained from this project will help transform
environmental biotechnology to address environmental AR for the protection of
human and ecological health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The link between human,
animal, and environmental health (One Health) is exemplified by one of our most
pressing public health issues: antibiotic resistance. Environmental hot spots of
antibiotic resistance have been identified using techniques that do not identify
the genetic context of antibiotic resistant genes (ARGs). Failure to understand
the microbial ecology and mechanisms driving the proliferation of ARGs in the
environment limits our ability to characterize the hazard posted by these genes
and prevents the development of engineering solutions to limit the spread of
antibiotic resistant infectious disease. To address these issues, field surveys
and datamining are proposed to: 1) provide guidance on best practices for
linking functional genes to putative host cells in metagenomic data from mixed
microbial communities; 2) characterize the diversity of the ARG carrying host
cells; and 3) determine the prevalence of waterborne pathogens carrying an ARGs.
Samples from these studies will help define the relative abundance of select
ARGs across air, water, and biofilms. A laboratory experiment will be performed
to determine the relative contribution of host growth versus horizontal gene
transfer (HGT) under selective pressure. If a minimum concentration to promote
HGT can be observed, the genetic context of environmental ARG will be defined
under selecting conditions. By studying host cells, horizontal gene transfers,
and genetic context as a function of water quality, this research will
contribute fundamental knowledge on the factors controlling HGT in water. This
information can be used towards design of engineered treatment systems and is of
critical importance for understanding the transfer of resistance and
understanding conditions that promote beneficial and limiting transfers of
functional genes of importance. The data generated will help fulfill a critical
data gap for quantitative microbial risk assessment for ARGs. The project will
provide Broader Impacts by improving curriculum, promoting network building, and
facilitating interdisciplinary problem solving through an interdisciplinary
course. It will also build bridges to education in environmental engineering
with Hispanic students and communities. Results of the research will be shared
at the Rutgers Day public open house in English and
Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.