* 1846817
* CAREER: Modeling Soil-Machine Interaction for Advances in Civil Construction and Terrestrial Robotics
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* James Hambleton, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will investigate
the physical processes through which machines interact with soils, and develop
theoretical models that will underpin the design of future, autonomous devices
used for construction, mining, agriculture, and mobility. Humans move,
manipulate, and interact with soil on a massive scale for civil construction,
mining, and agriculture using machines that have been designed and built
primarily through trial and error, without fundamental knowledge of how soils
respond under different loading conditions. Advances in mechatronics and
robotics can revolutionize the design of these machines. Since existing
techniques for simulation and design are largely for devices operating on hard
surfaces, a major impediment to answering this question and others is the lack
of methods to predict how machines operate on deformable terrain. This project
will collect data and launch an integrated research and educational program
dedicated specifically to Soil-Machine Interaction (SMI), one that ultimately
will examine a wide variety of machine configurations and soil types. The
broader impacts of this project will shape an emerging, interdisciplinary field
by stimulating technological advances in the devices used for construction,
mining, agriculture, and mobility. Through integrated educational aims, the
project will also attract, excite and educate a diverse group of future civil
engineers through inclusive outreach and educational activities that engage
learners of all ages, from early childhood onward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will integrate experiments and theory based on fundamental soil
mechanics to obtain models for predicting the evolution of forces and reactions
as machines come into contact with soils to induce large, permanent (plastic)
deformations. Significant novelty lies in the complete experimental
characterization of force-displacement histories and deformation fields over a
wide range of possible motions, considering two fundamental soil types and using
the 6-axis robotic arm in the Soil-Machine Interaction Laboratory at
Northwestern University for actuation. To overcome the high computational
demands of existing numerical methods, the project will formulate an efficient
simulation technique based on the Sequential Kinematic Method, an approach that
utilizes simplified kinematics and an optimization-based solution scheme to
decrease computation times significantly. Since force-displacement histories
obtained experimentally or through numerical simulation are applicable only to a
single motion or load path, a significant breakthrough pursued in this project
is the formulation of a semi-analytical framework capable of predicting force-
displacement histories under arbitrary motions and loading conditions.
Educational and societal impact will be maximized through sustained outreach,
training of undergraduate and graduate students, interaction with industry, and
dissemination of results internationally across various platforms, including
open-source software written in an architecture advised by industry
collaborators. Through collaboration with the Chicago Children's Museum and
Chicagoland maker fairs, the project aims to stimulate interest in engineering
and SMI across a wide range of demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.