* 1846965
* CAREER: Matter-Wave Quantum Optics in Spin-Space in Ultracold Sodium Gases
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Arne Schwettmann, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics
Experiment Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Collisions between atoms in gases happen
all around us, for example in the air that we breathe every day. At room
temperature, the collisions are random and very difficult to control. By cooling
a gas to ultracold temperatures near absolute zero (below minus 273 degrees
Celsius) and trapping it in the center of a vacuum chamber, collisions can be
controlled and used to develop new technologies such as quantum-limited sensors
for impurities. An ultracold gas behaves like a single quantum mechanical
object, a matter wave. Collisions still take place in the matter wave, but they
now happen in a predictable fashion. In a sodium matter wave, the collisions can
be controlled precisely via microwave radiation. The colliding atoms behave like
small magnets with magnetic north and south poles determined by the direction of
their atomic spin. During collisions, atoms experience each other's magnetic
fields and change their spin directions. As they change directions, the atomic
spins become correlated with each other at the quantum level, a phenomenon known
as quantum entanglement. Quantum entanglement is useful when atoms are used as
sensors. All entangled atoms react to external influences in unison, increasing
the sensitivity of a sensor. This research project will use controlled
collisions in sodium matter waves to study quantum-enhanced sensing and other
quantum technologies. This project will study the role of impurities and will
also explore differences and similarities compared to experiments with entangled
beams of light. The research will improve our experimental understanding of
quantum technologies based on matter waves under realistic conditions, in the
presence of loss and impurities. This has practical applications for development
of robust quantum-enhanced sensors, for development of quantum-enhanced probes
for ultracold gases, and for improving our understanding of how we can control
spin in matter waves at the quantum level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research program is to study a new generation of quantum technologies based on
quantum engineering of matter-waves, such as quantum-enhanced sensors for
external fields with high spatial resolution, quantum-enhanced probes of
ultracold atomic samples to measure spin populations with reduced noise, and
quantum-enhanced matter-wave devices such as phase-sensitive amplifiers, similar
to those known from quantum optics with light. The control of matter-waves is
exerted by microwave-dressing and RF control of spin-exchange collisions in a
Bose-Einstein condensate of atomic sodium in the limit of long evolution times.
During spin-exchange collisions in the F=1 sodium gas, pairs of atoms with
magnetic quantum number m=0 collide and change into pairs with m=+/-1 and vice
versa. This process generates quantum entanglement similar to four-wave mixing
with light. But there are important differences in the atomic system due to
extra terms in the Hamiltonian not present in the photonic system. These
differences become increasingly important for long evolution times, t&gt;|h/c|,
where t&gt;30 ms in a sodium Bose-Einstein condensate and c is the spin-exchange
collisional energy. They give rise to quantum phase transitions that can
generate massive entanglement. The ground state depends uniquely on whether the
gas is antiferromagnetic (c&gt;0, Na), where it is massively entangled, or
ferromagnetic (c&lt;0, Rb), where it is not entangled. The goal of this project
is to make use of the unique features of ultracold sodium, and recent
technological advances in matter-wave quantum optics, to demonstrate a robust
and future-proof platform for matter-wave quantum technologies that will lay the
groundwork for extensive long-term research on matter-wave devices similar to
photonic devices. This is done by studying the following quantum technologies:
a) quantum-enhanced sensing via spin-mixing interferometry in the long evolution
time limit, b) quantum-enhanced probing of spin populations, c) quantum state
synthesis of exotic many body states, and d) quantum simulation of the effect of
impurities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.