* 1846418
* CAREER: Advanced Containers for Reproducibility in Computational and Data Science
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Tanu Malik, DePaul University
* Continuing Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2024
* USD 498,889.00

Reproducibility is essential for scientific progress and to establish trust in
scientific results. Published computational results, increasingly, lack
sufficient capture and description of companion information that enables
subsequent confirmation and extension of results. This project will design and
implement a novel container-based approach for sharing and reproducing
scientific results. Reproducible containers developed from this project will
package code, data, environment, provenance, and assumptions across
heterogeneous computing platforms. In contrast to taking a "devops"-based
approach, which burdens the user to manage reproducibility of experiments, this
project uses reference executions of scientific experiments as a virtualization
method for containerizing associated artifacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While a
container-based approach can help to verify repeat computations, further
advancements in container technology are needed to enable advanced forms of
reproducibility. This project aims to enable reproducibility even if
computations include non-determinism and race conditions; code, data-sets, and
parameters are changed; computations are performed on distributed platforms; and
containers are shared with sensitive data and undocumented content. To that end,
the project will develop an open-source container runtime that will offer
primitives for enabling re-runnability, extensibility, and publish-ability of
containers. The work leverages portable containers developed previously for
computational sciences. This award will lay the foundation for an essential
building block for establishing reproducibility of real-world computational and
data science use cases. The project will increase awareness of the need for
computational reproducibility tools through an integrated research and education
plan involving scientists, students, and instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.