* 1846368
* CAREER: Scalable Musculoskeletal Simulation for Biomechanical Animation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Shinjiro Sueda, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

This project will build new computational models for biomechanically based
animation of digital humans, suitable for a wide range of applications. Beyond
computer animation, the result of this research will be used for anatomy
training and education by combining musculoskeletal simulations with haptic
feedback. This research will also lead to novel applications in diverse other
fields, including: medicine, for surgical training and stroke rehabilitation;
ergonomics, for better understanding of energy use; bio-paleontology, for
discovering the movement of extinct animals; robotics, for bio-inspired tendon-
driven actuators; and neuroscience, for reverse engineering the brain by
providing a computational testbed for understanding motor control. The
integrated educational objective of this project is to use concepts from
computer graphics, computer animation, and computational biomechanics as
motivational tools to teach people of diverse ages and backgrounds about STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will build on existing
musculoskeletal simulations in biomechanics and graphics. In recent decades, two
contrasting methods for musculoskeletal simulation have been developed: line-
based methods and volume-based methods. Unfortunately, there is currently no way
to get the best of both worlds because these methods are built on fundamentally
different principles; line-based methods are built on rigid body dynamics,
whereas volume-based methods are built on continuum mechanics. This project will
bridge the gap between these two approaches. The specific research objectives
are threefold. (1) To imbue the standard line-based methods with two important
features, muscle inertia and branching. The guiding principle for this research
objective is to expand the current capabilities of existing line-based methods
while enabling easy integration into off-the-shelf simulators. (2) To apply
intelligent model reduction that is specific to muscles, in order to make the
volume-based methods more efficient and robust, and capable of gracefully
degrading to line-based methods. (3) To validate the proposed computational
models rigorously with real-world anatomical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.