* 1846975
* CAREER: A New Sensor-Driven Framework for Real-time Monitoring, Control, and Decision Making in Dynamic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ramin Moghaddass, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2024
* USD 507,776.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant supports research
that addresses the efficient operation and maintenance of complex, sensor-driven
engineered systems, promoting both the progress of science and advancing
economic competitiveness and national prosperity. Recent advancements in smart
sensing technologies and large-scale data acquisition platforms have brought new
opportunities for real-time monitoring and control of dynamic engineering
systems in such diverse domains as renewable energy and smart manufacturing. To
fully benefit from these new opportunities, research is needed on scalable
models and methods to capture the dynamic behavior of these systems and
efficiently analyze heterogeneous data collected from disparate sources so as to
enable real-time decision making and control. Through collaborations with the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Florida Power and Light, and Argonne
National Laboratory, the project will use large scale databases collected on
wind turbines and electric power grids as test cases for asset health monitoring
and control. The project also aims to enhance the participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields, particularly in data analytics,
data-driven decision making, and computing science careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a fundamentally new quantitative
framework that can efficiently utilize large-scale heterogeneous time-series
data collected from various sources in engineered systems to generate real-time
actionable insights and decision-making intelligence. Using dynamic Bayesian
hierarchical modeling and advanced recurrent neural networks without imposing
strong parametric/distributional assumptions and prior knowledge, the project
will develop and validate scalable optimization-based methods for training the
state-space model using past data. The framework will result in a new approach
for real-time optimal control and dynamic decision- making inspired by deep
reinforcement learning techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.