* 1846376
* CAREER:  Tempo, Contingency, and Gene Flow in the Coevolution of a Model Microbial Mutualism
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Erik Hom, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 953,429.00

Mutualisms - beneficial interactions between two organisms - are common in
nature and have profoundly shaped life on our planet. Mutualistic microbes are
important to human health because of the importance of microbes that live in and
on our bodies. They impact human welfare, for example because of the role of
microbes associated with high-yielding crop plants. These examples demonstrate
the fundamental importance of microbial mutualisms to human flourishing.
Surprisingly, very little is understood about how such mutualisms are born, or
the conditions that are important in their formation. This project will
investigate how mutualistic relationships form and become established at the
genetic level. It will explore how environmental factors impact the evolution
and stability of these new mutualisms. Insights from this work may be relevant
for biodiversity conservation efforts and for the management of invasive species
in light of environmental change. This project will also facilitate the growth
and development of initiatives aimed at improving STEM education practices and
STEM preparedness of graduate, undergraduate, high school, and community college
transfer students, that build upon the Principal Investigator's existing efforts
to improve the STEM success landscape in Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Principal Investigator created a new mutualism based on carbon and nitrogen
exchange between two model microbes, the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
and the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, a system with an unprecedented
degree of experimental and genetic tractability. Using this system, this project
will elucidate how nascent mutualistic relationships are consolidated at the
genetic level and investigate the impact of (1) carbon and nitrogen nutrient
availability, (2) historical contingency (i.e., prior evolutionary history), and
(3) gene flow/migration (between communities adapted to different local
environmental conditions) on the coevolution of mutualism. This work will
experimentally test ideas underlying Thompson's Geographic Mosaic Theory of
Coevolution, and address several questions, including: (i) how do environmental
conditions and/or the degree of interspecies dependency (obligate or
facultative) influence coevolutionary trajectories and the distribution of
adaptive genetic changes among partners? (ii) To what degree does prior
mutualistic evolutionary history canalize or limit the possibilities for
subsequent evolutionary adaptation? (iii) How does genetic mixing of partners
that have evolved under different sets of conditions influence subsequent
coevolutionary outcomes compared to cases where there is no gene flow? An
integral part of this project includes efforts to: (1) enhance undergraduate and
graduate education in evolution and genomics, (2) improve academic preparedness
and success of community college transfer students, and (3) catalyze STEM
interest and college readiness among low-income high school students, notably
from the Mississippi Delta.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.