* 1846354
* CAREER:Program Analyses for Improving Reliability of Probabilistic Software
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Sasa Misailovic, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 511,724.00

Many emerging applications operate on noisy data and make decisions under
uncertainty. Probabilistic programming languages represent such computations as
programs that operate on random variables and probability distributions. While
the existing languages open the world of powerful probabilistic inference even
to programmers with limited knowledge of statistics, new techniques need to be
developed to improve programmer productivity and simplify debugging of
probabilistic software. This project investigates the hypothesis that static
program analysis, with its sound and rich symbolic reasoning, is a solid
foundation for these techniques. This project will lead to new automated tools
to help scientists, engineers, and software developers build reliable and robust
probabilistic software. The project will integrate research and education by
developing courses based on newly developed ideas, with the goal of empowering
future software engineers with solid quantitative reasoning
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate both the foundations
of automated relational analysis for probabilistic computations and the
practical application of probabilistic analysis to help application programmers
and developers of probabilistic programming systems. The project will
investigate two impactful relational analyses for probabilistic programs:
sensitivity analysis and semantic differencing. The project will develop an
ecosystem of techniques that leverage these analyses to identify errors in
probabilistic programming systems, improve robustness of probabilistic
computations through program transformations, and optimize the performance of
applications that operate on noisy data. The benefits and key components of the
approach (including flexible abstractions, transformations, and solving
mechanisms) will extend to various application domains with inherent
randomness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.