* 1846237
* CAREER: Scalable and Robust Dynamic Matching Market Design
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* John Dickerson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Markets are systems that empower interested parties -- humans, firms,
governments, or autonomous agents -- to exchange goods, services, and
information. Due to logistical or societal constraints, many markets, e.g.,
school choice, rideshare, medical residency, advertising, cadaveric organ
allocation, online labor, public housing, refugee placement, as well as barter
markets such as kidney exchange, cannot rely solely on prices to match supply
and demand. This project will develop connections between artificial
intelligence (AI) and matching market theory and practice. Specifically, it will
create practical methods for the design and analysis of dynamic matching markets
operating under various forms of uncertainty, with complex goals, and under
objectives that take into account stakeholders' value judgments in a principled
way. This research will improve existing systems as well as enable new markets.
It will directly address problems in real-world matching systems such as kidney
exchange and will lead to improvements in fairness, economic efficiency, and
ethical alignment of objectives in fielded kidney allocation systems and other
markets. This project will also lay the groundwork for a redesign of the
computer science faculty and post-doc job matching market; and it will begin
developing principled systems to promote diversity in university admissions, as
well as quantitative and technical hiring. Open source software solutions
developed as a byproduct of this research will be made available to the public,
and results will be communicated with educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will substantially increase the breadth of matching market design,
traditionally addressed via microeconomic theory, by developing scalable AI-
based methods for designing and analyzing these markets. In turn, matching
markets will serve as impetus and inspiration for the development of principled
and scalable general optimization-based algorithms for decision making under
uncertainty, as well as general AI-based methods for alignment of systems with
elicited stakeholder value judgments. The research will make progress in the
following three directions:&lt;br/&gt;1) Principled approaches to managing
short-term uncertainty. Often, decisions must be made before all information
about the environment is revealed. This project will take an AI-based approach
to decision making under uncertainty; specifically, it will design and create
principled methods to learn (at some cost) about the environment that tie into
novel methods for computing robust matching policies.&lt;br/&gt;2) Learning to
balance fairness and efficiency through dynamic matching. Many matching markets
are dynamic: participants arrive and depart over time, and relationships between
them evolve in predictable ways. Via reinforcement learning and approximate
dynamic programming, this project will develop principled and practical ways to
learn matching policies that provide both economic efficiency gains alongside
fairness and/or diversity-promoting guarantees.&lt;br/&gt;3) Alignment with
human value judgments. AI-based matching methods require an objective to
optimize. Defining that objective involves a feedback loop between human
stakeholders---each with their own value judgments---and automated systems. This
research will meld techniques for aggregating value judgments of human
stakeholders into automated matching and resource allocation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.