* 1846023
* CAREER: Sparse Associative Deep Learning using Neural Mimicry in Multimodal Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,11/30/2019
* Edward Kim, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 11/30/2019
* USD 98,616.00

Artificial intelligence has made incredible progress in the past several years.
AI technology is now successfully being used in voice assistants, photo
recognition technology, chatbots, search engines, and self-driving cars. While
current AI is very good at matching specific patterns for specific tasks,
research has shown that it cannot generalize to different tasks and has no real
understanding of what it is doing. Thus, radical new directions need to be
explored to achieve a truly intelligent machine. This project explores a new
kind of AI framework, one that mimics how the human brain senses and understands
the world. This new AI system learns much like an infant would, by simply
observing the world and learning through exploration. This project also utilizes
a new type of computer chip that communicates information in the same way that
neurons in the brain communicate. Ultimately, the project will create a new kind
of AI by mimicking certain functions of the human brain. This research can
inform new methods and approaches to creating an AI that better understands the
world in which we live. Furthermore, the project attracts and supports the
education of students interested in the interdisciplinary field of human and
machine intelligence.

This project develops a new multimodal machine learning paradigm that is
principally different from the traditional deep learning methods used in the
state-of-the-art today. This research is inspired by breakthroughs in
computational and theoretical neuroscience that incorporate ideas not explored
by current feed-forward deep learning architectures. Rather than using massive
labeled datasets, the algorithms learn much like an infant learns, i.e., by
unsupervised observation and exploration of the world through different sensory
inputs. The project addresses three primary research challenges: (1) the
algorithms will robustly learn the structure of the world, (2) the model will
learn heterogenous associations from repeated stimuli, and (3) given the same
fundamental architecture, the model will learn how to predict the future.
Furthermore, the framework described in the project mimics the hierarchical
architecture, sparsity, top-down, and feedback functions of the mammalian brain.
This model is built upon recent advances in neuromorphic software and hardware
that enhance the functionality, energy use, and speed of the underlying
algorithms. Given that neuromorphic approaches are under active development,
this project has the unique opportunity to provide algorithms and functionality
in software and silicon.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.