* 1846860
* CAREER: Deconstructing Neurovascular Mechanobiology
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ethan Lippmann, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Relative to blood vessels in the rest of the body, the blood vessels in the
brain have specialized functions that make them very selective with respect to
what substances they permit to transfer between the bloodstream and the brain.
This function is commonly referred to as the blood-brain barrier (BBB) and may
become compromised in various brain diseases, but the reason for this change is
often unclear. The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) award is to investigate the hypothesis that changes in the stiffness of
the extracellular matrix of blood vessels are one of the causes of dysfunction
of the blood-brain barrier. This research will be accomplished by conducting
measurements directly on blood vessels dissected from mouse and human brain
tissue as well as by building blood vessel models from human stem cells through
which the matrix stiffness and other parameters can be precisely controlled.
These results will provide key insight into fundamental processes related to the
progression of changes in brain vascular physiology due to aging or disease. In
conjunction with this research plan, new educational and outreach activities
will be developed and disseminated. In collaboration with a local artist and
high school students who will perform research in the PI?s lab, a series of
educational materials will be developed to explain how stem cells can be used
for understanding and treating diseases. These materials will be disseminated at
a Nashville science outreach center, through after-school clubs for economically
disadvantaged students, and a yearly neuroscience event, thus promoting learning
and engagement in the local community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
research goal of this award is to understand the mechanobiology of the blood-
brain barrier, specifically related to the interaction of the cerebrovascular
mechanics with BBB function. This will be accomplished through two primary
research objectives. The first objective is to fundamentally characterize how
neurovascular tissue stiffness influences blood-brain barrier function in situ
(in natural tissue) and in vitro (in engineered tissue). The in situ portion of
the project will characterize the neurovascular stiffness, blood-brain barrier
leakage, and extracellular matrix remodeling as a function of age and disease
using mouse and human brain tissue samples. The in vitro portion of the work
will develop blood-brain barrier mimics using induced pluripotent stem cells
that can model this structure. These mimics will then be used to directly
examine the effect of substrate stiffness on blood-brain barrier function. The
second objective is to elucidate the biophysical mechanisms, specifically the
mechanical triggers and the molecular signals, that regulate neurovascular
stiffening in 2D and 3D culture. The focus will be on both autonomous and cross-
talk signaling for the various cells that make up the blood-brain barrier.
Understanding more fully the blood-brain barrier -- and in particular how
changes in vascular stiffness that occur during aging and other pathologies may
impact its function -- is a key area for understanding cerebrovascular
physiology and how materials can be transported (or prevented from being
transported) to the brain tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.