* 1846167
* CAREER: Talking Science: Early STEM Identity Formation Through Everyday Science Talk
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2026
* Remy Dou, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Johnson
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,031,041.00

This is a proposal responsive to the Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) solicitation (NSF 17-537) and submitted to the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning program. The proposal will address the critical issue of developing
children's identification with science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) fields, and will respond to the existing limited knowledge about the
development of STEM identities through conversations, particularly among very
young children from underserved and underrepresented populations. The study will
be based on the premise that individuals who develop STEM interest and identify
with STEM at a young age tend to pursue STEM-related careers more so than
individuals who develop these interests later in life. Research on the topic
suggests that after exploring a variety of childhood informal STEM learning
experiences, such as playing with electronics, taking care of animals, and
joining after-school science clubs, talking about science and consuming science-
related media were the only predictors of STEM identity. The study will
investigate whether STEM-related conversations outside of school with friends
and family during formative years (i.e., 5 -9 years old) predict their STEM
identity later in life and their STEM-career choices. The goals of the project
will be : (1) To develop an understanding of the features and context of
conversations that support STEM identity development in both majority and
Hispanic/Latino populations; and (2) To translate the research outcomes into
informal STEM learning practices that contribute to young people's perceptions
of STEM fields in their future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goals, the
work will address the following research questions: (1) What is the content,
context, and structure of STEM-related conversations with friends and family
that youth ages 5-9 participate in?; (2) How do these conversation features
(i.e., content, context, structure) relate to the development of youth's STEM
interests, sense of recognition as STEM people, and self-identification with
STEM?; (3) How do the cultural values and science talk experiences of
Hispanic/Latino youth shape conversation features related to youth's STEM
interests, sense of recognition as STEM people, and self-identification with
STEM in comparison to non-Hispanic/Latino youth?; and (4) Does professional
development for informal STEM learning educators that focuses on encouraging
youth to engage in STEM-related conversations with friends and family positively
contribute to youth's STEM interest, sense of recognition, and self-
identification with STEM? To address these questions, the study will adopt a
qualitative research approach that applies phenomenological strategies in
research design, data collection, and analysis to allow for exploration of the
meaning of lived experiences in social and cultural contexts. Participants will
include elementary-age students (ages 5-9; n = 50) from socially, culturally,
and linguistically diverse backgrounds, enrolled in summer science camps in the
greater Miami area that intentionally solicit the participation of children and
families who would not typically participate in these kinds of programs due to
socioeconomic and cultural barriers. To inform the development of interview
protocols in terms of the kinds of childhood talk that leave a long-term impact
on students, including the kinds of talk experiences remembered by students who
choose or persist towards a STEM career in college; the project will also
recruit first- and second-year college students as participants. Data gathering,
and interpretation strategies will include surveys with college students (n=32)
and interviews (n = 16), as well as recorded and coded semi-structured
interviews with early-grade students (n= 50). Broad coding of the content,
context, and structure of STEM-related conversations will be further subdivided
into sub-codes to identify patterns using qualitative analytical strategies. The
outcomes of this research will constitute a theoretical framework and models
that can guide the development of both professionals and programmatic activities
at informal learning institutions, particularly around scaffolding participation
in STEM through science talk. An external evaluator will address both formative
and summative aspects of the activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.