* 1846766
* CAREER: Topological Engineering for Active Photonic Structures and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Liang Feng, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Photonics has yielded important technological breakthroughs in novel information
processing, switching and routing for high-speed computing and communication
systems. Active photonic structures built upon optical gain materials (e.g.
lasers and amplifiers) are the key drivers over other passive components in
photonic applications. Novel approaches towards unique active photonic
functionalities become necessary to further advance modern information systems.
In this project, the PI will leverage the state-of-the-art integrated photonics
technology to develop a disruptive topological photonic platform. The novel
topological engineering of light propagation offers an unprecedented perspective
to further expand the design methodology of active photonic structures, enabling
a wide range of applications in optical communication and computing. This
research is closely integrated with the existing educational activities,
stimulating undergraduate and graduate students to pursue engineering career by
exposing them to the exciting development of active nanophotonic devices solving
important societal problems in optical computing, communication, and networking.
The educational outreach activities will also be provided to promote the
interests and participations of K-12 students and broaden the participations
from underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop disruptive active photonic technologies via
strategic configurations of optical gain and loss in a topological manner. This
can deliver a great variety of unprecedented freedoms in manipulating light for
modern photonic applications and thus revolutionizing next generation of
photonics-based information systems, advancing on-chip optical switching,
routing, lasing, and division multiplexing. Coupled with optical gain/loss, the
actively controlled topology of the photonic devices offers robust light routing
in a flexible and reconfigurable manner. Also under investigation is how active
optical gain/loss manipulation can be strategically controlled to create a new
class of imaginary-gauged topological photonic lasers, where the chirality of
laser oscillation can be conveniently switched to better control the topological
photonic routing. Exploratory photonic research based on an innovative Dirac
formalism will be conducted to create a more versatile topological photonic
platform for, in particular, topological mode creation and addition in a
flexible manner, which will enable robust mode division multiplexing to increase
information capacity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.