* 1846658
* CAREER: Social Intelligence with Contextual Ambidexterity for Long-Term Human-Robot Interaction and Intervention (LT-HRI2)
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Chung Hyuk Park, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 02/29/2024
* USD 564,900.00

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is the most common neuro-developmental disorder
among adolescents in the United States, with an estimated prevalence rate of one
in 59. The major characteristics include deficits in social, sensory, and
emotional processing. Boys have about four times higher rate of diagnosis than
girls. General interventions such as behavior and speech/language therapies have
been developed, and socially assistive robots have shown effective and positive
outcomes in communicating with and delivering interactive interventions to
individuals with ASD. However, a major obstacle to broadening the impact of
robotic assistance and intervention in real-world settings is the lack of a
robotic framework that can adaptively learn diverse interaction skills over time
and associate with new social contexts as the human counterpart develops.
Furthermore, recent studies are showing that girls are under-diagnosed and thus
under-served due to their higher sensitivity in social cues resulting in social
camouflage that often causes their symptoms to go undetected. Thus, there is a
demonstrated need for intelligent socially-assistive robotic systems that can
cope with the developmental processes and gender-specific characteristics of
children with ASD. To address this need, the project aims to develop a novel
socio-emotional human-robot interaction framework to provide interactive
emotional regulation and guidance through robot-initiated conversation and
gestures in response to the individual's unique socio-emotional cues. These cues
can be recognized through analysis of voice signals, facial expressions,
gestures and conversation. The successfully developed framework, which will be
implemented on virtual and physical robotic platforms, will promote healthier
and emotionally-balanced living for individuals with socio-emotional processing
disorders or deficits. The knowledge gained through this project will be
directly fused into educational activities for the future generation and
students from underrepresented groups to develop creative mindsets and analytic
skills in science, technology, engineering, art, and math (STEAM). Collaborative
outreach activities include: applying the technology developed in the George
Washington Autism &amp; Neurodevelopmental Disorders Institute (ANDI) facility;
working with the Kennedy Krieger Institute through Robotic Design workshops,
Summer Robotics camps and providing Robotic interactions in school environments;
and participating in the Take2 Summer Camp program that offers a 4-week
therapeutic camp for children who have difficultly functioning in the social
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term career research goal is to
understand the fundamental principles of human interactions and behaviors and
translate these mechanisms into computational modeling and algorithms for a
novel assistive robotic framework. Toward this goal, this project will develop a
socially assistive robotic framework with contextual ambidexterity that is
perceptive of personal socio-emotional states, capable of learning social
skills, emotionally interactive, and gender-smart for long-term human-robot
interaction and intervention (LT-HRI). Contextual ambidexterity, which
investigates the key metrics for synchronizing two strategies--how to best
exploit given functionality and resources in performing a task and how to
efficiently explore new skills and knowledge to gain social intelligence over
time--is very applicable to the robotic agent that needs to be able to determine
best selections from programmed skills (exploitation) when faced with well-
perceived situations but needs to also be able to learn new skills and contexts
(exploration) when faced with unknown situations. To evaluate the efficacy of
the framework in the real world, an active learning robotic agent will be
developed to assist in socio-emotional LT-HRI for adolescents with autism
spectrum disorder (ASD). The Research Plan is organized under four tasks. The
FIRST TASK is to achieve advanced emotional perception tailored to an
individual's unique socio-emotional cues. A voice-based-emotion-estimation
module will be developed and combined with a widely used facial expression
analysis module to control an interactive communication module that can interact
with the user to acquire more accurate emotional characteristics if needed. The
SECOND TASK is to learn social gestures and contexts from personal interactions
and communications. Algorithms have been developed to capture the real-time
sequence of a human gesture and to generate "gesture-features" that will be
passed to a module that will check to see if the feature is already learned or,
if not, will be registered as a new gesture. Once the gesture is learned, the
robot will practice the learned behavior and observe the user's response to
learn/update the social context of the gesture. The THIRD TASK is to develop an
efficient framework for modeling emotional interaction and regulation between a
human user and a robotic agent and to develop controllable algorithms for
effective rapport formation. Emotional agents include human emotion, robotic
emotion and a target emotional goal for emotional regulation and therapy. In the
"rapport forming" phase, the robot's emotional goal is designed to approach the
human's emotional goal and establish a common bond of empathy. In the "emotional
guidance" phase, if the "rapport phase" is failing, the robot will take a
proactive role in moving the human's emotional state toward the target emotion.
The FOURTH TASK is to develop a gender-smart robotic intervention system, i.e.,
an optimal interaction policy for gender-specific social environments. Once the
robot has perceived the user's emotional state, the robot can select subsequent
actions to increase the user's engagement/participation level. Gender-smart
behavior planning will be based on Partial Observable Markov Decision
Process(POMDP) models of each user's interaction patterns/preferences, which can
be used to maximize the total expected reward and determine the next action to
be taken by the robot. POMDP models results can be incorporated into gender-
specific representations (e.g. heatmaps) that can be used to anticipate gender
differences. A set of experiments with human participants (neurotypical
adolescents and adolescents with ASD, ages 10-19) will be designed to validate
algorithms and assess the overall effectiveness of the robotic framework. The
specifications, training data, and algorithm outcomes produced by the project
will be openly disseminated for researchers as open-source Robot Operating
System (ROS) packages and repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.