* 1846166
* CAREER: Algebraic Methods for the Computation of Approximate Short Vectors in Ideal Lattices
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jean-Francois Biasse, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2024
* USD 458,000.00

This project involves research into the computational hardness of the search for
short elements of the so-called Euclidean lattices. The hardness of this task is
the measure of the security of one of the most promising family of cryptographic
protocols that are conjectured to resist attacks from quantum computers. The
transition toward such protocols is an immediate priority for the cryptography
community. Indeed, quantum-safe primitives will need to be ready and deployed
long before the construction of large scale quantum computers to account for the
shelf life of encrypted data. The results from this research are disseminated to
a large audience ranging from industrials willing to adopt quantum-safe
primitives, university students, and K-12 students. This project supports a
week-long cybersecurity camp for high school students who discover the
fundamentals for security and cryptography through hands-on
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically focuses on the
hardness of the search for short vectors in Euclidean lattices that are ideals
of a number field. This special class of lattices, called ideal lattices, is
very popular in lattice-based cryptography because it allows interesting
optimizations including the use of significantly shorter keys. However, the
restriction to a smaller class of lattices having more algebraic structure could
also mean that the search for short elements is not as hard as in general
lattices. Building on previous work of the investigator on the computation of
invariants of number fields, this project investigates the algebraic methods
allowing the search for short elements in ideal
lattices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.