* 1846291
* CAREER: Towards Elastic Security with Safe and Efficient Network Security Function Virtualization
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2019,06/30/2021
* Hongxin Hu, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Indrajit Ray
* 06/30/2021
* USD 191,617.00

Traditional network security functions are generally implemented on vendor
proprietary appliances or middleboxes, which usually lack a general programming
interface, and their versatility and flexibility are also very poor. These
traditional network security appliances often need to be placed at fixed network
entry points and have a constant capacity with respect to the maximum amount of
traffic they can process. Such rigid nature makes them inefficient in protecting
today's prevailing programmable and virtualizable environments. Network Function
Virtualization (NFV) and Software-Defined Networking (SDN) are two emerging
networking paradigms that offer the potential to address those limitations and
are able to facilitate elastic security with the design of a new breed of
network security functions called virtual Network Security Functions (vNSFs).
The major goal of this project is to extend the understanding and science of
virtual Network Security Functions. It will develop new technology for virtual
Network Security Functions where security microservices can be deployed
elastically, safely and efficiently, on demand, tailored to the needs of the
situation. It addresses major challenges inherent in the management, design,
deployment, and execution of virtual Network Security Functions that currently
prevent the full use of their benefits. This project will also integrate a
comprehensive education plan with the proposed research to train the next
generation workforce in computational sciences. The project will foster the
diversity of students by active recruitment of women and other under-represented
groups for participation in the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
first propose a new firewall architecture to address challenges in virtual
firewall scaling. This project will then explore solutions to facilitate safe
and efficient virtualization of both traditional and Artificial Neural Network
(ANN)-based Intrusion Detection Systems. Finally, this project will develop a
general framework, OpenNSFV, for supporting safe and efficient virtualization of
network security functions. The proposed solutions of this project will be
flexible, scalable, trustworthy, and optimal, and will substantially enhance the
security of programmable and virtualizable network infrastructure. To
demonstrate the practicality and feasibility of the proposed solutions, the
project will implement, deploy, and evaluate the proposed security mechanisms in
real production environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.