* 1846226
* CAREER:IDENTIFICATION AND CHARACTERIZATION OF NOVEL GENETIC PLAYERS IN THE EARLY SIGNALING PATHWAYS OF PLANT-MICROBE SYMBIOSES
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Muthusubramania Venkateshwaran, University of Wisconsin-Platteville
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 05/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Excessive use of agrochemicals, such as fertilizers and pesticides in intensive
agriculture has not only increased the cost of cultivation but also poses severe
health hazards and threats to various ecosystems. Sustainable agriculture aims
at preserving the natural reserves for the future, demands minimum chemical
inputs, promotes efficient nutrient recycling, and enhances the critical
microbial-driven processes, such as nutrient acquisition and protection against
plant pathogens. Rhizobia and mycorrhizal fungi are the primary groups of
beneficial soil microbes, which help the plants in meeting their demand for
nitrogen and phosphorous, thereby significantly reducing the exogenous
application of nitrogen and phosphate fertilizers. Although mycorrhizal
associations are widely prevalent among most land plants, nitrogen-fixing
rhizobial associations are limited only to legumes. This project aims at
dissecting the molecular mechanisms of legume-rhizobia symbiosis to engineer and
introduce this symbiotic machinery into cereal crops. This will be a great boon
to the farmers, as the availability of cereal crop cultivars that are capable of
establishing symbiotic associations with nitrogen-fixing rhizobia will minimize
their cost of cultivation manifold. In addition to furthering existing knowledge
on plant-microbe symbioses, the project will provide ample scope for the
integration of research and educational goals of the researcher and support
unique educational programs dedicated to provide a research based-learning
platform to undergraduate students from first-generation, low-income, under-
represented minority groups, K-12 teachers and students of Wisconsin public
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Symbiotic associations between crops and microbes
play an essential role in enhancing the productivity and sustainability of our
agriculture. The two most important symbioses in agroecosystems that promote
crop nutrition are legume root nodulation and arbuscular mycorrhization. Genetic
studies in the model legumes, such as Medicago truncatula and Lotus japonicus
led to current understanding of the molecular mechanisms controlling the
establishment of these mutualistic associations and suggest the existence of a
Common Symbiotic Pathway (CSP) between both symbioses, in which Medicago
truncatula DOES NOT MAKE INFECTIONS 1, 2 and 3 (DMI1, DMI2 and DMI3) play a
central role. This opens the exciting possibility of manipulating this conserved
CSP to improve the associations between symbiotic microbes and crop plants. To
achieve this exciting goal, a thorough understanding of symbiotic signal
transduction machinery is required. This CAREER project aims at identifying and
characterizing novel genetic players in the early signaling pathway through
genetic suppressor screening followed by mapping the suppressor loci through
whole genome sequencing to clone the novel genes for functional
characterization. This project will allow the investigators to identify novel
components that have been missed in conventional screens for nodulation-
defective mutants and generate new knowledge of the molecular mechanisms
allowing symbiotic associations that could be applied to legume and non-legume
crops. Therefore, this project will not only provide fundamental insights into
the molecular mechanisms controlling plant-microbe symbioses, but will also
identify potential targets for engineering more efficient nitrogen-fixing
associations in cereal crops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.