* 1846858
* CAREER: Quantification of the Powder-Liquid Interface via Multi-scale Granulation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Heather Emady, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 527,110.00

Powders and particles are extensively used and processed in industry.
Particulate materials are used in pharmaceuticals, agricultural chemicals,
detergents, and consumer products. Despite their wide use, few engineering and
design principles exist to guide the processing of particulates. Existing models
are empirical and specific to certain particle sizes or shapes. Thus, there is a
critical need to study particulate systems. This research will use experiments
to gain insights into the particle-liquid interface and property-processing
relationships. Education and outreach activities will help prepare students to
work in this important technological area and increase the participation of
women in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER award, the
wetting and granule formation behavior of practical, complex powder formulations
will be quantified via static single drop granulation experiments. The single
drop granule formation information will be used to scale-up to industrial
granulators. Linking the material properties (micro-scale) to the process
parameters (meso- and macro-scale) and product granule structure (meso-scale)
will provide a scientific means, via semi-empirical models and regime maps, to
design and predict granules of tailored properties. Here, new knowledge will be
created with the potential to predict granular product properties based on the
characterization of the powder-liquid interface, along with the raw feed
material and process parameters. This work aims to transform the granulation
process, allowing granulation to be more broadly applied and expanded to new
industries, such as biomass and metal-organic frameworks. Two novel scientific
broader impacts of this work include: (1) the ability to predict granulation
routes, and (2) the application of granulation to a variety of new industries.
Through this award, students from middle school through graduate school will be
engaged and supported in chemical engineering, and specifically particle
technology research, to inform and prepare students for career opportunities in
this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.