* 1846888
* CAREER: Force-Generating Mechanisms Responsible for Matrix-Dependent Compressive Mechanical Feedback During Tumor Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Kristen Mills, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Laurel Kuxhaus
* 04/30/2024
* USD 532,000.00

Growth is a necessary process to develop the organs and structures of the body.
It is a complex process involving signals inside cells, between cells, and
between cells and their surrounding matrix. During growth, cells divide --
leading to expansion of the organ or structure that pushes against the matrix
that surrounds it. The matrix acts to constrain the dividing cells. This
expansion against the matrix results in a compressive force being generated on
the cells. It is not currently understood how this constraint-induced
compression affects future cell division and growth. However, it is known that
diseases like cancer, which lead to the seemingly chaotic growth of tumors,
often initiate and flourish in matrices that are significantly stiffer than
healthy matrices. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award
project will seek to determine how cells decide how much constraint-induced
compression is healthy for them to grow against and how tumor cells evade such
signals. The advancement in knowledge expected from this award can then be
applied to support development of new treatment and characterization systems for
cancer. The project will also engage, motivate, and educate future scientists
and the community on the importance of mechanics in health and disease. These
educational and outreach activities include three interactive modules for young
high school students, participating in residential research summer programs for
high school students, mentoring undergraduate student researchers, developing a
graduate-level curriculum, and even collaborating with dancers to develop
performances that communicate concepts of biomechanics to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research goal of this project is to
study tissue growth in malignant tissue as a function of the mechanical
properties of the extracellular matrix, focusing on understanding the signaling
pathways and cytoskeletal network mechanics through which cells transduce
mechanical constraint during tissue growth. This is supported through three
research objectives. The first objective will determine the proliferative
potential and cell- and tissue-scale morphological development of breast cancer
cells of increasing aggressiveness during mechanically constrained growth using
well-defined hydrogel matrices. Measurements related to cellular and tissue
morphology, as well as cellular division, will be quantified using time-lapse
confocal microscopy as a function of the number of cells present and the matrix
mechanical properties. The second objective will compare tissue- and cell-scale
stress fields in the matrix and tissue for the panel of breast cancer cells of
increasing aggressiveness. This will be done through imaging of tissue
deformation caused during growth using fluorescent microbeads co-embedded in the
matrix with the cells. The final objective seeks to determine the mechanism by
which cells transduce mechanical constraint during division in tissue growth by
examining the expression of proteins that are involved with force generation and
sensing during cellular division and partially inhibiting those proteins to
discern their individual roles. The scientific impact of this work will be
significant, as it will significantly contribute to the fundamental
understanding of tumor growth and development -- key questions that must be
answered to allow future developments in cancer
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.