* 1846911
* CAREER: Reconfigurable Microfluidic-Microbalance Sensors to Monitor and Optimize the Performance of Microphysiological Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2025
* Michael Daniele, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2025
* USD 500,000.00

Reconfigurable sensing-systems are adaptable platforms that can detect and
quantify any target on-demand; however, such systems have not been translated
and applied to fields of biosensing and biotechnology. New biosensing
capabilities are needed for a paradigm shift in sensor design, from tailoring
the sensor to fit a narrow range of targets and conditions, towards a more
adaptable platform, wherein the sensor architecture is unvaried, while its
performance is tuned to match a particular concentration and complexity of the
biological analyte. This project aims to investigate and engineer a new
generation of reconfigurable biosensor platforms that can be used to measure
multiple circulating biomarkers and inform the development and analysis of
microphysiological models. Microphysiological models replicate human organ
function, and they are promising technologies for fundamental biological
research and discovery of translatable biomarkers, pharmaceuticals, and
regenerative therapies; however, due to the anatomical and cellular complexity
of microphysiological models, a major challenge exists in measuring and
analyzing the function and performance of such complex systems. Reconfigurable,
multiplexed sensors will provide a new technique for the parallelization of
monitoring microphysiological models, i.e. many microphysiological models and
biomarkers can be operated, monitored, and analyzed simultaneously. Such a
technology is poised to better our understanding of the fundamental development
of any engineered large tissue, organ, or model. This knowledge will accelerate
biotechnology research by reducing variability and providing more statistically
powerful trials, better informing animal or clinical testing, and identifying
new targets for investigation. The interdisciplinary nature of this project,
combining microelectronics, microfluidics, data science, and tissue engineering
will require equally interdisciplinary education and global engagement plan,
which will be implemented by collaborating with high school STEM teachers
through authentic summer research experiences and participating in the
international SensUs Biosensors Research Competition for undergraduate and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this proposal
is to design, fabricate, and validate sensors for a reconfigurable, multiplexed
microfluidic-microbalance system, which is comprised of an array of miniature
quartz-crystal microbalances and integral microfluidics to characterize both
biochemical and biophysical properties of microphysiological models.
Specifically, the operational frequency, binding selectivity, and regeneration
of the novel biosynthetic-recognition moieties will be investigated.
Understanding these parameters will enable the microfluidic-microbalance
platform to be reconfigured for different biomarkers; moreover, the multiplexed
sensing can elucidate new correlations between sets of biomarkers and biological
function. The proposed research will include (1) modelling of microfluidic
delivery and operation of microfluidic-microbalance arrays in complex media, (2)
microfabrication and experimental testing of sensor with novel biosynthetic-
recognition elements, and (3) the development of the necessary hardware and
computational algorithms to process the multiplexed data streams. To demonstrate
these innovations, the sensors will be validated with a microphysiological model
of human microvasculature to (1) extract, process, and biochemically analyze
circulating media, (2) measure and correlate perfusion pressure and viscosity to
microvascular development, and (3) harnesses these data streams to predict and
optimize biological function of the model. This effort will be the foundation
for new multiplexed sensing strategies to investigate microphysiological models
and complex in vitro biological systems. Broadly, this research will illuminate
a pathway for future research into innovative means of making sensors to monitor
multiple biochemical analytes simultaneously, to be reconfigured for use in MPMs
of different organs, and to generate data streams for the future development of
machine learning methods to analyze and discover novel correlations between
biomarkers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.