* 1846726
* CAREER: Human-Centric Control for Teleoperated Surgical Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,03/31/2021
* Ann Majewicz Fey, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Scheidt
* 03/31/2021
* USD 522,950.00

Human-in-the-loop control strategies in which the user performs a task better,
and feels more confident to do so, is an important area of research in
teleoperated robotics. However, human behavior can often change as a result of
environmental, physical, emotional, and social factors. The goal of this Faculty
Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project is to design adaptive control
systems that can interpret and react to the dynamic human user. This research
will be impactful in the field of surgical robotics where interaction with the
patient demands safety and effectiveness from both the human operator (surgeon)
and the robotic system itself. Robotic systems that are aware and responsive to
user skill and performance style could be more able to avoid user errors and
respond to adverse events in unpredictable environments. By integrating real-
time models of user intent, movement style, and expertise level with a surgical
robotic platform, this project will advance the NSF mission to promote the
progress of science and advance national health by exploring fundamental
relationships human behavior, motor control, and machine manipulation within the
context of surgical robotics. The project supports education and broadening
participation in engineering by promoting innovation activities related to
healthcare and technology development for medical simulation and training.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to develop adaptive
control algorithms for teleoperated robotic surgical systems that can respond
to, ignore, and/or augment human motor control inputs depending on the output of
user-centric models of behavior and task difficulty. Model output will be based
in real-time, data-driven predictions and interpretations of human intent,
surgical style, and level of expertise. Research objectives include: developing
methods to model and control human behavior (e.g., user behavior and expertise)
during unstructured teleoperation tasks; designing and analyzing adaptive
control laws to enhance performance through visual and haptic guidance; and
evaluating the effectiveness of these algorithms on clinically-relevant outcomes
in training and intervention using a surgical robotic platform. A key innovation
of this work is designing control methods to be agnostic of the specific task
performed by the human operator: only user-centric metrics and movement data
will serve as inputs to novel difficulty and stylistic prediction models that
will then be used to create adaptive control algorithms. This work could lead to
significant improvements in the adaptability, capability, and usability of
teleoperated surgical systems when collaborating with a human
user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.