* 1846308
* CAREER: Investigation of Dynamic Interactions Between Wing-Body and Aerodynamics in Bio-Inspired Flight
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Haithem Taha, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Biological flyers such as insects and birds represent an engineering marvel in
terms of their natural maneuvering capabilities. These exhibited biological
phenomena offer a scientifically-rich gold mine for problems. The astounding
maneuvering performance exhibited by these flyers is a result of complex dynamic
interaction that takes place between their flapping wings and the aerodynamics
resulting from fluid flow over their bodies. Some insects have been observed to
perform turning maneuvers of greater than 3000 deg/s, with less than a 30 ms
delay. In normal everyday flight, some birds may experience up to 14 g
accelerations in super-maneuverable tasks, while the maneuverability of the most
advanced fighter airplanes cannot exceed 8-9 g. This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) project will focus on understanding the fundamental
aspects and mechanisms of the dynamic interaction between the wing-body and
fluid dynamics during flight. The results from the proposed research will enable
engineers to design bio-inspired micro-air-vehicles without complicated sensory-
control-actuator-processing systems by promoting self (natural) stabilization.
The proposed research will boost the design capabilities of micro-air-vehicles
and drones, which have great potential use in search and rescue missions,
reconnaissance missions, filming, border monitoring, emergency response, etc. It
is a multi-disciplinary work that bridges the gap between mathematics, physics,
engineering, and biomechanics. The project will also lead to the development of
new courses for students and interesting program that focuses on improving
participation of minority students in STEM disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this proposal is to investigate
the interactions between the wing-body dynamics and unsteady flow dynamics in
flapping flight with particular emphasis on the underpinning physics of the
newly discovered vibrational stabilization phenomenon. This will be achieved by
a three-prong approach: (i) Theoretical: by developing a reduced-order flight
dynamic model and analyzing the aerodynamics-body-wing-dynamics interactions
using geometric control theory and higher-order averaging; (ii) Computational:
by solving Navier-Stokes equations around the wings of a flapping insect,
coupled with the mechanical equations governing the wing and body motion to
study the role of leading and trailing edge vortices in the vibrational
stabilization phenomenon; and (iii) Experimental: by building a multi degree-of-
freedom test bed (with motion capture and flow visualization) to validate the
theoretical and computational findings and experimentally assess the
effectiveness of vibrational stabilization in flapping flight and scrutinize its
physics. Finally, a new generation of flapping micro-air-vehicles will be
developed with minimal actuation, relying on the discovered vibrational
stabilization phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.