* 1846218
* CAREER: Scalable Algorithmic Primitives for Data Science
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Yang Peng, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 06/30/2023
* USD 348,882.00

This project aims to improve some of the most fundamental algorithms in
computing: solving systems of linear equations, optimization on graphs, and
maintaining dynamically changing networks. Tools for solving these problems are
integral components of high-level programming languages such as MATLAB and
Julia, and are frequently taught as basic programming constructs in courses on
machine learning, statistics, and data science. Improved algorithms for these
problems can provide faster, more robust, and easier-to-use algorithmic
primitives, which would in turn enable computing on larger and more diverse data
sets in areas such as data mining, image processing, scientific computing, and
network science. The proposed works will actively involve graduate students, and
their results will be incorporated into courses at both graduate and
undergraduate levels. The project will also support the PI's long-time
involvement with algorithmic problem-solving outreach activities, with a focus
on making these activities more accessible to underrepresented groups, and
institutionalizing the involvement of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The problems that this project proposes to study, linear system
solvers and optimization on graphs, are some of the most well-studied problems
in algorithm design. Previous work on these topics led to many widely-used
algorithms and data structures. The main approach of this project is motivated
by progress on combining numerical and combinatorial algorithmic primitives
through the graph Laplacian matrix, known as the `Laplacian paradigm' for
designing graph algorithms. Recent and ongoing work by the PI and collaborators
led to the current best algorithms for many key problems involving graph
Laplacians, and more importantly, significantly broadened the scope of problems
addressed. An underlying theme in these results is that the most powerful tools
work with intermediate algorithmic states, and the focus of this project is a
more in-depth study of this phenomenon using ideas from data structures, which
also construct and reuse intermediate algorithmic states. These directions of
investigation will lead to new algorithmic constructs, give improved tools for
computing on static and dynamic data, and enable new applications based on
computations on graphs and matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.