* 1846531
* CAREER: Developing Computational Methods to predict Hate Crimes
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Morteza Dehghani, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 711,340.00

Deeply-held group beliefs can motivate people to engage in hate crimes. Yet
predicting these crimes is extremely challenging because of their statistical
rarity. This project uses computational methods and big data from social media
to predict when virulent hate speech transitions to hate crimes. The research
examines how the language of hateful speech and its dissemination over social
networks predicts hate crimes. The scientific goal is to inform and advance
theory and basic understanding of the social and cognitive processes that
underlie extreme and hateful thoughts and how they spread. One aim is to
identify mechanisms that might inhibit the dissemination of hate speech in
social media. Another is to provide new tools for law enforcement. Students and
faculty across many disciplines will have an opportunity to learn new
computational methods for handling big data and for examining the spread of
ideas online and through social media.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By integrating
theories of social cognition with natural language processing and machine
learning techniques, this project seeks to understand how deeply-held beliefs
and identity dynamics coalesce to form extreme perspectives that could result in
derogation of out-groups and hate crimes. It examines the linguistic features
that characterize certain forms of social cognition and hate speech, and
considers how the spatial distribution of hate speech can be estimated from
sparse, biased data. The research considers whether socially-motivated hate
crimes and acts of hate speech can be predicted using unobtrusive measures and
information about social networks. The related educational and training
opportunities include mentoring of students from minority-serving institutions,
sharing newly-developed tools for text analysis with the wider scientific
community, and workshops on machine learning and text analysis. This CAREER
award is supported jointly by the NSF Social Psychology and Secure and
Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC) Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.