* 1846849
* CAREER: Phosphorescent Organic Light Emitting Diode Materials Featuring Multidentate Carborane-Based Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Alexander Spokoyny, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Alexander Spokoyny of
the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of California,
Los Angeles (UCLA) are developing new luminescent transition metal-based
complexes featuring boron cluster building blocks for use in luminescent
lighting applications. The goal of this research is to use these unique boron
cluster-based scaffolds to create stable and efficient deep blue emitters for
use in organic light emitting diode (OLED) devices, potentially resulting in the
next generation of television screens, mobile phone displays, and solid-state
lighting sources. The project lies at the interface of synthetic inorganic,
organometallic and materials chemistry, and is well suited for the education and
training of scientists at all levels. Three key target audiences were chosen for
outreach, which include middle and high school students through experimental
summer science camps, and inmate members of the California Institute for Women
(CIW) as part of the UCLA Prison Education project. These educational and
outreach activities create excitement towards the potential positive changes
scientific careers can hold for younger students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project centers on the development of new photophysically-innocent ligand
scaffolds based on polyhedral boron clusters. Currently utilized classical
polyaromatic ligands attached to metal centers within the flat square planar
geometry can lead to undesirable color dilution and non-radiative decay pathways
due to intermolecular stacking interactions. Boron clusters are used to
counteract these issues providing the three-dimensional steric bulk capable of
minimizing intermolecular interactions in the solid-state. Furthermore, boron
cluster ligands are synthetically appealing, given that they place functional
groups at specific vertices, thus allowing for a large degree of tunability. In
this project, new substitution chemistry is used to tune the emitter color
through the ligand coordinated to the platinum(II)center. Furthermore, boron
cluster species may provide extraordinarily large frontier orbital gaps in their
unfunctionalized form, making them photophysically innocent in the context of
designing metal-based phosphorescent emitters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.