* 1846420
* SBIR Phase I:  A Big Data Skills-To-Tasks Ontology For Career Mapping, Job Matching, And Talent Acquisition.
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2019,07/31/2020
* Lokesh Dani, XOPOLIS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 07/31/2020
* USD 214,218.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to make talent search faster and much more
effective. More specifically, it will aim to make it easier to connect open jobs
with the talents of job seekers. The innovation proposed here will redefine job
search in a time when the labor market is in major flux, and the technology
developed in this project will enable job searching to move far beyond a one-
page resume and focus more on the skills needed to succeed in a job. In so
doing, the innovation will enable job seekers to find new opportunities that are
aligned with their career interests and enable employers to find skilled talent
matched to their project needs. Employers using this technology will be able to
search for talent according to what they need performed, without necessarily
knowing how the task will be performed. Similarly, job seekers will be able to
search for jobs that they may not have known existed but are still strongly
aligned with their career goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business
Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop a skills-to-tasks
matching system that serves as a basis for which worker skills are employed to
perform which tasks on the job. Currently, available data on the skill content
of occupations does not capture variation across industries, geographies, or
over time. Nor does it capture the applicability of a worker's current skills to
new workplace tasks, an important consideration for up-skilling and re-training
programs. This limitation has left a major source of information asymmetry
intact in the 21st century job market, where the most effective talent search
strategy remains peer-referrals. This same lack of granularity in available data
has limited the effectiveness of policymakers to measure the skills-gap,
identify career pathways, and design training programs most needed in their
local economies. The research proposed in this project will produce an up-to-
date compendium of the skills and work activities that are evolving in the labor
market and map the relationships between them. This technology will provide a
dynamic and granular view of the labor market and improve the quality of
information available to decision-makers in industry, education, workforce
development, as well as for the study of the future of
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.