* 1846706
* CAREER: New control-theoretic approaches for cyber-physical privacy
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Minghui Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Title: New control-theoretic approaches for cyber-physical
privacy&lt;br/&gt;Advanced information and communications technologies (ICT) are
increasingly permeating through our world. The technological advances are
stimulating the rapid emergence of new-generation large-scale cyber-physical
systems (CPS), including the smart grid, smart buildings, intelligent
transportation systems, medical device networks and mobile robotic networks. CPS
consists of a large number of geographically dispersed entities and thus
distributed data sharing is necessary to achieve network-wide goals. However,
distributed data sharing also raises the significant concern that the private or
confidential information of legitimate entities could be leaked to unauthorized
entities. Privacy has become an issue of high priority to address before certain
CPS can be widely deployed. Existing techniques to protect the data privacy of
ICT systems are not sufficient to ensure CPS privacy. This project will develop
new control-theoretic schemes to assure the successful completion of control
tasks for large-scale CPS and simultaneously preserve the privacy of legitimate
entities. The outcomes of this project will provide engineering guidelines to
build trustworthy CPS in adversarial operating environments. The proposed
activities on education and outreach will contribute to training an energetic
generation of skilled professionals and engineers with multidisciplinary
background to satisfy the rapid growth of CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will systematically study CPS privacy from a fresh control-theoretic
perspective. The proposed research will develop new schemes by leveraging
technical tools of two disparate domains: (1) decision and control (control
theory, optimization, game theory, distributed algorithms); (2) computer science
(data privacy, cryptography). The new schemes will achieve mathematically
provable privacy and control-theoretic performance. The research agenda consists
of three thrusts: (i) developing new homomorphic encryption schemes to solve
distributed optimization problems where the computation is carried over
encrypted data; (ii) designing feedback perturbations on the inputs and outputs
of dynamic networks such that network privacy is protected, system utilities;
e.g., controllability, are maintained, and the costs caused by the perturbations
are minimized; and (iii) evaluating the developed theory using the case studies
of power systems, smart buildings and machine learning. The project will involve
collaborations with research laboratories in federal, military and industrial
sectors. The collaborations will promote technology transfer and make an impact
beyond academia. The successful completion of this research will discover the
unique role dynamic systems play in CPS privacy, provide the new understandings
of the interplay between control theory and data privacy, and enable CPS to
operate in a trustworthy manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.