* 1846945
* CAREER: Tackling the Solvent-Stabilizer Co-contamination by Propanotrophic Bacteria with Catalytically Versatile Di-iron Monooxygenases
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Mengyan Li, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Thousands of aquifers are contaminated with mixtures of chlorinated aliphatic
hydrocarbon (CAH) solvents and stabilizers like 1,4-dioxane. To date, there is
no single remediation strategy capable of treating both types of pollutants
simultaneously. To tackle the problem, an innovative biological treatment will
be developed that employs bacteria growing on propane that are capable of
simultaneously degrading both CAHs and 1,4-dioxane. Development of this approach
requires the isolation of a diverse collection of bacterial strains capable of
effective treatment under various field conditions. This novel remediation
strategy is potentially transformative in its precision targeting for specific
contaminated sites. An added benefit of this approach results from it being less
disruptive to the environment compared to other available remedial strategies.
Through laboratory experimentation and hands-on training with stakeholders, the
investigator will develop the next generation of environmental remediation
professionals. Recruitment of students from diverse backgrounds will broaden
participation in these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioremediation is frequently
a preferred groundwater contamination treatment method because it uses a natural
approach to degrade pollutants at relatively low cost. However, the success of
this approach is highly dependent on the specific physiochemical characteristics
and the indigenous microbiota of a given site, resulting in site-specific
solutions with narrow applicability. To increase the effectiveness of
bioremediation, the PI will establish a collection of propanotrophic isolates
and consortia exhibiting robust degradation capabilities and environmental
adaptabilities. This strategy relies on the synergy of conventional cultivation
approaches and state-of-the-art biotechnologies such as metagenomics and single-
cell genomic analysis to advance understanding of cometabolic biodegradation at
the molecular, cellular, and microbial community levels. This research focuses
on propane-inducible soluble di-iron monooxygenases (SDIMOs) as versatile
biocatalysts, uniquely capable of degrading a variety of chlorinated solvents
and 1,4-dioxane. Novel SDIMOs will be identified and their catalytic capacities
and kinetics will be characterized in heterologous expression clones and
knockout mutants. These insights will be used to refine the categories of SDIMOs
to enable the design and interpretation of omics and other molecular biological
tools to exploit the metabolic interactions among propanotrophic consortia
obtained from different polluted habitats. Finally, bench-scale microcosm assays
will be used to evaluate and compare the feasibility and reliability of
conventional and diagnosis-based bioremediation strategies to advance their in
situ applications. This research will be actively integrated with a core
educational goal to cultivate the next generation of remediation professionals
needed to address growing demand in the historically polluted New York-New
Jersey-Connecticut tristate area. Taking advantage of the sizeable remediation
industry in this area, the PI will engage students of all levels with a diverse
range of on- and off-campus activities, such as guest lectures with
environmental experts, professional workshops with alumni in the field, and
University-sponsored research projects, as well as internships and networking
opportunities with private and non-profit remediation organizations in the
region. These experiences will give students critical access to applied research
and training in the field, and foster long-lasting connections that are key
catalysts for career success. Further, the PI will attract motivated students
from underrepresented groups at two-year colleges and local high schools to take
part in scientific seminars, laboratory tours, and part-time research
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.