* 1846266
* CAREER:  Nectar chemistry and ecological and evolutionary tradeoffs in plant adaptation to microbes and pollinators
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Rachel Vannette, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2024
* USD 950,982.00

Plants interact with a variety of organisms. The flowers and the nectar plants
produce are adapted to attract beneficial organisms like bees or hummingbirds.
However, microbes like bacteria and fungi also inhabit flowers and can reduce
plant reproduction. Plant traits can reduce microbial growth in nectar, but this
may also reduce pollinator visitation. This project will investigate if plants
that are pollinated by different organisms (e.g. birds vs bees vs flies) differ
in their ability to reduce microbial growth and if nectar chemistry is
associated with microbial growth. This project will examine if nectar traits can
be used to breed plants to be more resistant to harmful microbes without
reducing attraction to pollinators. Resistance to microbes is beneficial in
agricultural contexts where floral pathogens can limit food production but crops
still rely on pollination. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will link
variation in plant phenotype to microbial abundance and species composition, and
microbial effects on plant-animal interactions. This project will use a
tractable system: the microorganisms growing in floral nectar, which can
influence floral visitors and plant reproduction. The underlying hypothesis
tested is that plant traits that facilitate or reduce microbial growth, and the
community context (e.g., presence of pollinators) influence ecological and
evolutionary outcomes. The research activities will be performed using 1) a
community of co-flowering plant species and 2) genotypes within Epilobium canum.
Experiments will characterize variation in microbial growth, nectar chemistry,
and microbial effects on plant reproduction and floral visitor behavior and the
interactions of these factors. Experiments and analysis will reveal how
variation in nectar chemistry is associated with microbial growth and species
composition in nectar, and subsequent effects on plant-pollinator interactions
including plant reproduction. Experiments across Epilobium genotypes will
elucidate how microbes affect microevolution of floral traits in a community
context. This project will engage students from a large undergraduate class to
participate in practitioner-motivated research projects. Students will also
participate in outreach to local communities on pollinator-friendly plantings
for horticultural and landscaping. The project will support students recruited
from diverse and underrepresented backgrounds to participate in independent
projects related to project objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.