* 1846866
* CAREER: Mechanobiology of Planar Cell Polarity
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yubing Sun, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 532,000.00

Epithelial cells line the surfaces of many organs in the body, including the
inner surface of hollow organs. As such, they often exhibit different functional
properties and abilities through the thickness of the cell - something that is
called planar cellular polarity (PCP). The biofabrication of fully functional
epithelial tissues has a broad application in tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine. One of the main obstacles for achieving this goal is that
epithelial cells grown in culture dishes typically do not demonstrate this
polarity. The epithelial cell polarity within a sheet or plane of cells is
tightly regulated by signaling within and between cells. This signaling does not
appear to be maintained in cultured cells and, as a result, reestablishing PCP
in manufactured tissues has never been achieved. In addition, some congenital
abnormalities, such as spina bifida, are due to the failure of epithelial cells
to function properly during embryonic development. This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) project will study the mechanical and biochemical
regulatory mechanisms of planar cell polarity in vitro. The project will
systematically study the effects of geometrical confinement, matrix stiffness,
mechanical strains, and chemical gradients on the initiation and maintenance of
PCP, as well as identify the molecules that relay external mechanical signals to
the cells for establishing PCP. The educational activities in this project will
provide hands-on, project-based experience to a broad audience, with an emphasis
on women and underrepresented minorities. Undergraduate and graduate students
will be trained in a project-based course in mechanobiology. In addition, a
summer program that provides computational scientists and biologists with
training in advanced bioengineering tools that are developed through this
project will facilitate interdisciplinary communication. By improving
understanding of how endothelial cells establish this necessary functional
variation, this project will support the development of biomanufacturing and
tissue engineering systems to produce layers of epithelial cells that are
necessary for normal organ function. In addition, the fundamental knowledge
gained will advance understanding with respect to normal and pathological tissue
growth and development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research goal of this
project is to expand knowledge about the fundamental mechanisms through which
epithelial cells, which are planar polarized, mediate strain-based signaling.
This project is focused on neuroepithelial cells that are responsible for the
formation of the neural tube during embryonic development, disruption of which
can result in neural tube defects (such as spina bifida). This will be
accomplished through three research objectives. The first is to investigate the
effects of interfacial geometry and matrix stiffness on the asymmetrical
distribution of PCP signaling complexes at the single cell level. This objective
will use novel patterning techniques to control the areas in which the cells can
grow as well as tunable hydrogels to simulate variations in extracellular matrix
stiffness. The second objective is to elucidate the role of strains and the Wnt
gradient (a set of signal transduction pathways in which proteins pass signals
into a cell through cell surface receptors) in the alignment of PCP at the
tissue level. This alignment will be evaluated at the molecular, cellular, and
tissue-level through molecular assays, live-cell imaging, and tissue phenotype
assessment. The final objective is to identify the mechanosensors that relay
mechanical signals to the PCP pathway. This will be done through selective
knock-down of various key mechanoreceptors in the cultured cells to determine
how these changes affect strain-mediated alignment of PCP. The knowledge gained
from these experiments will advance fundamental understanding of the development
of planar cell polarity in neuroepithelial cells and will be more broadly
applicable to epithelial cells in general. In addition to answering fundamental
questions that are key to tissue growth and development, this research will
support the advancement of biomanufacturing and tissue engineering systems that
include layers of epithelial cells, which are important for normal tissue
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.