* 1846846
* CAREER: Multiplexed Paper-Based Biosensor Enabled by Interfacial Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Charles Mace, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The use of modern instrumentation for biochemical analysis is impractical in
limited-resource settings where electrical power and trained operators may not
be available and where analytical solutions must be low-cost, portable, and
operationally simple. Fundamentally new approaches that are designed
specifically to address the challenges of limited-resource settings are needed.
Utilizing paper as a substrate to develop biosensors is attractive because the
resources required to produce them are minimal and the materials are ubiquitous
and inexpensive. This project will create new device designs that can enable
paper-based biosensing. Hydrophilic (wettable) channels will be patterned in
paper using hydrophobic (non-wettable) barriers in order to control the
transport of sample fluids by wicking. In addition to devising a new strategy
for bioanalysis in limited-resource settings, the broader impacts of this
research program include the creation of educational opportunities for middle
school students (hands-on workshops), high school students (device design
challenges and summer internships), and science teachers (classroom kit
development).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to their low cost and ease of
use, paper-based microfluidic devices have gained attention as a platform to
develop point-of-use bioassays. Independent of the advances in assay
development, the paper-based devices themselves, in spite of their vast
potential to facilitate bioanalysis, have received surprisingly little
attention. This project aims to build an integrated research and education
program centered on developing novel paper-based microfluidic devices that can
facilitate biosensing based on chemical and biochemical reactions that occur at
the interfaces formed between converging liquid fronts. Devices exploiting this
approach will facilitate multiplexed biosensing using assay formats that are
traditionally considered to be incompatible with flow-based devices (e.g.,
chemical reactions). The central hypothesis of this research is that the
material properties of the paper (e.g., porosity) and the transport of reaction
products (e.g., by diffusion) will ultimately control the analytical performance
of these paper-based biosensors. By studying these variables systematically, new
strategies for low-cost, paper-based biosensing will be developed. Assays at
fluidic interfaces will result in the formation of visible colors that will
allow users to easily interpret the results of an assay via visual threshold
(qualitative), visual comparisons of intensities to read guides (semi-
quantitative), or with image analysis (quantitative). This research is
significant because the devices derived from this program span a broad range of
applications in bioanalysis and will serve as versatile tools for all forms of
analytical chemistry. Potential applications include: (i) environmental
monitoring of heavy metals, (ii) food security and nutrient density, (iii)
detection of nucleic acids and proteins, and (iv) the development of diagnostic
assays that are designed specifically for use in limited-resource
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.