* 1846875
* CAREER: Computational Failure Mechanics Across Multiple Scales with Deep Reinforcement Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* WaiChing Sun, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 664,156.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will support
fundamental research in using human-interpretable knowledge generated by
artificial/augmented intelligence (AI) to discover hidden physics mechanisms
that lead to the failure of materials. While there has been considerable
progress made in basic understanding of various failure mechanisms, e.g. brittle
fracture, strain localization, and ductile flow, the recent advancements in
experimental techniques, such as digital image correlation and micro-computed
tomography imaging, have led to an influx of data on failure that is not always
easy to incorporate into models manually. The current effort leverages the AI's
ability to repeatedly generate and test hypotheses such that it can self-
identify and discover mistakes in previous modeling efforts and identify new
physics too subtle or difficult to identify and interpret manually. These
computer-generated discoveries will be a powerful tool in accelerating the
progress of science. By understanding how failures of materials and structures
occur, the research will advance national prosperity and welfare by helping
engineers making more efficient, robust and precise designs-by-analyses for
infrastructure, structural components and devices. As part of the grant, the PI
will also facilitate mentoring relationships with selected underrepresented high
school students and high school teachers in the Harlem district of New York City
to enable future generations of engineers and scientists in leveraging the
opportunities afforded by AI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new meta-modeling paradigm
is planned to adaptively generate models to capture the effects of evolving
microstructures due to micro-cracks, plastic slip, and wear at sub-scales, and
then to recursively upscale responses to the scale of interest. By
conceptualizing a constitutive law (theoretical or data-driven) as a directed
multi-graph, i.e. a flow network of information, we idealize the process of
writing a constitutive law as a combination of actions operated on the directed
multi-graph. With a reward function defined as a function of accuracy,
robustness, speed, and consistency, we then invent a game whose goal is to
maximize the rewards with finite actions (e.g. shape of yield surface, hardening
rules, damage, nonlocality, refinement criterion) against constraints (e.g.
material-frame indifference, thermodynamic laws). This technique is then applied
in hierarchical and concurrent multiscale coupling models. In the hierarchical
models, hybridized machine learning models can be used as a surrogate to bridge
scales. In the concurrent model, a multi-phase field model is used to enable
several types of models (theoretical, data-driven, hybridized, homogenization-
from sub-scale-simulations) to be deployed at different domains of interests
(e.g. crack tip, shear band) to yield the most accurate
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.