* 1846863
* CAREER: 3D Printing of Multiscale, Multifunctional Porous Structures by Selectively Freezing Multidimensional Nanomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Chi Zhou, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Multiscale, multifunctional porous structures are found in nature and used in
many engineering applications. However, it has proven extremely difficult to
fabricate such structures using traditional manufacturing techniques, partially
because their intricate structures need to be developed over many length scales.
To address this challenge, this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER)
Program project will investigate a freeze nano printing (FNP) approach through
selectively freezing and in situ ice-templating of nanomaterials to fabricate
multiscale, multifunctional porous structures. A combined experimental and
modeling methodology will be used to understand the fundamental mechanism in FNP
and elucidate the parameter-process-structure-property relations. The research
will contribute a 3D printing process that can fundamentally unlock structural
and functional properties and lead to industrial applications in areas such as
energy, health, environment, aerospace, automotive, and consumer products. As
such, the project positively impacts economic welfare, national health and
security. The educational objective is to inspire high school students, attract
freshman-level undergraduate students to the field, train graduate students, and
provide outreach to the general public through hands-on education and
manufacturing innovation based on 3D printing technologies. Activities include
publishing an open-source 3D printing system; development of web-accessible
lectures; and organization of a TINKER camp workshop, a Liberty Partnerships
program, and a 3D printing symposium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project
will focus on freeze nano printing (FNP) technology to fabricate multiscale and
multifunctional porous structures. The central premise is that the microscale
structure can be manipulated by in situ ice-templating, while the macroscale
structure can be controlled by inkjet printing. If successful, this project will
significantly advance scientific understanding of the complex phenomena in FNP
process, including 1) understanding how the high-aspect-ratio multidimensional
nanomaterials interact with printing nozzle, and how the ink composition and
process parameters affect the drop formation, and ultimately influence the
property of the produced macrostructure, 2) elucidating the mechanism of how the
multidimensional nanomaterials interact with ice-crystals during the droplet-
wise ice-templating process, and how the complex behavior affects the
microstructural property, and 3) studying the relation between the process
parameters and the interfacial structures of the multiple materials, and how the
interfacial structures influence the multifunctionality. Through hands-on-based
educational activities, this project will provide exciting course materials and
lab projects to students from K-12 to graduate-level. Outreach to pre-college
institutes with curriculum relevant to students' daily lives will broaden
participation of the minority and underrepresented groups. Curriculum tailored
to the undergraduate and graduate students through teaching and research will
inspire their lifelong interest in science and engineering. Community outreach
will help promote awareness and adoption of 3D printing technologies and
democratize advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.