* 1846493
* CAREER: Formal TOols foR  SafEty aNd Security of Industrial Control Systems (FORENSICS)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Hoda Mehrpouyan, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2024
* USD 453,808.00

The goal of the project is to develop a multi-layer security framework to
provide control technicians and engineers with far superior mechanisms to
address the increasing risk of cybersecurity attack on vulnerable water
treatment plants and reduce latent risks to public health and safety, industry,
and national security. The findings will generate knowledge base and forensic
tools to help control engineers to quickly detect and mitigate potential
security flaws in central components across control systems, including
industrial control software, sensors, and actuators. Industrial control systems
are integral to the operations of many of the nation's largest manufacturers as
well as to water treatment facilities, oil and gas production, and power plants.
It is becoming increasingly common for organizations to facilitate improved
communication and efficiency across and between organizations or subsidiaries by
connecting their control systems to the Internet. However, in so doing, they
become vulnerable to cyberattacks that could result in significant danger or
disruption to city or regional populations or to geographically dispersed
production chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project fills research and
deployment gaps by developing a reliable and scalable formal framework by (1)
developing formal models, algorithms, tools, and libraries to provide control
technicians with a practical toolkit to integrate security into the control
software without any expertise in cybersecurity, (2) developing process control
anomaly detection mechanism and visualization tools, (3) developing new
experimental methods and software to investigate the security of sensors and
actuators and detect intrusions that are based on the Advanced Persistent Threat
(APT), (4) providing training for students, teachers, control engineers, and
control technicians to be more prepared to ask questions about cybersecurity and
investigate how to tackle cybersecurity in their daily
responsibilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.