* 1846904
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating astrocyte-mediated adaptive changes in primate brain metabolism
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,06/30/2020
* Courtney Babbitt, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2020
* USD 31,800.00

Human adaptations in diet and metabolism are likely to be linked to other
important human traits, like our large, metabolically demanding brains. This
doctoral dissertation project will study astrocytes, a type of metabolically
important brain cell, to determine their contribution to the unique metabolism
of the human brain. This work will further our understanding of evolved
metabolic and neurological differences among primates, while providing insight
into an understudied, but critical cell type of the brain at the cellular and
genetic levels. This project will support the research of a first-generation
female college and graduate student, as well as the development of public and
K-12 science communication efforts largely focused on demystifying the genome
and understanding the societal implications of readily accessible genomic data.

Previous research has consistently shown enrichment of metabolic function in
genes differentially expressed between the brains of several primate species.
This proposal will investigate the evolution of gene expression and function in
astrocytes, to understand the extent to which this cell type contributes to the
unique metabolism of the human brain. The investigators will use established,
non-invasive cell culture methods to grow and develop astrocytes from induced
pluripotent stem cells of both humans and chimpanzees. These astrocytes will be
assayed for differences in gene expression and traits important for metabolic
function, such as glucose uptake into the cell.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.