* 1846954
* CAREER: Rigidity tuned elastomer origami tessellations for fast, reconfigurable, and soft mechanoreceptors
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,04/30/2022
* Kristen Dorsey, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2022
* USD 500,404.00

Mechanical deformation sensors made from rubber, fabric, and other soft
materials are poised to unobtrusively measure human motion, which will lead to
human-machine interfaces, human-robot cooperation, active prostheses, and
assistive devices for people with limited mobility or dexterity. In these
applications, complex motions such as bending, twisting, and straining are
present. Most soft sensor designs respond similarly to these deformations, which
limits their accuracy if more than one deformation occurs. Origami patterns,
which have unique mechanical properties that cannot be achieved in flat
materials, are promising solutions for more accurately measuring complex
deformations. The goal of this work is to measure how stretchable and soft
origami behaves and to study whether soft, origami-patterned sensors can
distinguish pressure, strain, and curvature to realize a new class of soft
deformation sensors. Soft, origami-patterned sensors will be modeled and
fabricated. Their mechanical properties and sensing performance will be
characterized. Female undergraduate engineering students at a women's college
will participate in carrying out this research through summer and semester-long
research opportunities. In conjunction with the research objectives, this
project will encourage middle school students and teachers to learn about
flexible sensors through a series of workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goal of this project is to investigate whether soft material origami
demonstrates mechanical properties that are advantageous for selective or
multimodal strain, pressure, and curvature sensors. Silicone elastomers are
flexible and compliant, which makes them excellent materials for use in soft
sensing applications. Flat elastomer sensors, however, have non-specific
responses to curvature, strain, pressure, and force. Changing the sensor
morphology to bias the response towards one deformation may decouple these
deformations while preserving the elastomer's advantageous properties. Origami
and kirigami patterns are a promising approach to decoupling deformations and
increasing mechanical selectivity. By modifying the pattern and fold angle or
cut angle, origami and kirigami tessellations can tune the material's Poisson's
ratio and stiffness. The project has three research objectives: 1) to model and
characterize origami-patterned silicone elastomers under mechanical
deformations, 2) to combine patterns that successfully decouple deformations
with soft sensing modalities (e.g., resistive, capacitive), and 3) to fabricate
origami patterned sensors with variable stiffness folds to demonstrate
reconfigurable, high-dynamic range sensors. This investigation will increase
fundamental understanding of the mechanical properties of origami-patterned
silicone elastomers. The fabrication work will also yield new knowledge about
generating such patterns in silicone elastomers and techniques to integrate
mechanical sensing modalities into soft, three-dimensional
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.