* 1846927
* CAREER: Phonon Scattering By Electrons: From Fundamental Understanding To Thermal Transport Control
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Bolin Liao, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2024
* USD 502,310.00

Fundamental understanding and control of heat transport processes in our energy
systems is crucial to improve the energy efficiency and sustainability of our
society, as currently over 60% of our total energy consumption is rejected in
the form of waste heat each year. Effective control of the heat transport
remains a technological challenge because major heat carriers in solid materials
are typically less sensitive to external influence. This CAREER project examines
the theoretical basis and practical feasibility of a novel means to control heat
transport in solids: using external electromagnetic fields to significantly
alter the heat transfer processes. This project not only advances our
fundamental understanding of energy transport in state-of-the-art materials and
devices, but also benefits the society by providing new practical strategies to
design more efficient and sustainable energy systems. This CAREER project also
focuses on raising the workforce readiness for next-generation renewable energy
technologies by exposing K-12 and undergraduate students to hands-on renewable
energy harvesting projects, and promoting the diversity of the renewable energy
field by providing research opportunities to undergraduate researchers from
underrepresented minority communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal
of this project is to understand how the interaction between phonons and
electrons can modify the thermal transport properties of solid-state materials.
This project is motivated by our recent finding that phonon-electron scattering
can become the dominant phonon scattering mechanism in semiconductors with high
electron concentrations at room temperature. Theoretically, state-of-the-art
first-principles phonon-electron scattering calculation with coupled Boltzmann
transport equations will be employed to understand phonon damping and
amplification by phonon-electron scattering, reveal key factors that determine
the strength of phonon-electron scattering and identify materials with strong
phonon-electron scattering for potential thermal switching applications.
Experimentally, ultrafast optical and electron spectroscopic methods will be
developed and applied to characterize the phonon-electron scattering strength
for phonon modes with different frequencies, momenta and polarizations and
demonstrate solid-state thermal switching by modifying phonon-electron
scattering via external photoexcitation and electrostatic gating. This CAREER
project not only generates new insights for energy transfer processes in devices
with high electron concentrations, but also provides transformative
opportunities to develop novel functional energy materials and devices based on
the interaction of microscopic energy carriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.