* 1846854
* CAREER: Computational Methods for Multiscale Kinetic Systems: Uncertainty, Non-Locality, and Variational Formulation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Li Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,001.00

Kinetic theory has emerged as a critical tool in studying many-particle systems
with random motion, which arise widely in plasma physics, semiconductors, animal
swarms, nuclear engineering, among many others. It bridges the gap between
microscopic particle system and macroscopic continuum description, and therefore
is at the core of multiscale modeling. In addition to its multiscale nature,
this project intends to advance the understanding and computation of kinetic
theory in new, emerging aspects that involve uncertainties, non-localities, and
variational formulations. A parallel educational objective is to prepare and
train students at all levels for multi-disciplinary research through advanced
courses, topic seminars, and summer programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
aims of the project include: (1) utilize the variational formulation of
macroscopic and kinetic equations to develop scalable, structure preserving,
mathematically justifiable methods via advanced optimization techniques; (2)
design multiscale computational methods for nonlocal interacting kinetic
systems, with emphases on nonlocal collision and connection to fractional
diffusion; (3) develop robust algorithms for hyperbolic equations with
uncertainty, especially in treating discontinuous solutions; (4) study the
inverse problem for nonlinear kinetic systems, including stability analysis with
varying scales, numerical regularization and algorithms. The proposed activity
is on an interdisciplinary topic and of general interest to both computational
mathematicians and scientists from other areas. The variational methods provide
a new perspective in overcoming difficulties that are shared among most partial
differential equation (PDE) models nowadays: multiple scales, high
dimensionality and necessity in preserving physical quantities. The research
outcome will have an impact on other disciplines including computational optimal
transport, optimal control theory, mean field games, and machine learning. The
fractional diffusion solvers will be equally applicable to photon transport
through cosmic dust or atmosphere, electron beam dose calculation, and other
nonlocal PDEs arising in material science, finance, and plasma physics.
Uncertainties that are omnipresent in kinetic equations have a profound
influence on the solution behavior and must be carefully quantified. The
analysis and algorithms investigated through this project, in both forward and
inverse setting, will facilitate the understanding of sensitivity in the system
under random perturbations, and largely advance the modern design of device with
optimal performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.