* 1846178
* CAREER: Engineering Arrays of Organic Light Harvesting Crystals from Solution
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Stephanie Lee, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 02/28/2021
* USD 500,000.00

Inexpensive sources of clean, renewable energy to expand the US energy portfolio
are among the most urgent needs of today's society. Substituting conventional
silicon with solution-processed organic semiconductors promises to drive down
manufacturing costs and significantly increase the production capacity of solar
panels. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program grant will
support fundamental research addressing the continuous manufacturing of organic
semiconductor crystal arrays optimized for maximum sunlight absorption and
electricity generation. Thin scaffolds that can guide organic semiconductor
crystal formation and growth during deposition from solution will be
incorporated directly into solar panels. As a generalizable strategy to control
solution-phase crystallization, the findings from this research will promote the
progress of science and advance the national prosperity in a broad range of
scientific disciplines, from disposable sensors to pharmaceutical manufacturing.
By engaging students in emerging renewable energy technologies, this project
will serve as a platform to promote long-term retention of K-12 students and
women in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Confinement of crystals
within nanoporous scaffolds is a powerful strategy to select for specific
crystal orientations and polymorphs and has contributed to a fundamental
understanding of critical nucleus sizes and crystal growth mechanisms. This
research project endeavors to restrict nucleation events to nanoscale
environments but allow subsequent crystal growth to proceed unconfined above the
scaffolds. In doing so, control over the crystal orientation and structure will
be retained while significantly increasing the accessible crystal surface area.
By systematically varying solute-solvent interactions, solute-substrate
interactions, and processing conditions, relationships between molecular
parameters and the orientation, density and structure of nuclei will be
uncovered. Such knowledge will be used to establish design principles to achieve
desired crystallization outcomes. For example, control over the orientation of
nuclei will enable the first realization of vertical organic semiconductor
crystal arrays in which the stack direction is aligned with the charge transport
direction in solution-processed organic solar cells. This research strategy will
be compatible with continuous processing methods that will drive down
manufacturing costs compared to conventional batch spin coating used to deposit
active layers in the majority of the state-of-the-art organic solar
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.