* 1846665
* CAREER: Mechanochemical Activation in Ordered Polymer Networks
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jennifer Laaser, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/29/2024
* USD 549,716.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Applying force across molecules is a
powerful way to drive chemical reactions. Such force-sensitive molecules can be
used to make materials that report on their own integrity, that self-heal after
damage, or that allow force to be used to control when and where a reaction
takes place. Polymers are a useful platform for these types of materials because
they can act as "molecular handles" for transmitting forces applied to a bulk
material down to the molecular scale. However, designing polymers that
efficiently and uniformly transmit forces to the molecular scale remains a
significant challenge. In this project, the PI and her students will address
this challenge by synthesizing and characterizing force-responsive polymers with
well-defined connectivity and internal structure at the nanometer scale. This
work will enable new understanding of how forces are distributed in polymeric
materials and inform design of force-responsive polymeric materials for
practical applications. This project will also contribute to education and
broadened participation in polymer science through development of active
learning classroom activities for use in undergraduate polymer science courses,
creation of video demonstrations featuring diverse female role models, and
establishment of a women-in-chemistry group to provide mentoring and
professional development opportunities for female students in the PI's
department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing polymeric platforms that efficiently transduce
macroscopic forces to the molecular scale is critical for practical applications
of mechanochemistry. In this work, the PI and her students will investigate how
the network structure and nanostructure of polymeric materials determine the
molecular-scale distribution of forces in polymer networks under strain. Three
model systems will be developed to investigate this phenomenon. First, to test
the hypothesis that more uniform networks will drive more efficient
mechanochemical activation, spiropyran-containing polymers will be crosslinked
into well-defined networks, and force-induced activation rates studied as a
function of network connectivity, network strand dispersity, and defect content.
Second, to investigate the roles of nanostructure and competing structural
relaxations in physically crosslinked materials, mechanochemical activation will
be studied in triblock copolymers that self-assemble into well-ordered nanoscale
morphologies. Finally, new strategies will be developed to enable precise
placement of mechanophores within polymer chains, and will then be used to test
how chain stretching near nanoscale interfaces can be used to promote or
suppress force-driven chemical processes. Together, these research aims will
bring fundamental insight to molecular-scale forced distributions in polymer
networks and inform design rules for functional mechanochemically-active
materials.&lt;br/&gt;These research aims will be integrated with several
education and outreach activities aimed at broadening participation and
improving education in polymer science. The PI will develop and distribute
Process-Oriented Guided Inquiry Learning (POGIL) activities for polymer science.
She will also create video demonstrations of important topics in polymer science
featuring female presenters as role models for interested students. Finally, she
will establish a women-in-chemistry group for students in her department as a
mechanism for promoting new mentoring opportunities and broaden female students'
participation in the scientific enterprise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.