* 1846073
* Developing K-12 Education Guidelines for Artificial Intelligence
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2019,03/31/2022
* David Touretzky, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 03/31/2022
* USD 270,622.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by developing guidelines
for teaching and learning about artificial intelligence (AI) in K-12 school
settings. Though AI is a quickly emerging field of research with broad
applications in the STEM workforce and industry generally, there are few
curriculum standards or educational guidelines for introducing pre-college
students to fundamental knowledge and skills relating to the field of AI. This
project will address the emerging need for greater guidance in this field by
bringing together specialists in AI from academia and industry with specialists
representing K-12 education to draft guidelines for teaching and learning about
AI across the grade bands of K-12 schools. The draft guidelines will then be
reviewed by a larger interest group representing specialists in AI and computer
science, as well as representatives of K-12 educators more broadly and the
general public. Feedback from this larger interest group will be used to refine
the guidelines for broader dissemination. In addition to developing initial
guidelines for AI education at the pre-college level, the project will create an
online directory of resources that can be used by K-12 teachers to develop
instructional experiences in AI for their students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team is working in association with the Association for the Advancement
of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) and the Computer Science Teachers Association
(CSTA) to model AI guidelines after CSTA's K-12 Computer Science Standards
released in 2017. The project Steering Team includes members of AAAI and CSTA,
as well as broad representation of AI scholars nationwide and experienced K-12
teachers across all grade bands. Efforts are being made to ensure that
culturally relevant resources are identified and readily available to support
implementation of the forthcoming guidelines with all student populations
nationwide. The project team includes a Steering Committee that guides the
project, and a larger Working Group consisting of experienced K-12 teachers at
all grade levels and AI specialists representing academia and industry. An
Advisory Group representing AI education nationally and internationally will
provide additional guidance to the project. The project will employ mailing
lists, a project website, and social media to engage the broader community of
interested scholars, educators, researchers, and members of the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.