* 1846273
* CAREER: Quadratically Nonlinear Micro-Resonators: Enabling Next Generation Photonic Devices and Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Alireza Marandi, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project is inspired by how the
immeasurable impact of electronics in our modern life is rooted in the
development of a nonlinear device in a scalable and integrated form, i.e. the
silicon-based transistor. Introducing resonators with strong quadratic
nonlinearities to photonic devices can enable development of disruptive
technologies for numerous applications. This is evident from more than 50 years
of table-top nonlinear optics, over which a wide range of optical systems with
extraordinary performance has been demonstrated and used for applications
ranging from sensing to computing. This project is focused on bringing the depth
and breadth of such functionalities to the micro-chip-scale integrated
photonics, and enabling scalable solutions for a variety of real-life
applications. The specific experiments of the project can lead to unprecedented
solutions for our most daunting molecular sensing challenges through development
of ideal compact sources for spectroscopy. They can also enable a scalable path
for unconventional computing for some of our hardest computational problems in a
variety of disciplines. The developed knowledge through this project will be
applicable to other applications ranging from metrology to quantum information
processing and optical communications. Students working on the project will get
educated on conducting multi-disciplinary research, and the PI will incorporate
the materials developed through this project in a course on frontiers of
nonlinear optics. The team will participate in outreach activities targeting
k-12 students with a large population of underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical DEscription:&lt;br/&gt;Optical
resonators with strong quadratic nonlinearities are proven to provide a broad
range of functionalities that are essential for sensing and information
processing applications. However, despite their outstanding performance in
table-top systems, their footprint, power consumption, and cost have been
prohibitive for many real-life applications. Recent development of nanoscale
photonic platforms with quadratic nonlinearities, for instance in lithium
niobate, has enabled access to an unexplored regime of nonlinear photonics which
promises overcoming these challenges. This regime is associated with
significantly large nonlinearities, low losses, and potential for dispersion
engineering. This project leverages these features to introduce a disruptive
line of theoretical and experimental research on quadratically-nonlinear
microresonators, and aims to (i) advance our understanding of this new regime of
nonlinear photonics, (ii) utilize this micro-chip-based platform to lay the
foundation for development of a new class of functionalities in photonic devices
and systems, and (iii) demonstrate proof-of-concept experiments for on-chip
nonlinear optical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.