* 1846369
* CAREER: Guaranteed Nonconvex Optimization for High-Dimensional Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Mahdi Soltanolkotabi, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 01/31/2024
* USD 549,346.00

Contemporary nonconvex learning approaches in signal processing and machine
learning are revolutionizing our ability to process data in their natural form,
bringing transformative changes to modern life ranging from web searches and
social networks to healthcare, commerce, and imaging. Despite wide empirical
success in applications, these learning schemes lack a clear mathematical
foundation that can enable not only rigorous performance analysis but can guide
system designs based on an understanding of what would work, when and why. This
project aims to develop a unified framework to design and analyze efficient
nonconvex optimization algorithms. The resulting signal estimation and learning
algorithms will be deployed in novel applications aimed at learning
understandable models from data, which in turn will allow for better systems
that can acquire data faster and at higher resolution and quality. Components
from this project are integrated into an advanced graduate class and select
results will serve to motivate K-12 students to pursue careers in STEM (Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
investigator studies a family of iterative algorithms for nonconvex data fitting
problems that arise in modern signal processing and artificial intelligence,
such as phaseless imaging and neural network training. The overarching goal of
the project is to understand when these algorithms converge to globally optimal
solutions and to characterize their behavior and convergence rate in terms of
key quantities such as the number of data samples/observations, prior knowledge
about the model, initialization accuracy, etc. The theoretical investigations
utilize techniques from high-dimensional probability, statistics, optimization
and nonlinear dynamics in control. The theoretical analysis guides the design of
more reliable learning algorithms that can seamlessly scale to massive data
sizes and are robust to node failures that arise in modern distributed computing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.