* 1846262
* CAREER:  Determining the roles of individual tubulin isotypes in cellular microtubule functions
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Mohan Gupta, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 01/31/2024
* USD 1,115,426.00

Microtubules are long cellular filaments that are comprised of the protein
building block named tubulin. Microtubules are critical for important cellular
processes including cell division and development of the nervous system. The
cells within complex organisms have multiple variations of tubulin, called
isotypes, that cooperate to assemble microtubules. Why cells have multiple
variations of these similar yet distinct tubulin isotypes remains largely
unknown. The goal of this CAREER project is to determine the molecular
mechanisms by which microtubules can perform diverse tasks in different types of
living cells. To further broaden the impact of the project, the Principal
Investigator and members of the research group will utilize multiple aspects of
the project to develop science-based learning activities and curriculums for
high school and college students. These curriculums will be administered through
programs designed to engage and educate underrepresented high school students in
science-related activities and careers. A new section of a learning team will be
developed for college students at Iowa State University with undeclared majors
that focuses on the advantages of studying model organisms in science. This
learning team will emphasize how the study of these organisms advances medicine,
agriculture and general biological knowledge. This effort will increase the
proportion of students exposed to science-based career activities, strengthen
science literacy, and build communication skills. These activities will impact
about 450 students over the course of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microtubules are cytoskeletal polymers
comprised of tubulin protein, a heterodimer of alpha and beta subunits. The vast
majority of eukaryotes express multiple variants, or isotypes, of alpha and beta
tubulin. A long-standing yet poorly understood question is the role of tubulin
isotypes in microtubule functions. This project utilizes a multifaceted approach
to address the fundamental question of how tubulin isotypes dictate distinct
microtubule functions. The strategy draws on results with naturally occurring
mutations and recent advances in the preparation of recombinant mammalian
tubulin to test hypotheses for how specific isotypes function in axons and in
oocyte meiosis. These context-specific results will be complemented with
genetic, proteomic and cell biological-based analyses of isotype function in the
budding yeast model. This comprehensive investigation will exploit the strengths
of the yeast system to define mechanisms by which tubulin isotypes define
specific microtubule functions. Overall, the results of this project will
generate paradigms for how tubulin isotypes mediate microtubule processes and
have significant implications for understanding how they specify microtubule
activities in diverse organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.