* 1846223
* Workshop on Opportunities, Challenges, and Best Practices for Basic Plasma Science User Facilities
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Howard Milchberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2019
* USD 55,906.00

This award supports a Workshop on Opportunities, Challenges, and Best Practices
for Basic Plasma Science User Facilities to take place on May 20-21, 2019 at the
University of Maryland, College Park, MD. The Workshop will bring together
representatives of the plasma physics and scientifically related communities to
discuss the opportunities and challenges associated with establishing and
operating university-based basic plasma science user facilities across the
spectrum of plasma science sub-fields. A variety of user facility management
models will be considered, including facilities in a physically contiguous
laboratory environment and centrally-coordinated but geographically distributed
instrumentation networks, as well as both the open user facility and
collaborative shared-use facility management models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Workshop will distill what are considered to be the premiere intellectual
opportunities and challenges in plasma physics that necessitate mid-scale or
major user facilities. This will be a needed, important, and timely community
discussion. The Workshop will aim to address the following
questions:&lt;br/&gt;1) What are the science questions that require
establishment and operation of plasma science user facilities and cannot be
addressed on smaller scale single-PI experimental facilities? Are there
compelling plasma science questions of such value and interest to the global
scientific community that may warrant establishment of new user facilities? If
so, what are they?&lt;br/&gt;2) Under constrained resources, what are the
upsides and the downsides of investing in the operation of user facilities in
each of the relevant sub-fields?&lt;br/&gt;3) What may be the limiting factors,
e.g., the size of the community of potential users or the flexibility and ease
of operation, in establishing an experimental facility as a user
facility?&lt;br/&gt;4) Are there particular challenges to transparent and
effective operation of user facilities specific to plasma science or any of its
sub-fields? If so, what are they and what modes of operation may be used to
overcome such challenges? &lt;br/&gt;5) What are the best practices for managing
transparent and effective operation of mid-scale and major user facilities for
plasma science?&lt;br/&gt;The workshop presentations will be webcast with the
opportunity for online commentary and Q&amp;A with offsite participants. The
Workshop will produce a publicly available report addressing the above
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.