* 1846925
* CAREER: Aerial and Aquatic Flapping Flight at Low Reynolds Numbers
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* David Murphy, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2024
* USD 554,950.00

The flapping of wings is a common locomotion technique for tiny animals in both
air and water. Insects flap their wings to fly in air, and zooplanktonic marine
snails called sea butterflies flap wing-like appendages (called parapodia) to
"fly" in water. Further, some tiny insect species are able to locomote via wing
flapping in both air and water. Despite the thousand-fold difference in density
between air and water, the flight systems of these very different animals show
surprising similarities in how the wings move and in how they generate lift.
These similarities point towards the possibility of designing a bio-inspired
micro-aerial vehicle capable of aerial and aquatic flapping flight, but the
fluid dynamics of such flight systems are not well understood. The aim of this
project is to investigate the fluid dynamics of small-scale biological flapping
systems flying in air, in water, and in both. This research will occur within
the larger context of an education program in which underrepresented engineering
students prepare for graduate studies by learning research skills, creating an
illustrated children's book about sea butterflies, and attending a graduate
class field trip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tiny insects and sea butterflies
(pteropods) use similar wing kinematics and lift generation techniques to propel
themselves in air and water, respectively. Further, some insects use their wings
for both aerial flight and aquatic swimming. However, neither the fluid dynamics
of aerial and aquatic flapping locomotion at low Reynolds numbers nor the
adaptations these animals have made to fly in air, water, or both are well
understood. This project will experimentally investigate these adaptations and
the underlying fluid physics of flapping flight in air, water, and both by a
diverse group of insects and pteropod species, with the following outcomes: 1)
High speed kinematics and volumetric flow measurements of swimming pteropods
will show how extreme wing flexibility affects lift production. 2) A novel,
ultra-high-speed particle image velocimetry system will provide measurements of
the 3D kinematics used by and the flow generated by freely flying tiny insects.
3) Kinematics and flow measurements of the swimming and flying of tiny aquatic
insects will reveal how an aerial flight system can be adapted to aquatic
operation. These outcomes will illuminate the core fluid dynamics principles
underlying this locomotion technique, build understanding of the adaptations
animals have made for flapping locomotion in air and water, and inspire design
strategies for multimodal micro-aerial vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.