* 1846774
* CAREER: Belief Formation in Verification Strategies and the Evaluation of Verification Evidence
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Alejandro Salado, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

In systems engineering, verification is the process of building confidence in
the proper functioning of a system. Although it is a key activity in
engineering, the fundamentals of how engineers utilize objective data to inform
inherently subjective judgments about the system during verification is not well
understood. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award
supports fundamental research into this process and education efforts geared
towards improving understanding about and skills for verification activities.
The research focus is on modeling the information structures by which engineers
build confidence in a system's performance. This knowledge can lead to improved
verification strategies and more rigorous ways to evaluate verification data.
Hence, the research activities can bring about a potentially transformative
paradigm for the practice of systems engineering. Improved verification
strategies benefit society by enabling efficient system development with a more
robust verification coverage, which may lead to increased safety and efficacy of
commercial products and public services and greater overall economic
competitiveness. The innovative education paradigm introduced in this project
embeds verification into regular engineering assignments to prepare students to
exercise sound judgement and be effective decision makers in engineering. Middle
school students are engaged with a computer game that teaches conceptual
diversity beyond calculations. By realizing that no single answer exists for an
engineering problem, students embrace the potential diversity in engineering
solutions and focus on understanding how prior knowledge, mental models,
preferences, and team member attitudes shape the meaningfulness of their
solutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER project
is to study the formation of engineers' beliefs during systems engineering
verification activities and to identify patterns and heuristics that better
enable engineers to capture their beliefs in information artifacts. Explanatory
models of how engineers' beliefs form will be established by combining Bayesian
analyses, traditional and dynamic belief graphs, and decision theory with
empirical observations of professional engineers and information artifacts
(e.g., verification plans and reports). Cognitive mapping will be used to elicit
belief structures, Bayesian analysis will be employed to model engineers'
beliefs, and Credal sets will be used to account for differing engineers'
beliefs. The educational objective of this project is to help students recognize
and embrace the subjective (yet non-arbitrary) nature of correctness in
engineering problems. Novel instructional approaches to two key populations for
engineering will be implemented and assessed. A digital game to model real-world
contexts as math word problems will be used to seek and capture the conceptual
diversity that emerges when middle school students cooperate while solving
problems. Undergraduate students will be exposed to open-ended problems that
foster a solution-verification iterative approach to engineering in several
courses from their freshmen to senior years. Overall, this project will
contribute to determining the effects of engineers' beliefs and belief
structures on verification strategies and the evaluation of verification
evidence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.