* 1847077
* CAREER: Adaptive Investments for Resilience of Electricity Infrastructure Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Ekundayo Shittu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project will: (i)
generate new decision theories and models to help government policymakers in
crafting the incentives to advance public-private enterprise capital formation
and investments into electricity infrastructure systems; and (ii) investigate
and provide self-organized restoration plans in the advent of a disruption.
Inspired by the self-healing properties in biological systems such as
morphogenesis (genes adapting to environmental changes) and wound healing
(functional changes in cells due to regeneration), this CAREER project will
expand the paradigms of complex adaptive systems by incorporating realism and
empirical data into models that have practical implications such as how much to
invest in a particular electricity technology portfolio in order to enhance
system resilience. In addition to creating new decision theories in
incentivizing players in the electricity market, one outcome will be a decision
support platform for policymaking to enhance public-private enterprise
participation in community resilience efforts. To integrate the research
components into educational activities, this project will: (i) incorporate
social innovation and entrepreneurship to reach students at all levels; (ii)
create a hierarchical makerspace academy to provide high school and STEM
students the knowledge to build empirical and analytical models of decision
making by including project tasks in formal and informal learning processes; and
(iii) integrate methods from economics, operations research, and biology with
engineering knowledge. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation of underrepresented minorities in research and positively impact
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is at the nexus of
predictive analytics used to forecast electric power disruptions and robust
stochastic optimization models used to determine investments into energy
technology portfolios under sequential and multiple uncertainties in policy and
technological performance. This project will integrate these approaches in a
bio-inspired complex adaptive system framework to evaluate performance-oriented
dynamic investments, and use scenario analysis to distill the thresholds of
resilience-enhancing electricity technology portfolios. The PI will interpret
the system healing process to be a dynamic function of infrastructural decay,
operating status/environment, adaptation, redundancy, and the potential for
assets decentralization to limit disaster propensity for damage propagation and
downtime protraction. This framework will employ the multiple Taylor Series
function with wide area measurement system data for system stability prediction
within a modified IEEE bus test system. This project will evaluate the value of
a resilient infrastructure system in the larger scheme of systems
interdependence with the aid of Integrated Assessment Models such as Global
Change Assessment Model (GCAM) and Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) models
infused with mathematical representations of physical system degradation. If
successful, this CAREER project will provide the first scientific test of the
efficacy of the multi-disciplinary approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.