* 1847670
* CAREER: Microscale contactless reconfigurable swarms with active random mutations (MICROSWARMS)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* John Gibbs, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 405,828.00

The natural world is full of examples of cooperative interactions between active
components, which come together to form entities greater than the sum of their
parts. For example, trillions of cells interact both physically and chemically
to form highly complex biological organisms. These organisms are then capable of
behaviors infinitely more diverse than those of the individual cells. When many
simple parts give rise to complex behaviors, the term often used is "emergent."
Self-propelled particles (SPP's) are entities capable of moving without the
influence of external factors. The behavior of a collection of these SPP's can
lead to emergent phenomena similar to the complex formations observed in herds
of migrating animals. In general, it is difficult to predict what properties
will emerge when the only information available is how the SPP's move and
interact with each other. Thus, being able to perform controlled experiments on
interacting SPP's is expected to help bridge this gap, but very few systems of
this type are currently available. This project is dedicated to developing a
system of small-scale SPP's that show emergent phenomena that are dependent upon
the details of how fast the particles move, and more importantly, how they
interact; both parameters can be tuned, even in real time. Another key feature
of this novel system is the particles do not come into direct contact with
others, mimicking behaviors such as swarming and flocking as seen in nature.
These contactless particle swarms allow the study of new phenomena and make
possible novel nano- and microscale material fabrication. This project will have
far reaching impact on undergraduate research opportunities at Northern Arizona
University (NAU). It will also impact the graduate program in Applied Physics at
NAU, with a new class being developed aimed at introducing the students to the
everyday activities of a professional scientist. Impact upon the local community
will include the researchers working closely with a middle school on a project
related to active matter as well as outreach to Native American students at the
Hopi High School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Active matter consists of driven mobile
entities that move and interact to form dynamic structures and patterns with
properties not seen at the level of the individual self-propelled particles
(SPP's). Several recent studies have been concerned with the collective and
emergent phenomena observed in active colloidal matter, but the proposed
research herein is unique in that the particles form clusters that do not come
into direct contact, overcoming numerous current experimental limitations in
this field and allowing for testing current theoretical predictions. The system,
in particular, combines controllable activity using an external light source and
tunable "contactless" long-range interactions arising from magnetic dipole-
dipole interactions between the particles. Depending upon the geometry, these
interactions can take on different forms that can be attractive, repulsive, or a
combination of these. Interactions between large numbers of contactless SPP's
results in collective motion that has not been demonstrated in the past and
changes with particle type. Moreover, the system is ideal for the exploration of
new phenomena such as shape-dependent collective behavior of complex 3D colloids
when steric interactions are absent. This unique system not only allows for
engineering new forms of controlled particle-particle interactions and multiple-
particle collective phenomena, but these behaviors can be harnessed to fabricate
new materials by active self-assembly. As many of the experimental techniques
and methods in this project are excellent for introducing students to research
for the first time, not only will undergraduates be an integral part of this
work, but the researchers involved in this project will also work closely with
STEM City to make bi-yearly visits to a middle school in Flagstaff, where the
students will have the opportunity to take part in a research project on active
matter. Additional efforts to disseminate this research beyond the University
include outreach to K-12 students, and the larger public, in the local
Flagstaff, AZ community via the Flagstaff Festival of Science and beyond by
making yearly visits to the Hopi Native American Reservation for hands-on
demonstrations with high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.