* 1847247
* CAREER: Understanding Electroplasticity in Metals for Advanced Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2019,01/31/2021
* Chang Ye, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Alexis Lewis
* 01/31/2021
* USD 121,175.00

In many traditional manufacturing processes (e.g., metal forming in auto body
manufacturing), some hard-to-deform metals need to be heated to high temperature
to be processed. This can lead to poor surface quality, and requires high energy
consumption. An approach to improve the process capability has been researched,
by which electrical pulses are directed at specific locations to allow
formability of metal sheet at low temperatures. This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) award supports fundamental research to provide
needed knowledge to understand this process and how it affects the material
properties. This innovative process has the potential to enable the manufacture
of hard-to-deform metals without significant bulk temperature increase, which
can improve significantly the processing capability of many traditional
manufacturing processes, including forming, peening, rolling, and forging. This
advanced manufacturing capability will contribute to the competitiveness of the
US by reducing the cost, lowering energy consumption and environmental impact of
many metal manufacturing processes that play a vital role in the defense and
manufacturing industry. The education and outreach program is designed to
motivate students from underrepresented groups to pursue manufacturing careers,
strengthening the workforce critically needed to revitalize US manufacturing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this project is to
understand the electroplasticity effect by studying electric-defect interaction,
dislocation mobility, and their effects on plasticity and microstructure
evolution in metals subjected to electropulsing-assisted plastic deformation.
Multiscale simulation will be used to study how microstructure defects (grain
boundaries, precipitates, and dislocations) affect the distribution of electric
current and how the heterogeneously distributed electric current affects
dislocation mobility and metal plasticity. Tensile tests will be used to study
how pulsed current affects flow stress. Comparison with heating by continuous
current and furnace will be made to reveal the advantages of pulsed current. A
constitutive model of the flow stress in Ti64 subjected to pulsed current will
be built, and the model will be validated using the experimental data. The
microstructure evolution in electropulsing-assisted laser shock peening and its
effects on the plastic-affected depth, residual stresses and mechanical
properties of Ti64 will be studied. By integrating multiscale simulation with
experimental study, this research will reveal the physics-based fundamental
mechanisms of electroplasticity, new knowledge critical to broaden the process
capability of deformation-based manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.