* 1847850
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Energy expenditure, neuroendocrine systems, and social dynamics in challenging environments
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2020
* Lee Gettler, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/29/2020
* USD 20,788.00

This doctoral dissertation project will investigate the relationship between
physiology and behavior when humans are exposed to novel, challenging
environments. The project will draw upon core bodies of research on biological
plasticity and adaptation, energy allocation and expenditure, and social
cooperation. This research will facilitate new insights on how humans acclimate
to extreme cold and high altitude demands, which will broadly inform research on
human capacities to respond to the diverse range of ecological stressors found
throughout the world. This study will help train a woman of color at the
University of Notre Dame for her PhD and will also help in the training of
undergraduate and junior graduate students in the Hormones, Health, & Human
Behavior Lab, of which ~80% of lab members are women and underrepresented
minority students. In conjunction with the National Outdoor Leadership School,
the investigator has created a project website that both students and the public
can easily access for preliminary findings and updates on the study. The
research team has also heavily engaged in public outreach, including
presentations for elementary and middle school classes, public lectures to local
communities, and promoting scientific inquiry and sharing research through
popular science articles, podcasts, and social media venues like Twitter.

This project aims to help understand how humans biologically and behaviorally
acclimate to novel and challenging ecologies, specifically via the relationships
between energetic/metabolic physiology, neuroendocrine systems, and social
dynamics. The investigator will study individuals participating in ~90 day
expeditions through the American Rockies as a part of the National Outdoor
Leadership School (NOLS). In such environments (e.g. high altitude or cold),
ecological and psychological stressors impose intensive demands on human
physiology, including metabolic and psychobiological functioning. The research
will address larger discussions about (i) biological variation, plasticity, and
adaptation in challenging ecologies, (ii) life history- and ecological-based
perspectives on energetic allocation and expenditure, and (iii) the evolution
and function of prosociality, cooperation, and collective action. Recognizing
the relationship and nuances between physiology and behavior may give critical
insight into the success of human global expansion and settlement, with
implications for human health and well-being as well as future exploration, and
habitation of increasingly changing and unique ecologies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.