* 1847365
* CAREER: Granular Power Electronics at the Grid Edge
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Minjie Chen, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Power electronics are the key building blocks of future energy systems. Power
electronics play critical roles in renewable energy integration, computing and
telecommunication, grid-scale energy storage, and transportation
electrification, all at the edge of the future smart grid. These emerging energy
systems are usually modular and granular. This research project targets a
generalized design method that will enable a new family of power electronics
that can achieve high performance and perform new functions at the grid edge for
a variety of applications. ``Granular power electronics'' represents a
systematic design approach that pushes the intelligence and capability of power
electronics to a granular level that has not been demonstrated before. The PI
will leverage the recent advances in wide-band-gap devices, circuit
architectures, and control methodologies to address the challenges of
controlling sophisticated power flow, modeling magnetics with granular
structures, and addressing the inverter-to-inverter oscillation problem in nano-
grids with many smart inverters. The results of this project will be
incorporated into the efforts that the PI is currently leading as a part of the
"Campus-as-a-Lab" program to create research opportunities for undergraduate
students. The outreach program for K-12 students, involving them in the
development of experimental demos, will expose them to the role of power
electronics in improving the quality and sustainability of our daily lives and
attract them to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will perform a
systematic investigation on the fundamental principles of granular and modular
power electronics. The PI will (1) develop design toolkits (modules, schematics,
and layout patterns) comprising switched-inductor cells, switched-capacitor
cells, bridge structures, and magnetic-couplers which may serve as the basis of
granular power conversion architectures, (2) establish systematic methods to
evaluate the topology, select the components, control the power flow, model the
magnetics, estimate the grid impedance, and perform stability analysis of
granular power electronics and systems with sophisticated power flow; (3)
develop open-source computer-aided-design tools for the design and control of
granular power conversion architectures; and (4) build small-scale experimental
systems to verify the developed methods and benefit education. The PI will use
three emerging and important energy systems at the grid edge as examples - smart
inverters (distributed energy generation), large scale energy systems (data
center power delivery), and a nano-grid test platform for multidisciplinary
energy systems research. High performance grid-interface power electronics
topologies will be studied, and model-based multi-agent control strategies will
be developed to enable a future smart grid with many granular power electronics
at the edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.