* 1847319
* CAREER: Robust Decoding of Neural Command for Real Time Human Machine Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Xiaogang Hu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 549,494.00

The human hand can produce complex dexterous movements, unmatched by any current
robotic hand. Such sophisticated movements are often taken for granted. A
majority of individuals with a stroke, however, tend to have persistent hand
functional deficits, limiting their ability of living independently. Human-
machine interactions hold great potential to restore motor functions of stroke
survivors. Recently advanced rehabilitative or assistive techniques (e.g., hand
exoskeletons) have the ability to substantially enhance motor functions.
However, few of these state-of-the-art techniques have been successfully
translated to end users, and one critical limiting factor is the challenge in
controlling the many movement directions robustly. Therefore, there is an urgent
need to develop non-invasive and robust neural decoding approaches for human-
machine interactions that can directly translate to clinical applications.
Accordingly, this project aims to decode the neural command sent from the brain
that controls individual finger movements. This is accomplished by reading
activities in the spinal cord using muscle electrical signals obtained from the
skin surface. The decoded finger-specific neural command can then be used to
control rehabilitation or assistive robots, which can substantially enhance the
quality of human-machine interactions. This approach can also facilitate wide
applications of robotic rehabilitation or assistance in stroke survivors. The
non-invasive nature of the techniques has a great potential for readily clinical
translations. The proposed research will be integrated with education through
graduate and undergraduate research involvement and new course development.
Summer projects and demonstration materials on human-machine interactions will
be developed for K-12 students. Outreach programs will be organized to expose
the proposed research topics to underrepresented students, highlight the
opportunities in science and engineering, and promote students interests in
choosing future STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's
long-term research goal is to develop highly innovative non-invasive tools for
human-machine interactions, with a particular interest in better understanding
the neuromechanical properties of the upper extremity, and improve the
functional performance in individuals with a central or peripheral injury.
Toward this goal, this project aims to decode the descending neural command that
controls individual finger movements by extracting spinal motoneuron discharge
activities using source separation of high-density electromyogram signals (HD-
EMG) from finger muscles. The non-invasive, robust, and real-time neural
decoding technique developed will be easy to implement, can accommodate the
different impairment levels of individual stroke survivors, and will
substantially improve the control quality of exoskeleton or neuroprosthesis. The
Research Plan is organized under three aims. The FIRST AIM is to develop non-
invasive offline and real-time neural decoding approaches based on spinal
motoneuron discharge probabilities at the population level that are directed at
a designated finger. This aim addresses the need for non-invasive human-machine
interface signals that allow robust and intuitive interaction between humans and
machines. Surface EMG signals will be recorded over the targeted extrinsic
muscles using an 8x16 channel electrode array with an inter-electrodedistance of
10 mm. Motoneuron discharge activities will be obtained from different
independent component analysis (ICA)-based HD EMG decomposition methods that
will be evaluated on both simulated and experimental EMG data obtained from
stroke survivors and healthy control subjects. The decoding accuracy will be
evaluated by comparing the decoded neural drive with finger force output and
joint angles. Given that binary motoneuron discharge events are used, the
decoded neural drive signals are expected to be robust to changes in action
potential properties in the EMG signals, background noise, and motion artifacts.
The evaluation of the performance and boundary conditions of different source
separation algorithms can further ensure robust decoding performance in a
variety of situations, especially in clinical populations. The SECOND AIM is to
classify the neural command specific to individual finger movements. This aim
addresses the need for effective control of individual/flexible finger movement
in developing human-machine interactions. Surface EMG signals will be recorded
over the extrinsic forearm muscles using an 8x16 channel HD EMG electrode array
and over the intrinsic extensors muscles to fingers using an 8x4 channel grid.
Different features from HD EMG activities and from motor unit (MU) distributions
will be extracted. With macro and micro level features, different muscle
activation regions will be identified for individual fingers using pattern
classification approaches. The neural drive associated with specific finger
movement will then be calculated based on MU discharge activities of a specific
finger. The classified neural command signals can enable robust and flexible
control of individual finger movements non-invasively, and dramatically enhance
the dexterity of hand function in clinical populations. The THIRD AIM is to
quantify the performance of the decoding technique by controlling a non-invasive
neuroprosthesis for dexterous finger grasp patterns. A transcutaneous nerve
stimulation technique developed in the PI's group will be used to elicit
flexible individual and coordinated finger movements. The neural stimulation
system targeting the affected hand of stroke survivors will be controlled by the
decoded neural drive from the contralateral/unaffected arm (particularly if the
stroke is severe) or from the affected arm, with time-sharing between
stimulations and recordings. The force output (force absolute error and force
variability) of neural drive controlled stimulation will be compared with the
global EMG controlled stimulation to evaluate the performance of the neural
decoding technique. The overall outcomes of the project are expected to
ultimately allow stroke survivors to intuitively interact with
rehabilitative/assistive devices in a robust and non-invasive
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.