* 1847488
* CAREER: Dynamic Microgels that Mimic Platelet Behavior to Promote Healing
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Ashley Brown, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 510,832.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Platelets are blood cells that play an important
role in stopping bleeding after injury. After bleeding stops, platelets also
help the injured tissue heal. Before injury, platelets circulate in the blood
stream and have a compact and round shape. This shape ensures that platelets are
able to effectively interact with the blood vessel wall if injury occurs. Once
injury occurs, signals at the injury site cause the platelet to change shape,
going from small and round to spread and star-shaped. This shape change in
response to injury is critical for platelets to both stop bleeding and then help
to repair the damage tissue after a clot forms. The research component of this
project focuses on the development of a new material that mimics the ability of
platelets to change shape in response to injury. The developed materials will be
tested for their ability to change shape in response to injury signals and for
their ability to stop bleeding and improve healing. This proposal will also
focus on community outreach in the state of North Carolina. The goals of the
outreach component of this project are to increase awareness and support for
biomimetic materials engineering. Biomimetic materials are materials that mimic
certain aspects of natural systems, such as the materials described in this
proposal that mimic platelet function. The outreach goals will be achieved by
designing new materials for K-12 summer camps and day camps and by giving talks
at local museum events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Natural platelets are pivotal to hemostasis and tissue
repair, and platelet shape change in response to thrombin at the wound site is
critical for these functions. Prior to injury, platelets display a small, round
morphology that enhances margination to the vessel wall; effective margination
is essential for rapid clot formation. At the injury site, thrombin activates
platelets and induces a significant platelet shape change. This shape change is
required for platelet-mediated clot retraction, which contributes to long-term
healing. However, the relationship between wound-triggered shape change of
platelet-mimetic materials and hemostatic and wound healing outcomes has not
been defined. To that end, the over-arching goal of this research project is to
develop a wound-triggered, platelet-mimetic microgel that, like native
platelets, activates and changes shape in response to thrombin. The research
objectives are: 1) Design platelet-mimetic particles that activate and change
shape in response to thrombin at the wound site and define the relationship
between thrombin concentrations and shape change dynamics; 2) Determine the
effect of shape change on particle margination and clotting kinetics; 3)
Determine the effect of shape change on clot retraction and wound healing
dynamics. The outreach component of this proposal will utilize a two-pronged
approach to increase awareness and support for biomimetic materials engineering
in the state of NC through 1) the development of educational experiences for
K-12 students and 2) participation in museum-based community outreach events.
The educational component will integrate with the research component by
providing students with hands-on experience with biomimetic materials
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.