* 1847389
* CAREER: Time-dependent Structures of Soft Materials under Flow: A Rheo-Scattering Approach to the Study of Thixotropic Yield Stress Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Simon Rogers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 525,000.00

This award supports experimental research and education to understand the ways
that soft materials transition from acting as solids to acting as liquids. Such
"yield-stress materials" have a wide variety of uses. These include
petrochemical, photovoltaic, pharmaceutical, food, and 3D printing applications.
These applications share the need for a material which can retain a desired
shape under certain conditions but can be made to flow on demand. Ideally, one
would design the characteristics of such materials to match the specific
requirements of the relevant process. However, there is no accurate way of
determining the precise conditions under which these materials yield. This
research will develop experimental methods that link the mechanical changes we
observe on human length scales to what happens at a molecular level. This will
enable the design of new materials as well as more efficient industrial
processes. The integrated education and outreach component of this project
supports broader outreach to school-age children, along with graduate and
undergraduate research training and mentorship. Outreach efforts consist of
programs designed to teach budding scientists about the complexity of soft
matter research through programs that target underrepresented groups. Outreach
through these programs, and with Campus Middle School for girls will introduce
young students to the concepts of soft matter and 3D printing. Undergraduate
classes will be enhanced by incorporation of higher-level material obtained
through this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
will develop the tools and fundamental science needed to understand and predict
the time-dependent structural and rheological transitions observed in
thixotropic yield stress fluids. Hybrid experiments in which rheological
information is paired with Small-Angle X-ray Scattering and X-ray Photon
Correlation Spectroscopy provide ideal tools to simultaneously access the
necessary range of length scale features (nm - micron) and time scales (ms -
hours). The hierarchical structural complexity of concentrated colloidal
suspensions known to be thixotropic yield stress fluids poses a challenge due to
a wide physical parameter space. Processing flows that take the materials far
from equilibrium expand this parameter space further. We will establish a rheo-
scattering-based methodology to guide measurements and ultimately design of
structural and rheological dynamics. Transient molecular-level structural
dynamics obtained from two-time correlations from rheo-XPCS will be paired and
compared with novel transient rheological analysis methods pioneered by the PI.
The PI will develop new structure-property-processing relationships to capture
the complexity of destruction and restructuring under applied deformation. The
researchers will design, develop, and implement rheological protocols that tease
out information regarding the transient recoverable elastic strain in
thixotropic materials. Prior work from the PI has developed rheological analysis
tools for out-of-equilibrium processing that are perfectly suited to determining
the transient rheological nature of thixotropic materials. This program will
build on the established equivalence between yielding and thixotropy, shedding
light on the underlying physical causes of yielding and restructuring under
flow, expediting their controlled design in real systems by combining
rheological characterization, microscopic structural probes, and model
development. Each of these aspects will address fundamental topics (the rheology
of yielding and restructuring, thixotropy as anti-yielding, new models) in a
mutually beneficial, synergistic fashion that provides a unique and rational
approach to materials discovery and design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.