* 1847753
* Network Embedded Storage and Compute (NESCO)
* CSE,OAC
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2020
* Thomas Lehman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 07/31/2020
* USD 299,817.00

The Network Embedded Storage and Compute (NESCO) project is motivated by a
premise that future Research and Education networks should include "embedded
compute and storage" functions as a mechanism to provide advanced services for
domain science application workflows. This is a natural follow-on to the current
cyberinfrastructure evolution revolving around "Cloud" and "Edge" computing. The
NESCO project is developing the next important trend based on a distributed
ecosystem of compute and storage facilities which are embedded deeply within
networks. These will be similar in function to on-premise edge cloud deployments
but will be customized for placement within networks. Application workflow
developers will have access to a new class of services which can be rapidly
tailored to specific flows and use cases. One result anticipated is the
"democratization of middlebox" functions in a manner where application workflow
developers can customize their workflows and data processing on real-time basis
with flow level granularity. This project includes a climate science workflow as
a prototype use case. It is anticipated that these new services will be of
interest to a broad range of domain science applications. Individual and small
research groups who cannot afford access to dedicated resources may find these
services of particular value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A NESCO facility is defined
which can be placed inside of Wide Area Networks, Regional Networks, and
Exchange Points. These facilities will contain advanced programmable hardware-
based network functions, compute and storage resources, and be architected to
provide services on a highly customizable per flow basis. An open source
orchestration system known as StackV is being modified to develop a new class of
realtime "Flow Management" services. The StackV system includes a realtime
modeling framework to "datafy" infrastructure, modular pluggable computation
elements, and intelligent workflow processes to build on-demand topologies
across heterogeneous resource types and service providers. This system also
includes a user facing application programming interface which allows workflow
agents to request resource topologies which span network, compute, and storage
resources via a single integrated request. This project is developing a NESCO
reference implementation which will be deployed for testing and
experimentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.