* 1847887
* CAREER: Study of Degeneracy Breaking Effects and Emergent Phenomena in Heterostructures of Frustrated Antiferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Christianne Beekman, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 577,611.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Today's high tech society relies heavily on
electronics such as computers, which use the movement of charge (electrons) to
function. The electron has another property, its spin (i.e., rotational
momentum). In most magnetic materials these spins are neatly arranged on a
repeating pattern of atomic nuclei. In ferromagnets, the kind of magnets that
decorate fridges, all these spins are aligned in the same direction, making the
material magnetic with a well-defined north and south pole. The research team
works on exotic magnets with atomic nuclei arranged in triangular patterns in
which the spins cannot make up their minds about where to point. This allows the
system to not adopt just one state but rather fluctuate between many available
states. The "spin flips" associated with these fluctuations can be regarded as
particles that have only a single magnetic pole. One of the major themes of this
project is to investigate whether these spin flips can be used as information
carriers in future generations of information technology, such as quantum
computing. The research team synthesizes these exotic magnets in thin film form
at Florida State University and the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
(NHMFL). By straining the thin film material the principal investigator tweaks
the atomic positions, and the magnetic properties, which are studied using
state-of-the-art facilities at the NHMFL and at national laboratories. This work
is paramount in paving the way to a future in which devices based on exotic
magnetic materials make use of spins, rather than charges, as information
carriers. These research goals are integrated with undergraduate level
curriculum development in materials synthesis to provide students at Florida
State University with an education that will prepare them for the emerging
advanced materials workforce. Outreach efforts include public lectures and
middle school classroom activities that aim to increase (materials) science
capital within the community. With these activities the principal investigator
works to increase science awareness and interest in students and to empower them
to make more informed decisions about their future career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to study
ground state selection, emergent properties, and concomitant exotic excitations
in geometrically frustrated systems as they are exposed to degeneracy breaking
perturbations. Strong spin/lattice coupling is expected to lead to emergent
ground states in structurally engineered films and heterostructures of
frustrated antiferromagnets. The initial focus is on pyrochlore titanates,
geometrically frustrated systems in which the Ising anisotropy leads to
formation of a spin ice state showing only short range correlations. The spin
ice state has been shown to host topological excitations that behave like
magnetic monopoles. There is an enticing potential of harnessing topological
excitations, such as monopoles, as novel types of information carriers. The
project is aimed at characterizing how the spin ice physics, and the formation
and dynamics of the monopoles, respond to external perturbations such as
epitaxial strain. Furthermore, the application of strain in thin film samples
unavoidably leads to a reduction in dimensionality, and the effect of such
confinement on spin ice physics, which is predicted to be significant, is being
investigated. Spin ice physics is also observed in spinel vanadates, poster
materials for orbital physics in frustrated antiferromagnets. The PI utilizes
epitaxial strain to tune noncollinear spin textures and stabilize a d-electron
analogue of the spin ice state on the pyrochlore V sublattice in spinel vanadate
thin films. The general approach for activities associated with this project can
be described as, 1) systematic synthesis and structural characterization of
strained thin films of frustrated antiferromagnets, 2) characterization of the
magnetic properties, and associated noncollinear spin textures, using capacitive
torque magnetometry measurements and elastic neutron scattering studies, and 3)
development of the torque technique to include the ability to probe spin flip
dynamics in spinel and pyrochlore thin films.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.