* 1847878
* CAREER: Pnictogen Bonding in Solution: Developing Tools for the Self-assembly of Inverted Bilayer Membranes, Heteromolecular Dyads and Supramolecular Catalysts.
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Anthony Cozzolino, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 655,710.00

Nature builds complexity through a clever combination of strong and weak
chemical bonds/interactions. Weak interactions are used to assemble larger
molecules, frameworks and scaffolds. For example, DNA strands are held together
by hydrogen bonds to form a double-stranded structure (double helix). These
hydrogen bonds can be broken relatively easily to allow separation of the
strands when single-stranded DNA is needed for cell replication and protein
synthesis. Hydrogen bonds are well studied and widely used not only in nature
but also for controlling the assembly and properties of man-made materials. With
the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the NSF Division of Chemistry, the research group of Professor Cozzolino at
Texas Tech University studies weak interactions that lead to larger assemblies
of molecules and explores their potential applications. Possible applications
range from molecular sensing to crystal engineering, self-assembly of large
polymers and gels to solar cells and liquid crystals - all of which are
beneficial to society and the economy. This research project also engages high
school and undergraduate students (including members of underrepresented groups)
in the development of a code for the computational studies of weak interactions,
providing an inquiry-based opportunity for involvement in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to gain a better fundamental
understanding of pnictogen bonding and to develop this type of bonding into a
useful and predictable supramolecular interaction. There are three main
objectives in this project. The first objective is to prepare and study
antimony(III) and bismuth(III) compounds that self-assemble through multiple,
homo-complementary secondary bonding interactions. The research plan takes
advantage of the unique ability of these pnictogens to support up to three
interactions at three well-defined sigma-holes. By examining the influence of
the pnictogen element, the polarity of the primary bond, the symmetry of the
supporting ligand, bond angles, and steric factors on the secondary
interactions, this project develops/refines a set of rules for designing
supramolecular systems (e.g., inverted bilayer membranes and vesicles) that
exploit pnictogen bonding. The second objective of the resesarch is to design
and study pnictogen compounds that self-assemble through heteromolecular
recognition events that are analogous to the self-assembly of Watson-Crick base
pairs. The third objective is to design systems that bind anions through
antimony(III) or bismuth(III) secondary bonding interactions. The experimental
studies are complemented by the parameterization of a molecular mechanics force
field to account for pnictogen secondary bonding
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.