* 1847765
* CAREER: Development of Super-Resolution Scanning Probe Stimulated Raman Microscopy with Excellent Spatial Resolution
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Xiaoji Xu, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 01/31/2024
* USD 621,076.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Xiaoji Xu of Lehigh University is developing new
measurement methods that probe how light interacts with matter at the nanoscale
(1000 times smaller than the diameter of a human hair). Raman spectroscopy and
microscopy are popular tools for measuring properties of molecules as they
enable research discoveries and chemical characterizations of value to industry,
health care, and environmental monitoring. Professor Xu is improving the spatial
resolution of stimulated Raman microscopy so that objects with dimensions
approaching those of large molecules can be chemically characterized on a
routine basis, and in a highly robust and reliable fashion. Specifically, this
project examines aerosols in the atmosphere that may contain harmful substances
that can impair the health of individuals by causing respiratory illness, heart
failure, or even prenatal defects. Understanding the composition, origin, and
transformation of aerosols is of vital importance for reducing their production
or lessening their affects. In addition to studying aerosols, Dr. Xu's team is
also developing an educational module that connects cutting-edge scientific
research laboratories with elementary and high school students in a standard
classroom setting, via immersive virtual reality experiences. A range of
chemical reactions are demonstrated to elementary and high school students
through virtual reality streaming, thereby promoting their curiosity for
science. Furthermore, Professor Xu's educational activities are improving the
effectiveness of scientific outreach for promoting science to the general
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Being able to visualize the chemical properties of
matter on small length scales is a major challenge for Raman microscopy. The
project is addressing this need for super-resolution Raman microscopy by
combining scanning probe microscopy and coherent stimulated Raman events.
Chemical sensitivity is provided by the stimulated Raman process. High spatial
resolution is achieved by nanoscale probing using a scanning probe microscope
tip. The project aims to achieve robust and reliable Raman imaging so as to
differentiate objects separated by roughly 10 nanometers. Through integration of
nanoscale infrared imaging techniques invented by the Xu group, multimodal
spectroscopic and mechanical microscopy are possible for chemical, biological,
and environmental samples. Professor Xu's team studies the chemical composition
and physical properties of individual sub-micron-sized urban contaminant
particles in the atmosphere, allowing his team to decipher their chemical
origins and photochemical transformations, with identification of and control
over aerosol pollutions being his team's ultimate goal. From efforts associated
with the educational plan, many students in elementary and high school
classrooms are connected to an advanced research instrument in a laboratory via
real-time multimedia capture and streaming devices. The students experience the
operation of advanced research instruments, solidifying learning outcomes.
Educational activities will be shared with students in schools in the Bethlehem,
PA School District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.