* 1847173
* CAREER: Fracture Mechanics of Antarctic Ice Shelves and Glaciers - Representing Iceberg Calving in Ice Sheet Models and Developing Cyberlearning Tools for Outreach
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Ravindra Duddu, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 03/31/2024
* USD 555,012.00

Iceberg calving is a complex natural fracture process and a dominant cause of
mass loss from the floating ice shelves on the margins of the Antarctic ice
sheet. There is concern that rapid changes at these ice shelves can destabilize
parts of the ice sheet and accelerate their contribution to sea-level rise. The
goal of this project is to understand and simulate the fracture mechanics of
calving and to develop physically-consistent calving schemes for ice-sheet
models. This would enable more reliable estimation of Antarctic mass loss by
reducing the uncertainty in projections. The research plan is integrated with an
education and outreach plan that aims to (1) enhance computational modeling
skills of engineering and Earth science students through a cross-college course
and a high-performance computing workshop and (2) increase participation and
diversity in engineering and sciences by providing interdisciplinary research
opportunities to undergraduates and by deploying new cyberlearning tools to
engage local K-12 students in the Metro Nashville Public Schools in
computational science and engineering, and glaciology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to provide fundamental understanding of iceberg calving by
advancing the frontiers in computational fracture mechanics and nonlinear
continuum mechanics and translating it to glaciology. The project investigates
crevasse propagation using poro-damage mechanics models for hydrofracture that
are consistent with nonlinear viscous ice rheology, along with the
thermodynamics of refreezing in narrow crevasses at meter length scales. It will
develop a fracture-physics based scheme to better represent calving in ice-sheet
models using a multiscale method. The effort will also address research
questions related to calving behavior of floating ice shelves and glaciers, with
the goal of enabling more reliable prediction of calving fronts in whole-
Antarctic ice-sheet simulations over decadal-to-millennial time
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.