* 1847149
* CAREER: Mechanics of Interfaces in Soft Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Teng Zhang, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2024
* USD 538,642.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will support
fundamental research on the mechanics of interfaces in soft materials by
establishing a novel multiscale and multiphysics modeling and simulation
platform. Interfaces between soft and hard materials (soft-hard) or soft and
soft (soft-soft) materials are ubiquitous in nature and engineering
applications, such as tendon on bone for load-bearing, mucus on tongue for prey
capture, growing tissues on scaffolds, and bonding silicon on elastomers for
stretchable electronics. A fundamental understanding of mechanics of soft
material interfaces will help diagnose failures of biological joints and design
underwater adhesive patches, flexible electronics, and strong, tough and
lightweight composites, which are urgently needed to advance the national
health, prosperity, and welfare. The integrated education plan includes an
interactive teaching module with demonstrations of soap bubbles, kids' stickers
and poly dough for outreach programs, participations in summer research intern
programs for high school students, and integration of computational tools in the
graduate and undergraduate curriculums at Syracuse University. A "Science and
Play" outreach program for K-12 students and the general public will be
organized in the Manlius Library annually to promote STEM education.
Furthermore, the Women in Science and Engineering program at Syracuse University
will be leveraged to encourage the participation of students from
underrepresented populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in the
mechanics of interfaces in soft materials is that their mechanical behaviors are
intrinsically multiscale and multiphysics interactions, which are determined not
only by microstructures at interfaces but also the nonlinear strong coupling of
surface and bulk deformations. This challenge will be tackled by seamlessly
integrating model techniques at different scales in a unified framework with
high parallel computation efficiency. Specific tasks include: (1) to bridge
coarse-grained models and finite element methods through lattice models and
implement the model in the large-scale atomic/molecular massively parallel
simulator (LAMMPS), (2) to link deformed configurations of soft-soft interfaces
with their molecular structures and nonlinear deformation and surface stress at
macroscale levels and study how multiscale couplings govern forces in wet
adhesion with large deformation of soft solids, (3) to investigate how
macroscale deformation confinement and energy dissipation, mesoscale cavitation,
fibrillation and instabilities and microscale molecular and polymer structures
synergistically determine the strength and toughness of soft-hard interfaces and
derive microstructures informed interfacial force-separation law for soft
adhesives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.