* 1847393
* CAREER: Harnessing Prediction Engines and Non-Monetary Mechanisms for Real-Time Decision Making
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Siddhartha Banerjee, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,549.00

CAREER: Harnessing Prediction Engines and Non-Monetary Mechanisms for Real-Time
Decision Making&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Smart societal systems - on-demand
transportation, smart supply-chain and logistics networks, cloud platforms, the
smart grid, financial-processing networks, etc - are revolutionizing all aspects
of our economic and social lives. All these systems face similar decision-making
challenges due to uncertainty, complex state-spaces, combinatorial constraints,
and strategic agent behavior. The aim of this Faculty Early Career Development
Program (CAREER) project is to develop a unified framework for real-time
decision-making for smart systems, built around the use of data-driven
prediction oracles and non-monetary market mechanisms. Such an approach leads to
policies that are simple, easy to interpret and implement in practice;
understanding their performance however requires new theoretical and
methodological ideas. The research will be complemented by collaborations with
partners in on-demand transportation, cloud computing, online payment processing
and the local food-bank, which will provide a portfolio of examples for
pedagogical purposes. These collaborations tie in with outreach plans, which
center on the development of a public library of societal systems simulators.
These will provide research projects for undergraduate students, experiential
problems for courses, and public demonstrations for attracting K-12 students to
STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical perspective, this research
will develop rigorous frameworks for: (i) harnessing prediction oracles as
inputs to real-time control policies, and (ii) designing non-monetary allocation
policies based on emulating monetary mechanism. An exemplar of the paradigm is
the idea of simulation-as-a-service (SaaS), wherein complex data-driven
simulators will be used as inputs for control policies and mechanisms. Such an
approach leverages historical and real-time data, incorporates the unique
constraints of the underlying system, and results in simple and practical
policies. The cost of this simplicity is that it is harder to prove rigorous
guarantees. To overcome this, the research will couple advances in machine
learning and mechanism design theory with the underlying philosophy of model-
predictive control. In particular, new theoretical techniques, using ideas from
stochastic coupling, convex optimization, martingale duality, and measure
concentration, will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.