* 1847892
* CAREER: Astronomical Research, Instrumentation &amp; Education with Undergraduates via ZINGRS
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2025
* Carl Ferkinhoff, Winona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Krimm
* 04/30/2025
* USD 680,980.00

High redshift observations at sub-millimeter wavelengths allow us to look back
in time to witness the past history of stars and galaxies. The z(Redshift) and
Early Universe Spectrometer (ZEUS) will measure the ZEUS INvestigated Galaxy
Reference Sample (ZINGRS) of galaxies to trace the evolution of this sample of
galaxies abundance of elements, stars, and gas from redshifts of 1 to 3, the
epoch when the rate of star formation was at its peak, resulting in an
understanding of the evolution of stars and galaxies at this critical epoch. A
Family Science program for minority and lower income families will be initiated
to develop the scientific literacy and STEM abilities of both adults and
children. Preservice high school science teachers at Winona State
University?under the instruction of the PI?will lead the presentations in this
program, and undergraduate students will serve as program assistants.
Undergraduate students at Winona State University will improve their STEM skills
by participating in the observations and developing the hardware needed for this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ground based observations of high redshift
galaxies at sub-millimeter wavelengths are limited by atmospheric absorption
bands especially for galaxies in the redshift range 1 to 3. This research
overcomes this limitation and can be applied at all high redshift ranges. It
uses one or two fine-structure line detections and combines them with radio
continuum measurements to fully characterize a galaxy, allowing many more
galaxies to be studied than via fine-structure lines alone. It employs the
z(Redshift) and Early Universe Spectrometer (ZEUS) to measure the far-IR fine-
structure lines from high redshift galaxies of the ZEUS INvestigated Galaxy
Reference Sample (ZINGRS) with JVLA observations of the radio continuum. By
combining these observations, the metallicity, interstellar medium, and stellar
populations in these galaxies at redshifts 1 to 3 will be characterized, tracing
the evolution of galaxies during the epoch of peak star formation in the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.