* 1847933
* CAREER: Synthesis and characterization of manganese complexes toward earth-abundant green catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* David Lacy, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2024
* USD 650,000.00

Chemical reactions are often inefficient, that is, they require considerable
energy, or produce undesirable byproducts. Many industrial and laboratory
reactions utilize catalysts - substances that lower the energy required for a
reaction and/or guide the course of the reaction to specific products. As many
current catalysts require the incorporation of expensive and/or toxic metals,
the development of new catalysts based on inexpensive, abundant, and non-toxic
replacements is an important goal. To this end, Professor David Lacy in the
Chemistry Department at the University at Buffalo is supported by the Chemical
Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division to synthesize and characterize new
manganese catalysts. Manganese (Mn) is abundant and non-toxic, but is
understudied compared to other metals. In this project a series of of reactive
maganese complexes are prepared and their basic reactions explored. Based on
these results new manganese catalysts for a variety of processes are designed.
The project also contains an integrated educational component that emphasizes
hands-on experiences for high school students in the local area. This effort
aims to assist local schoolteachers in stimulating student enthusiasm in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manganese(I) catalysts are currently used in
acceptorless (de)hydrogenations with ligand platforms initially designed for
ruthenium, but not optimally suited for Mn(I). This project focuses on the
preparation of a new library of ligands designed to leverage the special
properties of Mn(I). These new ligands include phenol-based phosphines (POP and
PO), new PNN and PNP pincer ligands, amino acid-derived chiral PN ligands, and
thiophenol-based PS and PSP phosphines. In addition to the synthesis of Mn(I)
complexes with these ligands, this research also addresses the lack of Mn(I)
catalyst precursors by providing new Mn(I) synthons and/or methods to prepare
Mn(I) catalysts from cheaper materials. The electronic properties and
decomposition pathways of the Mn(I) complexes and the mechanisms of catalysis
are explored to assist robust Mn(I) catalyst design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.