* 1847025
* CAREER: Josephson Quantum Optics with Coherent Microwave Light
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Michael Hatridge, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2024
* USD 439,666.00

Quantum computers promise to run algorithms which are exponentially faster than
their fastest known classical counterparts, as well as simulate general quantum
systems. This is especially exciting in the fields of biology and chemistry
where understanding complex molecules may open new avenues, for instance in drug
discovery and solar cells, as well as basic research. A number of physical
platforms for quantum computing exist, with two of the leading methods being
optical-frequency light interacting with atomic systems (known as quantum
optics) and microwave-frequency light interacting with superconducting,
Josephson-junction based circuits. While each method has unique virtues, neither
is yet capable of realizing large-scale quantum machines. Further, the two
platforms cannot be readily combined in a single quantum circuit due to their
vastly different frequencies of operation and materials requirements. This
CAREER project will leverage the extreme flexibility of superconducting circuits
to adapt techniques and concepts from quantum optics into a new series of hybrid
devices which may be referred to as "Josephson Quantum Optics". This project
will produce devices which can power a new generation of quantum machines, as
well as support graduate student training in cutting-edge quantum microwave
design techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superconducting quantum circuits, which
combine low-loss superconducting microwave elements with the nonlinear
inductance of Josephson junctions, are a leading platform for realizing quantum
machines, having made great progress in recent years in demonstrating the basic
requirements of quantum computing. Large scale, error-free quantum computers,
however, require encoding their bits of information logically across a number of
physical bits so that no single error can destroy them, resulting in a huge
expansion in the number of circuit elements required to build a quantum
computer. An architecture in which quantum elements are linked over long
distances (a specialty of the field of atomic physics and quantum optics),
rather than only to their nearest neighbors, can greatly reduce the hardware
overhead required to correct errors. This project will draw heavily from
concepts in optical-frequency quantum optics as well as bath engineering to
develop devices which generate and detect novel states of quantum light in ways
that are tolerant of loss and circuit imperfections. Project research aims
include the development of dc-driven highly-coherent qubit-based micromasers and
an absorptive, highly-efficient Fock-state detector. The devices and concepts
proposed here will advance our ability to build large, error corrected
superconducting circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.