* 1847885
* CAREER: Environmental Forcing on the Resilience of Carbonate Platforms During the Early Cretaceous Super Greenhouse Period
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Alexis Godet, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 550,462.00

Shallow marine reef systems support a highly diversified community. Yet,
approximately 75% of these carbonate-producing systems are threatened by ongoing
warming and increased human activity. Investigating the Earth's history can
increase understanding of these vulnerable systems and provide opportunities for
identifying mitigation processes. About 120 million years ago, the atmospheric
content of greenhouse gases increased dramatically. Under such conditions,
shallow marine carbonate-producing ecosystems either survived, adapted, or
disappeared. This proposal will test the hypothesis that the resilience of
carbonate-producing ecosystems was favored at low latitudes by examining four
locations at different latitudes, from the ancient equator to the subtropics.
This project will include research opportunities for underrepresented minority
students recruited from a local community college. The students will participate
in a summer internship program that includes a multitiered mentoring approach
and is designed to increase interest in geoscience and retention in the major.
Students will have the opportunity to publish their research and serve as role
models for other minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will link
the adaptation of ecosystems to environmental deteriorations associated with the
Oceanic Anoxic Event (OAE) 1a, by investigating carbonate platforms preserved in
France, Italy, and Oman. These areas were located at different latitudes during
the OAE1a and experienced diverse climate and weathering conditions. Carbonate
platforms either disappeared at high paleolatitudes or transitioned into
microbial communities in subequatorial settings. Determining parameters that
favor the resilience of these ecosystems requires the identification of the
perturbations in the carbon cycle and in the fossil assemblage associated with
the OAE1a, and the appraisal of associated environmental stresses using
geochemical proxies. Achieving these tasks will deepen the knowledge on feedback
mechanisms between the environment and carbonate production, quantify thermal
and nutrient latitudinal gradients under super greenhouse conditions, and
improve the understanding of the resilience of ecosystems during a period of
global paleoceanographic perturbation that could serve to mitigate the demise of
modern reef systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.