* 1847603
* CAREER: On the Neural and Mechanistic Bases of Higher-order Cognition
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Brandon Turner, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

This project aims to explore the neural basis of how higher-order cognitive
processes facilitate a representation of our environment. To date, the vast
majority of decision-making research uses relatively simple stimuli to
systematically relate independent variables within an experiment to collected
dependent variables such as response time, EEG, or fMRI measures. However, the
decisions that we make in our everyday lives are significantly more complicated.
We exist in environments where resource and reward structures change dynamically
on a daily, even momentary, basis. In these environments, cognitive control is
necessary to successfully adjust our goals and representations to match the
dynamics of our environment. Data from the experiments conducted during this
project, as well the analytic methods, will be used to create a comprehensive
syllabus in the emerging field of model-based cognitive neuroscience. The
materials, data, and code for performing the analyses will also be made
available to the broader scientific community, so that other universities may
adopt the course sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cognitive control is
essential to successfully adjust our goals and representations to match dynamic
changes in the environment. It is argued that our understanding of the
mechanisms by which control is carried out in the brain is limited by the lack
of statistical methodology to (1) rigorously investigate cognitive models
equipped with mechanisms of control, (2) relate mechanisms of control to brain
data, and (3) justify the inclusion of complicated mechanisms by assessing model
fit and complexity. In this proposal, I hope to use hierarchical (Bayesian)
joint modeling techniques to address each of these three limitations. The
hierarchical component of this research is specifically designed to assess
individual variation in the degree to which cognitive control is executed. The
joint modeling component of this research is designed to link neurophysiological
measures (e.g., EEG, fMRI) to cognitive theories about how control is executed.
Finally, to fully examine the degree to which stochastic mechanisms of control
may best describe individual subject data, I will build on existing techniques I
have developed for approximating these processes through likelihood-free
Bayesian methodology. Each of these components will be used collectively to
systematically examine the neural basis of control in various cognitive tasks,
and specifically the degree to which individuals are capable of successfully
executing said control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.