* 1847813
* CAREER: Iridium Catalysts for the Activation and Functionalization of Ethereal Substrates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Nathan Schley, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 675,000.00

Ether molecules are ubiquitous in the chemistry that powers modern society.
Simple ethers find applications as solvents, motor fuel additives, and as
precursors to polymeric materials such as plastics and epoxies. Complex ethers
are used to synthesize carbohydrates required for modern biochemical
applications. A defining characteristic of ethers is their low reactivity.
However, this useful property limits options for their further chemical
modification and thus, usefulness. With support from the Chemical Catalysis
program of the National Science Foundation, this research project is developing
new catalytic methods to enable ether reactivity. Professor Schley and his group
at Vanderbilt University are exploring new methods for ether activation designed
to address challenges unique to the utilization of both simple and complex
ethers. The team is enriched by strong connections between Vanderbilt and local
community colleges in the greater Nashville area. Professor Schley is organizing
an outreach program designed to promote undergraduate research opportunities for
community college students. Internship opportunities for current or recent
community college graduates to conduct summer research at Vanderbilt University
are also being created.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The stability of the ether
functional group with respect to attack by oxidants, strong bases, and
nucleophiles is a valuable property in many respects, but limits avenues for
direct ether derivatization. As a result, despite the availability,
affordability, and low toxicity of simple alkyl ethers, they have been primarily
limited to low-value applications. Similarly, the harsh stoichiometric methods
used for ether C-O cleavage limits compatibility with complex polyether-
containing molecules including carbohydrate derivatives. Through this project
the Schley research group is exploring two modes for iridium-mediated
electrophilic ether activation involving ether dehydrogenation to electrophilic
alkoxycarbenes and ether silylation to give silyloxonium ions. These
intermediates are activated towards nucleophilic cleavage reactions of the
integral carbon-oxygen bond and represent mechanistically distinct routes to
selective, catalytic ether cleavage reactions. This research is being pursued in
tandem with outreach to local community colleges in the Nashville area. As a
former community college student himself, Professor Schley is piloting an
outreach program aimed at disseminating information about undergraduate research
opportunities for community college students in
Tennessee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.