* 1847392
* CAREER: Merging geoscience research and education to investigate convergent margin deformation and improve spatio-temporal problem solving in STEM education
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Nicholas Perez, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 657,383.00

Mountain ranges have significant impacts on water and mineral resources, human
population centers, climate and weather, and are linked to natural hazards such
as landslides, earthquakes, and volcanoes. Despite their societal and
environmental impact, the development of mountain ranges remains enigmatic. This
project is focused on reconstructing the age, location, and amount of
deformation that formed the southern Peruvian Andes. This location is
representative of other mountain ranges that form between converging oceanic and
continental tectonic plates, allowing this work to advance the global
understanding of mountain building. Products of this research are used to create
new open-access geoscience course modules for high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students. A new Global Tectonics course for undergraduate and graduate
students that is based on research from this project includes an international
field research experience in the research area in southern Peru. This field
experience links tectonics, resources, hazards, and human impacts, facilitating
students' perception of issues with global dimensions. These education
initiatives contribute toward building a strong STEM workforce that is adept at
working with diverse datasets to solve problems across spatial and temporal
scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses field mapping, cross-section
construction, geochronology, bedrock and detrital thermochronology, kinematic
reconstruction, and virtual outcrop models to constrain the timing, position,
and magnitude of crustal shortening accumulated across the southern Peruvian
Andes since the Cretaceous Period. These datasets test how inherited rheologic
contrasts, temporally variable subduction zone geometry, and interactions
between surface and deep earth processes govern the development of mountain
ranges along convergent margins. With this new dataset on the temporal and
spatial patterns of deformation and mountain building, the principal
investigator and students assess how the upper plate responds to changes in
subduction zone processes, the discrepancies between measurements of crustal
strain at geologic and modern time frames, and how crustal deformation,
thickening, and surface uplift are linked in time and space. This work also
contributes toward research and education goals identified by the geoscience and
tectonics communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.