* 1847848
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Contextual and physiological correlates of complex behavioral strategies in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2019,11/30/2020
* Ryne Palombit, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2020
* USD 0.00

Primates engage in a complex array of behavioral strategies during social
interactions. This doctoral dissertation project will study the relative
importance of friendly and aggressive behaviors and the broader contexts in
which these behaviors occur during male-female interactions. The project will
contribute to our understanding of the distribution of reproductive behaviors
observed across the Primate Order. This project will contribute to the training
of an undergraduate student in hormonal analysis techniques in the laboratory.
The project will also contribute to conservation education programs and
classroom connections between research site locations and the home institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Olive baboons provide a unique opportunity to test several
hypotheses addressing the expression of coercive versus "friendly" interactions
with respect to mating. Because mating opportunities for males in this species
are not strictly confined to the highest ranking individuals, both aggressive
and friendly approaches occur, either by different males or even by the same
males at different times, with different mates. However, the conditions
influencing the relevant male and female mating decisions generating these
patterns are currently unclear. Systematic behavioral and hormonal data will be
collected from wild olive baboons to test whether two recognized aggressive
tactics are effective male strategies in either the long-term or the short-term.
Correspondingly, this research will evaluate whether males obtain mating
opportunities through the contrasting strategy of friendly interaction to
females, either as part of a long-term strategy of positive social affiliation
or as a short-term tactic. This project also will record female injuries and
non-invasively measure stress hormones to evaluate the physiological response
and potential costs to females of male strategies. This primate system provides
a useful model for testing general principles of how these ostensibly
antithetical strategy sets interact co-evolutionarily.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.