* 1847964
* CAREER: Novel Debye Waller Thermometry of Oxide Interfaces for Reducing Thermal Interface Resistance
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2025
* Jinwoo Hwang, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2025
* USD 625,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: To control thermal conduction in materials, it is
critical to understand heat transport through various interfaces within the
material. Interfaces often display thermal interface resistance (TIR), and for a
broad range of electronic, photonic, and energy-harvesting materials, TIR can
critically affect the materials' performance and stability. However, it is often
very challenging to identify the exact origin of TIR, since it would require an
exact understanding of 'what really happens' at the interface, including the
exact structure of the interface and how the structure affects the thermal
transport process. This project develops a novel technique that uses a small
electron probe to directly measure the temperature at the interface with near
atomic scale resolution and determine TIR with unprecedented precision. This new
approach can deliver transformative impact to the thermal engineering of
materials in many ways, by providing the new important understanding on how the
atomic scale structure and defects at the interface affect TIR, verifying the
existing theories and simulation results on how to reduce TIR, and providing new
material design rules on how to control TIR by modifying the interface structure
and composition. This project integrates the education and outreach activities
for underrepresented students to provide them with opportunities to engage with
researchers, motivate, and help them potentially pursue advanced degrees or
careers in science and engineering. The project also includes the development of
the interactive data analysis system that allows people with visual impairment
to perceive and process scientific data using their auditory
senses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: A new Debye-Waller thermometry
under development is based on quantifying Debye-Waller factor, the attenuation
of the scattered electron intensity due to thermal vibration, spatially resolved
at the atomic scale, using high angle annular dark field signal in scanning
transmission electron microscopy that is highly sensitive to thermal vibration.
Using this new approach, the temperature profile at the interface at the atomic
scale can be measured in situ, and TIR is directly determined from the profile
with high precision, beyond the limits of any existing methods. This new
experimental capability can validate the existing theories and hypotheses on how
to reduce TIR, including the theories involving phonon matching, acoustic
matching, epitaxial strain, and defect control. The validation is carried out
using carefully designed perovskite oxide interfaces, which are synthesized
using different structural parameters, such as the atomic mass, bond strength,
strain, defect density, layer thickness, and interface roughness. The error
analysis part of this work is assisted by the accommodation technology developed
in this project, which allows people with disabilities to efficiently perceive,
handle, and analyze the scientific data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.