* 1847860
* CAREER:Strategic behavior, beliefs, and interventions in networks
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Benjamin Golub, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 334,202.00

This CAREER award funds research in the economic theory of networks. Network
theory is used to analyze applications ranging from economic development to
business management. This project will develop new models and new measures of
network structure that are tailored to particular outcomes of interest. The
first project looks at how individuals learn from others, and asks what kinds of
networks spread accurate information. The second project examines how businesses
that share a supply chain make strategic decisions about pricing. The third
project considers the economics of network coordination. When individuals seek
to match their actions or opinions to those held by their friends and neighbors,
what properties of the group determine whether or not disagreement will persist?
The fourth project studies the formation of networks for collaboration. The
model gives new implications for how to build successful teams from diverse
populations. This project includes experiments with students who will
collaborate to learn new skills. The experiments are designed to measure key
model parameters. The education component of this award uses the experiments as
a platform for student engagement with recent research in this growing research
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal covers several of the major areas of
the economic theory of networks: learning and information transmission, games
and markets embedded in networks, and network formation. The first project
analyzes a new model of rational individuals learning from their social
contacts. It asks what network structures allow agents to form accurate beliefs
about a changing world, and which ones lead to persistent errors. The second
project studies a pricing problem in which firms interact strategically because
they are part of the same supply chain and their prices affect each other's
markets. The PI takes a network perspective on the strategic relationships and
analyzes interventions in the market aimed, for example, at improving consumer
welfare. The third project considers the basic welfare economics of network
coordination. When individuals seek to match their actions or opinions to those
of their network contacts, what properties of the group?s preferences determine
the costs of miscoordination or disagreement? Which networks sustain strong
polarization? The fourth project studies the formation of networks for
collaboration, e.g. by students in school. Since the topics of the projects have
proved to be of interest to applied researchers, the theoretical advances should
have spillover benefits to other parts of economics. In several of the projects,
a key aim is to provide empirically relevant summary statistics (e.g., measures
of price pass-through, or segregation) for use in applied research.
Finally,because the projects make connections with some classical problems of
Bayesian learning, market power, and coordination games, they also aim to enrich
economic theory more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.