* 1847087
* CAREER:  Using Information and Incentives to Promote Human Capital
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Rebecca Dizon-Ross, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 475,129.00

This CAREER project studies how to use information and incentives to increase
investment in health and education among disadvantaged populations. It develops
a method based on the idea that better information and appropriate rewards will
result in better decisions about health and education investments. This model is
then used to study the effectiveness of policies to induce diabetic patients to
exercise, policies to reduce opioid addiction, and to study choices parents make
regarding whether to invest more in their gifted child's education or invest
equally in all their children's education when resources are tight. The results
of this research will be applicable to several important policy questions,
including reducing the diabetes epidemic; addressing the opioid epidemic in the
US; and improving educational investments in the US and around the world. The
methods developed in this project will be used by other researchers to study
other policy issues. The results could contribute to the wellbeing of US
citizens, especially among the poor and people around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research uses four projects to develop
new insights about incentive design and tests them in the context of healthy
behaviors and investment in education. The first project conducts a follow-up
RCT on an earlier project to test whether personalizing incentive contracts
improves efficacy. The second project conducts an RCT to evaluate two incentive
schemes: incentivizing ``inputs" and incentivizing ``outcome" of abstinence. The
third conducts a field experiment to identify parental preferences by
exogenously vary returns to investing in their children's education, allowing PI
to quantify the weights parents place on maximizing the returns to investment
(total household earnings), equalizing their children's outcomes (individual
earnings), and equalizing the inputs given to each child. Project 4 uses an RCT
design to test whether knowledge that children will be ineligible to receive SSI
when they turn 18 will induce them to invest more in education. The results of
this research project will significantly contribute to economists' knowledge of
how best to design incentive schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.