* 1847245
* CAREER: Nonlinear biochemical switches for molecular fingerprinting
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Stephanie McCalla, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 512,641.00

Screening for biomolecules (DNA, RNA, and proteins) is vital for scientists and
clinicians. Current tests rely on difficult and expensive techniques that are
not suitable for clinical use. The proposed work will create a new class of
diagnostic tests. They will provide a yes or no response to the presence of
small amounts of specific biomolecules. The methods developed could make complex
laboratory techniques available to researchers and medical professionals who do
not have access to advanced equipment. Simple diagnostic devices will be made
with paper crafting tools. Making these tests affordable could significantly
improve health care in areas with limited resources. Incorporating these paper
devices into crafting projects that link art, design, science and engineering
will engage students in STEM. Educational kits containing these devices will be
distributed to rural Montana schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Information
processing in natural systems, such as cell-signaling and genetic regulation,
rely on highly nonlinear biochemical reactions. Subthreshold signals will not
elicit a response in the system. Synthetic biochemical switches that identify
proteins and nucleic acids exist but typically require large input
concentrations of target molecules. This is not suitable for many analytical
assays and molecular diagnostics. This project will investigate cooperative
signal amplification to produce high gain nonlinear reactions triggered by
specific RNA, DNA, and protein target molecules. Nonlinear DNA amplification
sources will be incorporated with competitive sinks that degrade signals
produced at a low rate. The resulting amplification switches can condense
abundance or relative abundance of two target molecules into a simple on/off
readout. They are designed to be simple, rapid, robust, and specific. The
overall goal of this NSF CAREER project is to design universal biochemical
switches to rapidly produce a robust molecular fingerprint of specific proteins
and nucleic acids using binary readouts. These switches will be validated in 1)
high throughput single cell analysis of small RNA and 2) paper-based multiplexed
microarrays for simultaneous identification of RNA and proteins.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award is jointly funded by the Cellular and
Biochemical Engineering Program of the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental,
and Transport Systems Division, and by the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.