* 1847271
* CAREER: Statistical and Geometric Analysis for Tree-Shaped Data
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Megan Owen, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 04/30/2024
* USD 412,038.00

This project will build a geometric, mathematical framework for analyzing tree-
shaped data, which occurs in disease, cancer, and medical imaging. The
evolutionary histories of viruses, relationships of tumor mutations over time,
and images of lung airways and arteries are all tree-shaped. The geometry of
trees must be considered during analysis to avoid errors and bias, but
traditional statistical methods are of limited use. Furthermore, technological
improvements such as genetic sequencing are producing increasingly large and
complex datasets of such trees. This project will develop new mathematical tools
to understand and derive insights from tree-shaped data. An educational
component will create training programs and extra-curricular opportunities for
undergraduates to participate in research and learn valuable statistical and
technical skills. Many of the students are expected to be from low-income and
underrepresented groups, thus broadening the participation of these groups in
STEM industry and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop
methods for analyzing tree data that use both the tree shape and the length of
its edges in a mathematically integrated way. The majority of existing tree
analysis methods only focus on the tree shape, but the proposed methods will be
based on the underlying non-Euclidean geometric space in which the data lie.
This research will contribute to the growing field of geometric statistics with
a mathematical formulation and method of computation for bias in tree-shaped
data, and two-sample tests validated on biologically realistic data. In scaling
these statistical methods to meet the Big Data challenge, this research will
continue to expand the field of computational geometry to piece-wise Euclidean,
non-positively curved spaces. Finally, this research will lead to characterizing
the first continuous geometric spaces for phylogenetic
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.