* 1847804
* CAREER: Bioorganic Investigation of Human Milk Oligosaccharide Modulation of Group B Streptococcus
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Steven Townsend, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 01/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Steven Townsend from Vanderbilt University to
investigate the communication between humans and bacteria found in their gut.
These bacteria are part of the gut flora or microbiome, a collection of
microorganisms that live in the gut and have an influence on human health. The
gut microbiome helps us digest food and fight pathogens, for example. It takes
1-2 years from birth for babies to develop an adult-like gut flora. The human
breast milk delivers molecules that promote or suppress the growth of specific
gut bacteria to infants. About two hundred of these molecules are
oligosaccharides. The research of Dr. Townsend focuses on the elucidation of the
mechanism by which oligosaccharides found in human breast milk affect the growth
and virulence of a bacterium from the gut that is a leading cause of sepsis and
meningitis. Successful completion of this project may help us understand human-
bacteria communication and provide new strategies to control specific aspects of
this communication. The interdisciplinary aspects of this program allows
graduate students and undergraduates to gain expertise in modern research
techniques. The project also integrates an outreach program to teach
carbohydrate science to children at the Martha O'Bryan Center, an anti-poverty,
non-profit organization in Nashville, Tennessee.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human milk
contributes substantially to the establishment of the gut microbiome in
breastfed infants by providing &gt;400 bacterial species and supplying
components that promote or suppress the growth of select bacteria. One of these
components are human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs). The central focus of Dr.
Townsend's program is to define how HMOs maintain microbiome homeostasis.
Bioassay-guided fractionation is used to identify potent antimicrobial HMOs in
human milk. Then, they use chemical synthesis to prepare photoreactive HMO
probes. These probes are used in affinity-based protein profiling to discover
the specific biological targets of HMOs and gain key insight into the mechanism
of action of HMOs. The identification of the mechanistic targets of HMOs may
significantly impact basic science by annotating, at the molecular level, the
biochemical processes of HMO-based chemical signaling between humans and
microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.