* 1847552
* CAREER: Design and Understanding up from the Atomic Scale of Multivalent Intercalation Electrodes for High-Energy-Density Rechargeable Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Robert Messinger, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/29/2024
* USD 550,572.00

There is a critical need for improved energy storage technologies for electric
vehicles and large-scale integration of renewable electricity grid storage to
improve domestic energy security. Currently, state-of-the-art energy storage
technologies such as lithium-ion batteries have insufficient energy density and
are too costly for broad use in these applications. Battery electrodes based on
multivalent ions (e.g., aluminum ions or zinc ions) yield significant
enhancements in electric charge storage capacity over monovalent (e.g., lithium-
ion) electrodes. When paired with their corresponding metal electrodes,
potentially transformative gains in energy density are possible. However,
multivalent battery performance to date is lacking, in large part due to limited
fundamental understanding and control of the complex electronic, chemical, and
structural changes that the electrodes undergo upon continued charge and
discharge cycles. Research efforts in this project will investigate the
fundamental electrochemical processes that occur during the use of multivalent
electrodes, yielding insights into how to design and realize rechargeable
batteries with significantly enhanced energy storage properties. Rechargeable
aluminum-ion and zinc-ion electrodes will be investigated as both aluminum and
zinc metals are earth abundant, low-cost, non-flammable, non-toxic, and exhibit
high volumetric charge storage capacity. The project also includes outreach
efforts that will advance STEM education at the high school level by directly
interacting with high school science teachers at a local high school via a
"Battery Bootcamp". Outreach will stress the co-development of hands-on, age
appropriate laboratory experiments for the high school students to use to help
understand electrochemical engineering concepts. The project also will conduct a
NMR School within the City University of New York (CUNY) for graduate students
to incorporate this technique and other advanced spectroscopic methods to enrich
their own respective research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific and
technological objectives of this research project are to (i) understand, up from
the atomic scale, the processes and properties underpinning electrochemical
intercalation of multivalent cations in crystalline transition metal compounds
and (ii) to use this understanding to discover and optimize novel intercalation
electrodes with significantly enhanced bulk energy storage properties. Aluminum-
ion (Al3+) and zinc-ion (Zn2+) intercalation electrodes will be investigated to
leverage the favorable electrochemical properties of aluminum and zinc metal
while enabling the effects of differing ion valence and charge density to be
studied. The electronic and crystalline structures of model transition metal
compounds will be systematically varied, enabling investigations of their
relationships to electrochemical intercalation phenomena from the molecular to
the cell level. Subsequently, knowledge gained from model studies will be used
to initiate targeted materials discovery efforts, wherein new electrode
compositions and structures will be synthesized and explored for next-generation
aluminum-ion and zinc-ion batteries. Novel multi-dimensional solid-state nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) methods will yield new insights into the atomic-level
environments, structures, and dynamics of intercalated cations and electrode
frameworks, revealing ion intercalation and charge transfer mechanisms. Overall,
this work is expected to establish and validate molecular design principles
aimed at realizing multivalent intercalation electrodes with enhanced charge
storage capacities, intercalation potentials, and rate
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.