* 1847770
* CAREER: A Multiscale Framework for Crystalline Defects in 2-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Xingjie Li, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Two-dimensional (2D) materials such as graphene are structures that have
thickness on the atomic scale (one atom thick in the case of graphene) which
have revolutionized many fields in materials science and nanotechnology.
Currently, little is known about the mathematical formulation to systematically
study these 2D few-layered structures, or about multiscale modeling to reliably
quantify how defects affect materials properties. The overarching goal of this
project is to develop constitutive mathematical models and computational tools
to provide a fundamental understanding of defect mechanisms and their influence
on mechanical and electronic properties and to help the control and design of
defects inside 2D materials. This research lies at the intersection of multiple
disciplines, and the purpose of the project is to bridge the computational and
theoretical gaps to meet the modeling demands. The educational goal of this
project is to motivate next generation of students to participate in STEM study
and to seek a STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the
development of a new and quantitative coupling framework for defective 2D
systems in the following specific directions: (1) introduce computational
schemes to cross the length scales for thin structures, employ mathematical
tools to identify sharp coupling conditions, and establish comprehensive error
estimates which allow defects in the analyses, (2) develop new interface
absorbing conditions to minimize wave reflection for modeling fracture
propagation, establish a posteriori error analysis for the adaptivity of
computation, (3) investigate time-accelerated schemes to study thermally-
activated defects, and (4) develop constitutive mathematical models and
computational tools to study the essential impacts of defects on the electronic
properties. The computational tools and the developed methodology can also be
applied to a wide range of physical and science problems. Computational open-
source software will be developed to contribute to the advancement of
nanomaterial research and technology. For the educational component, this
project will provide a research and outreach platform to prepare and train
students for interdisciplinary research and to disseminate knowledge of a range
of educational levels from K-12 students to young postgraduate researchers and
to the general public in the U.S. Successful completion of this project will
also greatly facilitate the mission and goals of encouraging students from
middle school student to graduate to pursue a STEM career by a variety of
outreaching activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.