* 1847140
* CAREER: Influence of Pressure on Surfactant Thermodynamics and Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Nicolas Alvarez, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 506,391.00

Water is a desirable and important solvent for many reasons. Water has low
toxicity, low vapor pressure, and high solubility for many compounds. However,
water is becoming increasingly limited and expensive as a resource. For example,
we currently use more than 2 million gallons of water for each hydraulically
fracked well, which requires costly water treatment to remove contaminants. This
is equivalent to 40,000 baths, an amount of water that is raising serious
concern in arid American states. Due to these environmental concerns, the use of
supercritical CO2 fracking fluids is an important research area. Supercritical
CO2 systems have extraordinary potential to reduce water use and greatly reduce
the environmental impact of current and next-generation industrial processes. In
many of these processes, molecules called surfactants are also vital to their
use. Surfactants lower the surface tension between two liquids or between a
liquid and a solid. Surfactants affect the transport of fluids in these complex
environments involving oil, water, gases, and solids. However, very little is
known regarding their effect at high pressure. This lack of understanding is
slowing major strides in the use of CO2 as a "green" alternative solvent in
separations, in chemical reactions, medical device fabrication, and hydrocarbon
fracking fluids. The principal investigator has recently developed and
demonstrated an instrument to accurately measure properties of surfactants at
high pressure interfaces and surfaces and understand how chemical structure
influences performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will focus on
developing thermodynamic and transport models describing surfactant interfacial
activity at high pressure interfaces via a newly developed high pressure
microtensiometer and analysis technique. Model parameterization will result from
analyzing static and dynamic interfacial tension data of various surfactants at
various interfaces as a function of pressure and temperature. This work will be
highly facilitated by a time scale analysis taking into account the effect of
interfacial curvature, surfactant concentration, and bulk fluid flow, which
allows for the distinction between kinetic and diffusion transport mechanisms.
Several chemistry/performance correlations are expected. For example,
quantification of partition coefficients in various phases will determine the
preferential solubility of different chemical structures and their applicability
in high pressure processes. Interfacial rheology studies will allow for better
understanding of foam and emulsion stability as a function of chemical structure
and interfacial activity. A theoretical framework that combines kinetic theories
and thermodynamic equations of state models will guide design of improved
molecular architectures. The model parameters generated by this work will allow
for (1) a deeper understanding of surfactant thermodynamics at elevated
pressures (2) a direct correlation between transport parameters and surfactant
structure and ultimately (3) correlation between molecular structure and
performance in industrial applications. Educationally, this funded work in
partnership with the Lindy Scholars Program and the Upper Darby School District,
will develop a STEM CAREER path building program involving five diverse
elementary/middle schools. In collaboration with the Louis Stokes-Alliance for
Minority Participation, we will introduce and prepare under-represented
minorities for research training during their Drexel tenure. Lastly, the PI will
hold annual industrial workshops, inviting local industries, to share in recent
discoveries and experimental findings in an effort to build collaboration and
increase the dissemination of fundamental knowledge and
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.