* 1847780
* CAREER: Defect Energetics and Dynamics in Concentrated Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Xianming Bai, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 550,887.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Metallic alloys are widely used as structural
materials in many practical applications such as bridges, power plants,
buildings, aircrafts, and automobiles. Conventional alloys are typically made of
one principal alloying element with addition of other low-concentration alloying
elements for improving alloy properties. Recently, concentrated alloys have
received significant interests due to their novel properties. Different from
conventional alloys, concentrated alloys consist of two or more principal
alloying elements. These concentrated alloys exhibit outstanding physical
properties compared to conventional alloys including high-temperature strength,
corrosion resistance, radiation tolerance, as well as wear and fatigue
resistance. Such superior properties are related to the unique formation and
transport mechanisms of crystal defects in concentrated alloys, which are poorly
understood to date. The goal of this project is to use novel computational
approaches to narrow this knowledge gap. The proposed research will study the
effects of alloy composition, atomic configuration of alloying elements,
interaction between alloying elements on the defect formation and transport
mechanisms in concentrated alloys. The connection between the atomistic
mechanisms and long-term defect evolution will be assessed to understand the
importance of these mechanisms on the microstructural evolution in alloys.
Successful completion of this project will reveal the atomic origins that lead
to the unique defect properties in concentrated alloys. The understanding may
help establish science-based principles for down-selecting alloying elements to
control defect diffusion and mass transport in concentrated alloys and thus
achieve desired physical properties. Through laboratory sessions and hands-on
computer simulation training at two outreaching programs at Virginia Tech that
target on recruiting high school students from under-represented groups into
engineering disciplines, this project will help attract and recruit next-
generation materials scientists and engineers with diverse backgrounds. In
addition, the research will be integrated into both undergraduate and graduate
courses to educate and retain students in computational materials science and
physical metallurgy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Lattice
defects such as interstitials and vacancies as well as their clusters are main
mass transport carriers in materials. Their diffusion is a critical process for
governing the microstructural evolution and thus the change of physical
properties in materials. Although defect energetics and dynamics are well
studied in pure metals and dilute alloys, they are poorly understood in
concentrated alloys including high-entropy alloys. The main objective of this
project is to understand the atomic origins for the unique defect energetics and
dynamics in concentrated alloys such as sluggish diffusion, which are further
determined by the complex atomic configurations and interactions of alloying
elements. The proposed research will start from binary concentrated alloys and
gradually extend to ternary alloys and high-entropy alloys. Multiscale modeling
methods including molecular statics, molecular dynamics, temperature accelerated
dynamics, and cluster dynamics will be used. To understand the effect of atomic
configuration, alloys of different compositions including the percolation
threshold, will be studied to elucidate whether percolation leads to
preferential diffusion of alloying elements. For the effect of interatomic
interaction, different interactions between alloying elements will be selected
in a desired way to determine the relative importance between defect formation
energies and migration barriers on the sluggish diffusion. Temperature
accelerated dynamics will be used to study the non-intuitive defect cluster
migration mechanisms, which can reach long timescales but with full atomic
fidelity. Cluster dynamics will be used to evaluate the importance of different
types of defects and clusters on the long-term defect evolution at the
experimentally accessible timescales. Accomplishing these tasks will enable
understanding of the unique defect formation and transport mechanisms in
concentrated alloys and may help the research community design novel alloys of
optimum properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.