* 1847152
* CAREER: An Integrated Platform for Measuring Neurotransmitters and Cytokines from Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Edward Song, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR). Understanding how neurons and immune cells in the brain communicate
with each other through the exchange of neurotransmitters and cytokines could
reveal new signaling pathways that are crucial to treating various
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease. Neurons
typically release various types of neurotransmitters to correspond with
neighboring cells, while immune cells commonly release cytokines to modulate
immune responses. Recent discoveries provide strong evidence suggesting bi-
directional communication between neurotransmitters and cytokines for the
purpose of modulating one another. Therefore, it is critical to monitor the
dynamics of both of these species interactively and simultaneously in a closed-
loop system, where one or more types of neurotransmitters can influence a series
of cytokines, and vice versa. This project investigates novel biosensing
strategies and the development of a fully integrated device platform that can
simultaneously measure the neurochemicals and cytokines from neurons and immune
cells, respectively, as they are released. Successful implementation of this
technology will greatly impact the neuroscience community by elucidating the
intricate signaling pathways and the mechanisms through which neuroinflammation
and immune responses occur in the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this project is to implement an integrated biosensing platform that
enables real-time measurement of the key neurochemicals and inflammatory
cytokines from cells in situ as they are secreted. To achieve this goal, the
following strategies will be applied: (1) Molecular templating will be used to
implement a novel polymer-based target receptor that will enhance the
selectivity in analyte recognition; (2) The electrochemical sensing technique
will be integrated with a graphene field-effect transistor to enhance signal
amplification and sensitivity in analyte detection; and (3) A lab-on-a-chip
device that integrates the cell culture system and the biosensing components
will be implemented. The educational objective of this project is to utilize the
research activities as a platform to train the current and the next generation
of STEM workforce. This will be achieved through the following strategic
approaches: (1) Training the next generation of scientists and engineers through
K-12 outreach activities; (2) Preparing engineers- and scientists-in-training
through undergraduate and graduate education and mentoring; and (3) Supporting
the current industrial workforce by implementing an online graduate certificate
program. These educational activities will expose the students in various stages
in their STEM career to the areas of (1) microfabrication of microfluidic
devices, (2) the concepts of biosensing and bioelectronics, and (3)
nanomaterial- and transistor-based detection of
biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.