* 1847598
* The Genetic Basis for the Evolution of Adaptive Skin Appendage Traits in Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Yana Kamberov, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2024
* USD 577,704.00

The "bare" appearance of human skin is a trait that distinguishes humans from
all other primates. This striking appearance results from miniaturized body hair
and increased sweat gland density (approximately 10 times higher than that of a
chimpanzee). These adaptations allow humans to cool their body temperature
through increased air flow over the skin and evaporation of water from the skin
surface. This project will find and explain the genomic changes underlying the
human-specific evolutionary modifications to hair and sweat gland composition.
The biological insights, as well as the data, methods and tools developed as
part of this research program, will provide novel assets to transform the
investigation of the genetic bases of other adaptive skin traits and skin
physiology more generally. The data generated by this project also will advance
ongoing efforts to build and properly pattern hair and eccrine glands in vitro,
a major obstacle in comprehensive human skin regeneration. In addition, this
project will support the training of under-represented minority students and
researchers, and fund the development of a public, educational website on human
skin evolution, which will highlight outstanding questions in skin evolution and
curate ongoing and new discoveries on this topic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program builds on the recent discovery by the research team that a
subset of biological signals that increase eccrine gland density also alter hair
development, leading to diminished hair size. The working hypothesis of this
project is that humans have acquired evolutionary mutations in regulatory
sequences leading to concomitantly increased eccrine gland density and
diminished hair size relative to other primates. The researchers will (i) map
out the regulatory sequences, or enhancers, that control the expression of a key
developmental factor, En1, that reciprocally regulates eccrine sweat gland
density and hair size; (ii) define the genomic changes within these enhancers
that contributed to unique hair and sweat gland traits in humans, by
investigating the functional significance of human-specific changes using genome
edited mouse models of diverged human and chimpanzee regulatory
sequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.