* 1847199
* CAREER: Ultrafast hydrogen-bond dynamics in crowded, heterogeneous environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Carlos Baiz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2024
* USD 604,290.00

With funding by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Carlos Baiz of the University of Texas at
Austin is investigating the structure and motions of biological molecules in
"crowded" environments. Biological molecules (biomolecules) like proteins and
DNA can contain many atoms (thousands!). This means that their structures and
internal motions (bending, twisting, folding) can be very complicated and hard
to predict. In order to understand biomolecules, chemists have studied them in
dilute solution, in other words, under conditions where they are interacting
with surrounding water molecules, but not other large biomolecules. It has
recently become evident that findings from these studies in dilute solution may
not be representative of biological environments. In real living cells,
biomolecules exist and function in crowded environments, often assembled
together to form membranes, enzyme complexes, and organelles. What are the
actual behaviors of biomolecules in real, crowded conditions? Professor Baiz and
his students are using a technique called time-resolved, two-dimensional,
infrared spectroscopy (2D IR) to study the structure and motions of molecules in
more realistic, crowded environments. In order to help interpret the complicated
2D IR data, Professor Baiz is developing computer models for the crowded
systems. Together, the experimental and computational studies are forming
connections among molecular structure, environments, and dynamics to rationalize
the mechanisms of protein interactions in the cell. Through this project,
Professor Baiz and his students are providing insights into how living systems
function at the molecular level. The research may also lead to new
cryoprotectant technologies (cryoprotectants are chemical substances that hinder
the formation of detrimental ice crystals in cells when they are frozen). The
students engaged in this project are gaining valuable skills and experience in
cutting edge laser optics technology as well as in the computer simulation of
molecular systems. The broader impacts of this project aim to increase
representation from minority students in the Chemistry graduate program at the
University of Texas at Austin through organized visit days for underrepresented
students across the southwestern states. These efforts seek to boost diversity
among the future science and technology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on mapping the ultrafast hydrogen-bond dynamics of small
molecules that mimic the protein backbone in solutions with crowding agents such
as polymers and proteins to characterize the effects of crowding and confinement
on solvation dynamics. Ultrafast two-dimensional infrared spectroscopy is used
to extract frequency-frequency correlation functions, which are directly
compared to molecular dynamics simulations. Structure-based infrared maps are
used to generate spectra from molecular dynamics trajectories, and thus provide
a direct connection between experiments and simulations. Vibrational probes,
including thiocyanates, are used to access the solvation environments on the
surface of proteins to understand the effect of protein polarity and
electrostatics on local hydrogen-bond networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.