* 1847830
* CAREER: Instrument Development of Plasmonic-Assisted Nanomechanical Detection for Polarized Spectroscopy and Imaging
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Laurene Tetard, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2024
* USD 403,966.00

With this project, supported by the Chemical Measurement and Imaging program in
the Chemistry Division, Professor Laurene Tetard and her students in the
Department of Physics and the NanoScience Technology Center at the University of
Central Florida are studying important molecular structures of living systems at
the nanoscale. Using polarized infrared light to enhance the capabilities of a
method known as Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM), the Tetard group is able to
observe the chemical and structural properties of single molecules and their
assemblies. The new approach can evaluate the orientations and crystallinity of
systems which cannot be studied with conventional tools, enabling deeper
understanding of important processes in chemistry, food science, catalysis,
environmental science, forensics, and biology. The team is also generating
educational materials to communicate the concepts and relevance of its research
activities through a series of workshops offering hands-on and project-based
activities. A diverse group of students is engaged in the conception and
execution of the workshops, with an aim of inspiring participants (including
women and underrepresented minority students) to pursue careers in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living systems and their components, such as nucleic and
amino acids, can present complex structural arrangements, such as chirality.
Despite the important relationship between the structure and function of these
unique self-assembled structures, standard analytical tools are deficient in
probing low concentration, single molecular processes or rare events. Dr. Tetard
is developing and evaluating a new approach to nanoscale polarized infrared
spectroscopy to enable identification of molecular chirality in complex systems,
and to further establish means to monitor specific dynamic structure-activity
relationships associated with these systems. The approach utilizes light
polarization and field enhancement for nanomechanical AFM detection. The
performance of the platform is being tested on several molecules of importance
in life sciences. Additional efforts target time-resolved monitoring of changes
in molecular twists. The educational component involves developments at the
forefront of nanoscale science in rich project-based activities for a series of
workshops in the US and abroad. Resulting hands-on and project-based activities
will be made publicly available for teaching
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.