* 1847655
* CAREER: Spectrokinetic Studies for Understanding Metal-Support Interactions in Catalytic Oxidation of Ethanol
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Juan Bravo Suarez, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Ethanol is a major commodity chemical produced from biorenewable sources that is
primarily used in transportation fuel. The project will focus on improved
catalysts for expanding the ethanol market by converting the ethanol to value-
added derivatives such as acetic acid. Specifically, the project will study the
interactions between gold nanoparticles and metal oxide catalyst supports to
gain fundamental understanding that will be used to design more active and
selective catalysts for acetic acid production. The fundamental knowledge gained
in this project will contribute to the long-term sustainability of U.S.
bioethanol plants. Mechanistic insights will also provide better general
understanding of metal-support interactions involving noble metals in
applications such as automotive exhaust oxidation catalysis. The research is
integrated with an educational plan that provides training and leadership
opportunities to a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students through
research and community engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
the effects of charge transfer processes in heterogeneous catalysis. The limited
number of experimental tools to assess in situ charge transfer rates and their
kinetic relevance for surface catalyzed reactions has been a major obstacle for
advancing the understanding of metal-support interactions. Three enabling
spectroscopic techniques have been developed to facilitate 1) in situ evaluation
of adsorbed oxygen on gold catalysts (Gold-Surface Plasmon Resonance-UV-visible
spectroscopy, i.e. Au-SPR-UV-vis), 2) identify surface reaction intermediates
(Modulation Excitation-Phase Sensitive Detection-Diffuse Reflectance Infrared
Fourier Transform Spectroscopy, i.e. ME-PSD-DRIFTS), and charge transfer between
metal and support (Modulation Excitation-Phase Sensitive Detection-UV-visible
spectroscopy, i.e. ME-PSD-UV-vis). This project will systematically examine
electronic and structural metal-support effects by studying a variety of
catalysts while isolating gold particle size, support nature, and catalyst
synthesis method. It is hypothesized that supports with n-type semiconducting
properties facilitate charge transfer from and to the gold nanoparticle
periphery, thereby promoting active species that oxidize ethanol to acetic acid.
Overall, the combination of Au-SPR-UV-vis, ME-PSD-FTIR, ME-PSD-UV-vis,
spectrokinetics, and reaction kinetics will provide a comprehensive mechanistic
view of gas phase ethanol oxidation to describe the observed activity and
selectivity trends. The new knowledge and techniques will assist in the design
of next-generation gold oxidation catalysts. They will also be transferable to
other oxidation reactions, thus expanding their applicability to a wide range of
surface catalyzed reactions. The research and educational programs will produce
a trained cadre of diverse students to enter the workforce in STEM disciplines.
A new outreach after-school science initiative, EMPower (Energy, Matter, &amp;
Power) club, will also provide undergraduate students with leadership
opportunities while serving as role models and mentors for elementary school
children from underrepresented groups and low-income backgrounds. The initiative
will serve as a catalyst to spark children's curiosity through hands-on
activities to let them appreciate science with fun activities and inspire them
to pursue education in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.