* 1847687
* CAREER: Multiple Scales of Nitrogen Cycle in Oxygen Minimum Zones
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Daniele Bianchi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2024
* USD 673,029.00

Multiple Scales of Nitrogen Cycle in Oxygen Minimum Zones
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The nitrogen cycle in the ocean is key to ocean
productivity, carbon storage, and emissions of nitrous oxide, a potent
greenhouse gas, to the atmosphere. The chemical processes that connect nitrogen
species in the ocean are sensitive to the amount of oxygen dissolved in
seawater. These reactions become more intense within oxygen minimum zones ?areas
of the ocean with little or no dissolved oxygen. Oxygen minimum zones are
affected by currents that range in scale from hundreds to less than few
kilometers. These currents create microhabitats where nitrogen cycling and
nitrous oxide emissions are higher. This project investigates the interaction
between small-scale ocean circulation, oxygen availability, and the nitrogen
cycle. It uses a series of increasingly finer-scale numerical simulations of the
Pacific Ocean, where two of the largest oxygen minimum zones are found. These
simulations provide information about nitrogen transformations and nitrous oxide
emissions on timescales from less than one year to several decades, and spatial
scales from a few kilometers to the basin scale. This research will increase our
ability to simulate and predict ocean responses to natural and human
disturbances, with implications for society. The educational component of the
project establishes a series of ocean-going chemical oceanography activities for
approximately 100 undergraduate students at the University of California at Los
Angeles each year. The field trips involve half-day cruises in the Santa Monica
Bay, where students sample a variety of biogeochemical properties. Observations
collected during the field trips will be used as a resource in classroom
activities and student research projects. The field trips and educational
materials offer opportunities to explore cutting-edge questions in ocean
biogeochemistry, increase student interest in ocean sciences and access to
research, and enhance student learning and self-efficacy, ultimately promoting
retention in oceanography and STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxygen minimum zones
host major nitrogen transformations, including denitrification, anammox, and
nitrous oxide production, which are essential for biogeochemistry and climate.
These reactions are strongly partitioned along oxygen gradients in the suboxic
range, making them sensitive to ventilation and chemical heterogeneity driven by
variable ocean currents. However, the nature of this sensitivity is poorly
understood. The objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that
physical circulation at scales from tens of kilometers (mesoscale) to less than
one kilometer (submesoscale) is critical in shaping these nitrogen cycle
transformations. To test the hypothesis and investigate its implications, we
will optimize a new model of the nitrogen cycle against a range of recent
observations, and implement it in a realistic three-dimensional hydrodynamic-
biogeochemical model. We will adopt a nesting strategy to downscale a Pacific-
wide historical simulation to a series of regional domains at resolutions down
to few kilometers or less, resolving the oxygen minimum zone boundaries and
their fine-scale variability. By analyzing these model solutions, we will: (1)
constrain the sensitivity of the microbial nitrogen cycle to oxygen,
ventilation, and chemical heterogeneity; (2) in light of this sensitivity,
quantify the role of mesoscale and submesoscale processes in shaping nitrogen
transformations and transport across oxygen minimum zone boundaries; and (3)
investigate the response of the nitrogen cycle to climate variability, in
particular fixed-nitrogen losses and nitrous oxide emissions to the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.