* 1847654
* CAREER: Moving beyond descriptive genomic studies - Applying theoretical ecology principles to predictably intensify anaerobic co-digestion processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Tyler Radniecki, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Microbial communities work together to process nutrients and organic matter in
engineered and natural systems. It is difficult to predict how complex microbial
communities will behave based on only what species are known to be present,
because most prevalent microbes often change over time and from location to
location, even as the community behavior stays the same. This work will develop
a quantitative standard to describe the state of the microbial community for
assessing bioreactor system performance. The research team will also create
environmental engineering focused cartoons as part of an outreach effort. The
cartoons will target underrepresented preteens and teens to increase scientific
literacy and expand future participation in environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research objective of this
research is to apply the theoretical ecology principles to quantify the
fundamental processes that drive microbial community architecture,
functionality, and fluidity. The system of interest in this work will be
anaerobic digesters during periods of stability, upset, and recovery. This
research will test the hypothesis that strategic changes to the operational
parameters of biotreatment systems can shape their microbial communities into
predictable compositions that achieve the desired functional improvement. Three
research objectives will be used to test this hypothesis. First, the dynamic
microbiome structures and individual microbial interactions that occur in full-
scale anaerobic bioreactors operated under non-co-digesting and co-digesting
conditions will be quantified utilizing sequence data collected from full-scale
facilities bi-monthly over a two-year period. Normal operational range
benchmarks (NORBs) will be created to identify the natural variability that
would be expected under stable operating conditions. Second, the NORBs for
operational parameters including organic loading rates, volatile solids
destruction, biogas and methane productivity, resistance, and resiliency for
these same facilities will be quantified. Advanced statistical tools will be
used to identify which operational parameters have the largest impact on
microbiome structures observed in the first research objective. Finally,
laboratory-scale anaerobic digesters will be used to determine the effectiveness
of using changes in operational parameters to shape the microbiome structure for
maximizing biogas productivity, resistance, and/or resiliency. The results of
this work address the greatest weaknesses of the tremendous amount of sequence
data generated in these systems; namely that it is largely descriptive in nature
with limited utility for designing systems and predicting future performance.
The educational and outreach phase of this work will identify the effectiveness
of using sequential cartoons to increase the comprehension and retention of
complex environmental issues in K-12 students with the goal of lowering barriers
to participation in the field of environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.