* 1847019
* CAREER: Comprehensive Evaluation of Critical Properties of Amine Salts and Their Impacts on Ambient Aerosol
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Chong Qiu, University of New Haven
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 694,646.00

This project is an integrated research, education, and outreach program to
improve understanding of nitrogen containing particles in the atmosphere. The
research team will measure several physical and chemical properties of salts of
ammonia, which includes nitrogen. The team will include undergraduate students
participating in a project-based learning class taught by the PI. Measurements
will be used to develop a model to predict behavior of these salts in the
atmosphere and the model will be evaluated with measurements from the field. The
knowledge gained, and the updated model, will improve the representation of
these particles in both weather and air quality models. Additionally, the
project will provide scientific research opportunities for many students at a
primarily undergraduate institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
comprised of six objectives: (1) measure several fundamental physical and
chemical properties of amine salts relevant to aerosol formation and
transformation, including density, surface tension, viscosity, thermostability,
phase transition, and hygroscopicity; (2) determine the properties of aerosol
partially modified with amine salts; (3) develop chemical-structure based
parameters and improve current atmospheric models; (4) conduct field
measurements on ambient amines; (5) incorporate the research into several
courses at University of New Haven (UNH); and (6) organize outreach activities
for grades 6-12 students&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.