* 1847705
* CAREER: Engineering redox metabolism using unnatural cofactors
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Han Li, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 12/31/2023
* USD 502,234.00

Chemicals can be synthesized from renewable resources using microbes. This
approach could help the chemical industry become more sustainable. A major
hurdle to the widespread implementation of this strategy is low production
efficiency on the part of the cells. The standard approach to overcome this has
been to modify the flow of carbon through cell metabolism. In this project, the
flow of electrons through the cell will be adjusted. This will be accomplished
by creating artificial electron shuttle molecules, known as cofactors. This is
an innovative strategy. It could greatly increase the efficiency of using
microbes to manufacture chemicals. Outreach activities will be integrated with
the research tasks. As a result, the project represents an attempt to (i) allow
biomanufacturing to better meet the Nation's needs for energy, food,
commodities, and medicine; (ii) contribute to undergraduate and graduate
education in STEM; and (iii) motivate female high school students in Orange
County to pursue a career in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catabolism and anabolism co-exist
without interference because each has a separate redox cofactor. A third,
independent redox cofactor may enable a specific pathway to be insulated from
core metabolism. Increased productivity might be achieved by establishing the
new redox cofactor and evolving enzymes in the product pathway to require that
cofactor exclusively. This project will establish nicotinamide mononucleotide
(NMN) as the third redox cofactor. This will be accomplished through a three-
step experimental plan. First, high-throughput selection platforms for
engineering of NMN-dependent electron circuits will be developed. Then, strains
of E. coli and S. cerevisiae capable of overproduction of NMN will be
constructed. Finally, NMN-dependent formate dehydrogenase will be engineered to
deliver NMN reducing power independently of the host's metabolic background.
Successful completion of these objectives will result in two industrially-
relevant strains capable of acting as a chassis for NMN-dependent pathways and
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.