* 1847373
* CAREER: Assessing the Role of Buildings and Organizations in Community Disaster Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Elaina Sutley, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 01/31/2024
* USD 548,907.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program project will transform
how structural design levels of buildings are prioritized in communities through
the consideration of social, economic, and environmental factors. In particular,
metrics will value the services and goods offered from organizations in times of
normal operation and crisis. Drawing on the fields of systems and structural
engineering, urban planning, and sociology, an interdisciplinary community-based
model will be developed and employed to assess and assign the highest priority
to buildings and organizations that support sustained health and welfare in
communities to drastically reduce disaster impacts, disruption, and recovery
time following future hazard events. Education and outreach tasks overcome
systematic barriers to interdisciplinary research through training the next
generation of disaster scholars and structural engineers to value cross-
disciplinary contributions and approaches, understand their social and ethical
responsibility in enhancing community resilience to disasters, and engage in
life-long learning. This scientific research contribution thus supports NSF's
mission to promote the progress of science and to advance our national welfare.
In this case, the benefits will be better designed buildings, which will save
lives, economic losses, and reduce panic, anger and confusion during
disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project asks: (1) how do buildings
and their hosted organizations act as a system to support the functioning of a
community, (2) what characteristics of buildings and their organizations can be
leveraged for prioritization in the design stage to better support continued
community functioning in the wake of a disaster, and (3) what constitutes
acceptable levels of functionality for buildings, organizations, and
communities? To answer these questions, existing work and databases are coupled
with new data collection to advance system analysis of buildings and
organizations accounting for changes across a disaster timeline and uncertainty.
New measures for understanding how buildings support community functionality are
grounded on the seven community capitals, namely, built, social, cultural,
political, financial, natural, and human. Fault tree analysis, multi-attribute
utility theory, and hazard simulation coupled with sensitivity analysis are used
to recommend a replacement for the risk category that sets the highest priority
of structural performance on buildings that host organizations and offer
services that critically support community functionality. Tiered mentoring, role
playing and focus group educational activities feedback to inform how to
disseminate research findings to diverse stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.