* 1847590
* CAREER: Computational and Theoretical Investigations of Variational Inference
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Chao Gao, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 02/29/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The new era of complex and big data poses unprecedented challenges in terms of
both our computational and theoretical understanding of Statistics. One of the
fundamental questions in modern data science is how to efficiently process
massive data sets with minimal information loss to aid scientific discovery and
decision making. This has led the scientific community to adopt approximate
statistical procedures that achieve the optimal trade-off between computational
efficiency and statistical efficiency. On the one hand, the approximation should
be tractable to gain computational benefits. On the other hand, the
approximation needs to be tight, so as to not compromise much in terms of the
statistical optimality of the original problem. This project aims to bridge the
computational and theoretical gaps in various statistical problems under complex
and nonstandard settings. The results of the proposed research will
significantly impact areas known for applying computationally intensive methods
on a routine basis. These include population genetics, astronomy, computer
vision, political science, social science, and animal
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent developments in high-dimensional statistics
and machine learning focus on exploring the intrinsic low-dimensional structure
of the problem. This poses new challenges in terms of both statistical
optimality and computational efficiency. Variational inference is a technique
that addresses both challenges by seeking a variational approximation to the
original problem that is not only tractable, but also tight. However, the
literature lacks a systematic investigation of variational inference from both
the computational and statistical perspective. The goals of the project include:
(1) theoretical investigations of variational Bayesian procedures; and (2)
variational optimization strategies in robust estimation. The project's success
will help bridge the computational and theoretical gaps in modern data science
and lead to significant theoretical and computational advances in variational
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.