* 1847610
* CAREER: Scientific Foundations for Augmented Human Performance in Robotic Surgery
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Timothy Kowalewski, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Some surgical procedures are challenging to perform because they demand speed
and precision of instrument control that tax the limits of even the most skilled
surgeons. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project is
based on the premise that intelligent surgical robotics can elevate skilled
performance of precision manual tasks by melding the high-level planning and
adaptability of the human surgeon with the superhuman speed and precision of a
hand-held robotic tool. The specific application to be studied and modeled is 3D
printing of biologically-compatible materials directly onto moving human anatomy
using hand-held, robotic, bio-jet technology. This is an example of a new
convergent discipline, which the PI calls "computational co-surgery." Here, the
handheld robot shares control of the bio-jet with the surgeon. Realizing the
full potential of the human / robot dyad will require seamless cooperation and a
dynamic tradeoff between speed and accuracy to deal with unpredictable target
motions. This in turn requires the human surgeon to monitor and evaluate the
quality and intent of the robot's motions as they unfold at high speed. The
project will quantify the ability of humans to perceive and characterize visual
feedback of tool motion at high speeds using a novel crowd-sourcing approach.
Seamless cooperation also requires that the surgeon exert high-bandwidth control
over the hand-held device. The proposal will explore the extent to which
voluntary modulation of limb reflex responses can facilitate low-latency
monitoring and control operations. The project also includes several annual
outreach events where participants use handheld robots to discover and learn
about computational co-surgery and human-robot shared control. As such, this
CAREER project promotes the progress of science, advances the national health,
and contributes to the development of the STEM workforce, with efforts to
attract students from underrepresented minority populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will advance a new interdisciplinary field of study
termed "computational co-surgery" through a project that will ultimately enable
3D printing of bio-materials directly onto moving human anatomy using hand-held,
robotic technology. The project combines elements of psychology (visual
perception), engineering (robotic design and control), and physiology
(sensorimotor control) to promote the ability of the human surgeon to leverage
the speed and precision of a hand-held robotic tool. In the case to be studied,
an intelligent robot and a human surgeon share control of a surgical instrument,
with touch and proprioception as the feedback channels and limb stiffness
modulation as the actuation method. The research objective is to measure how
humans perceive (Aim 1) and interact with (Aim 2) objects that move with high
speed (&lt;1kHz bandwidth) and precision (~50 um). Aim 1 will use Amazon
Mechanical Turk to test the working hypothesis that when viewing tool
manipulations, assessments of skill reflect a trade-off between movement speed
and movement quality (precision) subject to psychological factors including
internal models of limb and object dynamics, and stimulus coherence in
multisensory integration. Further, the project will explore the utility of touch
and proprioception (feedback) and limb stiffness modulation (actuation) to
realize low-latency, non-invasive bidirectional human-robot monitoring and
control. Aim 2 will use a customized hand-held robot with high- and low-inertia
modes and a Fitts pointing task to test the working hypotheses that: 1) limb
stiffness modulation is a fast and effective means of quickly ceding control
between robot and human intent during manipulations requiring high speed and
precision; and 2) humans naturally modulate effective stiffness at the hand-
robot interface via long-latency reflex action (i.e., without lengthy training).
Accomplishing these Aims will advance the fundamental science of handheld
collaborative robots that cope with unpredictable human motion or human intent.
The educational goal includes an outreach plan where participants are invited to
use a small hand-held robot to see if they can "perform better than the best
surgeon" in mock surgical tasks. Sites span classroom settings, public events,
and international acconferences attended by clinicians and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.