* 1847370
* CAREER: Synthesis and Properties of Group IV Colloidal Quantum Wells
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Matthew Panthani, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2024
* USD 709,592.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The performance of computer
processors has improved each year for the past five decades, leading to
improvements in education, healthcare, scientific research, and national
security. However, further improvements in computational performance cannot
continue indefinitely using conventional Si-based computer processors. This NSF
CAREER award project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in the Division of Materials Research, uses novel techniques developed
in Prof. Matthew Panthani's research group at Iowa State University and extends
them to prepare unique very thin (less than one thousandth of that of a human
hair) sheets of silicon or a combination of silicon and germanium. By precisely
controlling the sheet thickness, composition, and the molecules bound to the
surface, the sheets have different properties that could eventually make
computers perform much more effectively. The experimental methods are
complemented by theoretical computer simulations to better understand which
factors control the properties of these ultrathin sheets. This research
contributes towards developing a new type of material that could, for example,
improve the capabilities of computers and reduce the cost of computing. This
eventual advancement in computational performance would have a broad positive
impact on society by accelerating drug discovery and materials research,
improving national security, and reducing energy consumption worldwide.
Integrated with this research is an educational plan that broadens participation
in the next-generation STEM workforce through two activities: (1) collaborative
curriculum development with high school science teachers that conduct research
in the Panthani research group during summers, with the aim of strengthening the
interest of students from underrepresented groups in STEM research careers by
highlighting the relevance of science to their lives, to reach socioeconomically
disadvantaged students, Dr. Panthani for example partners with a teacher from a
prison school; and (2) summer workshop activities that are designed to increase
the likelihood that high school, undergraduate and community college students
from diverse backgrounds pursue careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials
Research, establishes synthetic strategies for Group IV semiconductor (Si, Ge,
and their alloys) colloidal quantum wells (c-QWs). Prof. Matthew Panthani's
research group at Iowa State University pursues research along two lines of
studies (1) synthesizing Si-Ge alloy c-QWs with controlled composition,
structure, and surface chemistry and (2) determining how structure and chemistry
influence the resulting optoelectronic properties using experimental
characterization and density functional theory. The starting point for
synthesizing the Group IV c-QWs are Zintl compounds that contain atomically-thin
Group IV element sheets that are separated by alkali metal atoms or salts. These
Zintl compounds are deintercalated to liberate freestanding nanosheets, which
are subsequently functionalized with organic or inorganic surface ligands to
provide electronic passivation and stabilize the c-QWs in colloidal suspensions.
Relevant optoelectronic properties of the c-QWs that are studied include band
gaps and conduction/valence band extrema. Additionally, the research provides a
platform for educational outreach centered around designing activities that help
form a science identity in students. Science identity is a factor that is
thought to be critical to one?s choice to pursue a career in science or
engineering. The educational plan involves collaborative curriculum development
with high school teachers who work in Prof. Matthew Panthani's lab and the
development of a workshop session that aims to improve the likelihood that
talented high school, undergraduate, and community college students, who
participate in summer research, pursue a career paths in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.