* 1847193
* ERA-CAPS: Collaborative Research: Thylakoid ion flux-Linking photosynthetic efficiency with osmotic stress response
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Kramer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,813.00

Plant productivity is dependent on many environmental factors, whether plants
grow wild or are carefully cultivated in a farmer's field. Efficient
photosynthesis is the key to plant productivity, but soil salinity disrupts
electrolytes, the so-called ion balance, in the leaf cells where photosynthesis
occurs. Soil salinity is a growing problem globally and will affect worldwide
food supplies if not effectively controlled. Deciphering how a plant responds to
salinity and regulates its cellular ion fluxes is essential to understanding and
potentially improving photosynthesis. This project identifies specific genes
that control ion fluxes and responses to salinity in plants using a specialized
imaging system and analysis tools to study their role in plant productivity. The
international team will use their findings to develop a computational model to
inform and improve breeding programs and to develop more highly productive
plants that can tolerate soil salinity. The model will be tested in tomato with
potential to have broad impact to assure global food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion flux across the thylakoid membrane represents
a promising target for improving plant photosynthesis, yet knowledge of key
components is far from complete. This project brings together an international
consortium with complementary expertise in chloroplast ion flux, spectroscopy,
phenotyping, ionomics, biochemistry, bioenergetics, and computational modelling.
By pursing multi-day phenotyping with dynamic growth lighting, the team has
isolated new candidate thylakoid ion flux mutants. The researchers will study
the compromised genes and their link to known thylakoid ion flux mediators by
pursuing the following aims: (i) complete the thylakoid ion transport protein
inventory; (ii) determine the role of thylakoid ion flux interactions in
photosynthesis and hyperosmotic stress resistance; (iii) identify the process by
which thylakoid ion flux impacts the hyperosmotic stress response; (iv) analyze
thylakoid ion flux impacts on key agronomical traits in crop plants; and (v)
generate a model for simulating increases to photosynthetic efficiency and salt
stress resistance as a function of thylakoid ion flux. The Flux4LIVES project
has several broader impacts. Photosynthesis is arguably the most important
reaction on earth and a foundation for life. With clear evidence that growth
conditions in the field have become more adverse recently, a detailed
understanding on how abiotic stress impacts this reaction pathway is needed.
Understanding the molecular mechanisms that protect photosynthesis and plant
productivity will be key to improving these pathways and thus securing necessary
levels of global food production. Since the data obtainedwill be open-access via
the existing PhotosynQ database, the global scientific community can apply the
knowledge to their own biological and ecological questions and thus further the
effort to meet food demands across varying climates and
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.