* 1847347
* CAREER: A multimodal imaging platform to investigate spatiotemporal changes in tumor bioenergetics that drive treatment resistance.
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Narasimhan Rajaram, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2024
* USD 609,578.00

Nearly 50% of all cancer patients each year are treated with radiation therapy,
either alone or in combination with chemotherapy. In the case of radiation
therapy, which is the focus of this project, hypoxia (very low levels of oxygen)
is an important cause of radiation resistance or treatment failure. Recent
evidence suggests that tumors experiencing brief episodes of hypoxia can also
harbor radiation-resistant cancer cells. Of specific interest are cancer cells
that are situated close to the oxygen diffusion limit in tumors, a region that
experiences fluctuations in oxygen availability due to poorly developed
vasculature. It is not known if metabolic adaptations (adaptations to decrease
energy expenditure) of these cancer cells to fluctuations in oxygen delivery can
help promote radiation resistance. The research goal of this project is to
develop a multimodal imaging platform to investigate the relationship between
microvascular oxygenation and cellular metabolism, and how this relationship
helps promote treatment resistance. Knowledge of these relationships in response
to radiation therapy can lead to the development of targeted therapeutics to
reverse resistance. These studies will provide opportunities for students to
gain valuable research experience in design and development of optical imaging
technologies and basic science investigations of cancer biology. The educational
and outreach goal of this proposal is to develop year-long learning kits based
on light and optics, which is part of the middle school curriculum. The purpose
of these kits is to equip rural middle school teachers with active teaching
modules to better communicate optics and light-based concepts to
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator's long-term career
goal is to develop optical imaging technologies that can visualize and answer
basic biological questions about the tumor micro-environment that would
optimally lead to the development of new biomarkers that can spur the
development of cost-effective tools to help advance public health. Towards this
goal, this project will build and validate a label-free multimodal imaging
platform (a two-photon microscope integrated with a hyperspectral darkfield
microscope (TP-HDMI)) to quantitatively visualize the relationship between
microvascular oxygenation and cellular metabolism and determine how the
relationship between these two hallmarks promotes radiation resistance.
Hyperspectral microscopy will be used to assess oxygenation levels based on
light absorption by hemoglobin and the differences in absorption profiles of
oxygenated (HbO2) and deoxygenated (dHb) hemoglobin. The oxygenation level
metric for spatial comparison will be [HbO2]/([HbO2]+[dHb]). Two-photon
microscopy will be used to assess cellular metabolism based on the system's
ability to image natural fluorescing NADH and FAD, molecules that are critical
for the energy producing processes. The cellular metabolism metric for spatial
comparison will be the optical redox ratio FAD/(FAD + NADH). The transformative
nature of the project lies in the ability to investigate dynamic changes in the
spatiotemporal relationship between tumor oxygenation and cellular metabolism in
vivo in response to radiation therapy, and how these changes might be distinct
in radiation-resistant and sensitive tumors. The central hypothesis of this work
is that metabolic reprogramming under these intermittently hypoxic conditions
can cause cells to develop a radiation-resistant phenotype. The Research Plan is
organized under two objectives. The FIRST OBJECTIVE is to build the multimodal
system and to validate its ability to investigate spatiotemporal relationships
between vascular oxygenation and cellular metabolism. Once assembled, the
integrated imaging platform will be validated in normal tissue within a window
chamber model established in athymic nude mice. Image analysis algorithms will
be used to separate vascular and non-vascular tissue. Dynamic metabolic
responses to changes in oxygen supply will be imaged while the mice are
subjected to varying levels of hypoxia. The optical redox ratio as a function of
distance from the nearest blood vessel will be determined. The SECOND OBJECTIVE
is to investigate the spatiotemporal changes in tumor bioenergetics in
radiation-resistant and sensitive tumors in response to radiation therapy. The
integrated imaging platform will be used to investigate dynamic spatiotemporal
changes in cellular metabolism in response to different doses of radiation
therapy in human head and neck tumors of known radiation resistance and
sensitivity implanted in the mouse window chambers. All of the imaging-related
endpoints will be further validated using immunohistochemical assays. The
studies will establish a model for metabolic changes within cancer cells as a
function of microvascular oxygenation, distance from the nearest microvessel,
and time after radiation therapy. Results obtained are expected to significantly
expand our understanding of how the spatial location of cells with respect to
the oxygen diffusion limit influences their resistance to
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.