* 1847486
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Influence of environment and population structure on human skeletal variation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Libby Cowgill, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 23,814.00

Humans vary in body size and proportions, and the underlying drivers of this
variation are not fully understood. Differences in body form can be adaptive for
certain environments, such as assisting in thermoregulation of the body through
the dissipation or retention of heat, but can also be related to factors such as
genetic drift and population history. This doctoral dissertation research will
examine human skeletal variation to understand the impact of various
environmental factors on human body form across a wide geographical range. The
project will help to elucidate how environmental factors may have complex,
differential effects in males versus females and across different parts of the
skeleton. Skeletal data from the project will be compiled into a freely
accessible online database. The addition of data for groups and regions of the
world that are currently underrepresented in biological and forensic studies
will increase understanding of human variation and global diversity. The project
will also foster international research collaborations and student training at
the undergraduate and graduate levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Asia has diverse
climates, high population densities, and a long history of human habitation.
Using a multidisciplinary methodological approach, this study of Asian
populations will meaningfully quantify proportional differences resulting from
environmental variables in a way not possible with previous ecogeographic
methods. Standard skeletal measurements and landmarks will be collected to allow
for comparisons across geographic regions as well as further examination of
variation in the size and shape of the face, cranial vault, and birth canal
between the sexes and populations. The analyses will account for the potential
influence of nonadaptive forces such as drift and migration on body form by
pairing skeletal measurements with appropriately matched genetic data and local
weather station information for statistical analysis. Linear mixed effects
models testing for evidence of adaptation due to environmental factors will
contain both head and body data of male and female individuals from each
population. Differences in the size and shape of the pelvis between the sexes
along with population differences in pelvic morphology will be evaluated using
Procrustes fit and principal components analyses as well as size and shape
dimorphism indices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.