* 1847103
* CAREER: Programming Vascularization by Design in Porous Composites
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Teja Guda, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2024
* USD 530,688.00

Understanding how blood vessels grow is crucial to advancing many fields,
including tissue engineering and cancer research. Many factors influence the
growth of new blood vessels, including how much oxygen is available, the
chemical signals present and the matrix (environment) through which these
vessels are growing. Of these factors, the exact influence of the matrix is the
least understood. Studying the influence of factors such as the stiffness and
softness of the material, the size and organization of the pores and how these
inter-related variables interact to guide vessel growth will enable a better-
informed design of suitable porous materials and advance the field of tissue
engineering. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project
seeks to evaluate the growth of vessels in three dimensions within a variety of
materials to map out the design space. A validated computer model will be
developed to predict how vessels might grow in as yet untested porous materials.
These outcomes will both accelerate the design of new tissue engineering
solutions and potentially reduce the cost of their development by enabling rapid
screening. Understanding how branching structures grow in nature and how things
move through highly porous structures is critical to a variety of fields,
including plant root growth in farming, tumors in cancer, natural gas extraction
and chemical processing on catalysts. The project's complementary education plan
is designed to engage underserved students in science and technical education
and instill scientific curiosity in middle school students through hands-on
experiments. Research community outreach will be achieved through the
development of visualization workshops that will enable researchers to track
particle movement through highly porous structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this project is to generate a predictive rubric that enables
the improved design of porous materials for tissue regeneration optimized for
rapid vascularization. Models that determine vessel network patterns based on
fluid mass transport are an invaluable first approximation, however their
significant deviation from the randomness of natural vessel tree networks
indicates that the impact of material/matrix mechanics needs to be further
incorporated. This project's Research Plan is designed to test the hypothesis
that local matrix compliance affects vascular sprouting, while regional
architecture affects growth, and global material compliance affects maintenance
and inosculation (joining) of vascular networks. The information gained can be
used to design biomaterials that can coax an angiogenic response instead of
overwhelming the system with chemical stimuli. The research methodology will
involve developing composite materials, using imaging modalities to develop 3D
architectural maps and using structural metrics and local mechanical properties
as inputs to model vascularization outcomes. The Research Plan is organized
under three objectives. The FIRST OBJECTIVE is to measure the specific impact of
hydrogel compliance, density, crosslinking and temporal degradation on the
vascularization of homogenous hydrogel systems. Studies are designed to test the
hypotheses that there is an optimal hydrogel compliance for any hydrogel system
that best supports vascularization, that variation of molecular weight, fiber
length, gel density and crosslinking can all independently modulate the
compliance of the system and that vascular network formation is only possible
when the time scale of vascularization is comparable to the time scale of
degradation, i.e., when instantaneous regional matrix compliance meets the
requirements needed to support vascularization. The SECOND OBJECTIVE is to
quantify the effect of scaffold pore size, stiffness and stromal cell seeding on
vascularization responses within biphasic scaffold-hydrogel systems. Studies are
designed to test the hypotheses that larger pore interconnections are better for
enhanced vascularization, and that soft porous scaffolds will allow
vascularization with longer segment lengths than rigid scaffolds and that the
presence of stromal cells might impact vascularization interdependently with
scaffold pore size since greater pore surface areas would result in greater
stromal cell number and consequently a stronger vascularization signal. The
THIRD OBJECTIVE is to develop and validate a computational mechanics-based model
to simulate vascular network formation in biphasic materials comprising a porous
material with variable architecture and infiltrated with a hydrogel material
permitting vascularization within the pores using both deterministic and
probabilistic approaches. Studies are designed to test the hypotheses that
development of vascularization over time in hydrogels is affected primarily by
material density and global boundary conditions, while the vascularization of
porous scaffolds containing hydrogels is significantly affected not only by the
scaffold pore size (regional boundary), but also by the elastic modulus of the
scaffold material. The novelty of the project's approach lies in adding a
mechanical perspective to existing knowledge on chemical and biological
processes to understand mechanisms of vascularization and aid in the rapid
exploration of any porous biomaterial for architectures suitable for tissue
grafts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.