* 1847177
* CAREER: Estimation and Control of Electrochemical-Thermal Battery Models: Theory and Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Scott Moura, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/29/2024
* USD 531,177.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will benefit
national interests by advancing knowledge on battery management systems based on
electrochemical-thermal models. Batteries are the linchpin technology for
multiple economic sectors, including consumer electronics, transportation, and
electric power systems. However, today's battery management systems use
simplistic models, which have raised serious performance and safety issues. For
example, significant electrification of the U.S. vehicle fleet will require fast
charging and long-range batteries. Simultaneously, we must ensure safety, as
evidenced by recent cases where batteries have caught fire. Future battery
management systems will address these deficiencies and unlock increased
performance and safety by utilizing high-fidelity multi-physics models. However,
the electrochemical-thermal model dynamics present unsolved challenges for
estimation and control. The research goal of this project is to resolve these
challenges and generate results that will enable current and future batteries
with more energy, more power, faster charge times, and longer life. The
educational goal of this project is to enhance retention and performance among
students from underrepresented, low-income, and first-generation backgrounds.
This will be achieved through a "Maker Design Studio," which will train over 600
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) students to become the
next generation of energy and control engineering
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Batteries are characterized by multi-physics
mathematical models, often involving nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
(PDEs), limited sensing and actuation, and significant parameter uncertainty.
This project pursues three research goals, motivated by batteries yet in pursuit
of fundamental systems and control challenges: (1) Formulate and analyze a
parameter estimation framework, based on a data selection approach that resolves
the identifiability problem. Online battery parameter (i.e. state-of-health)
estimation has remained elusive, due to fundamental identifiability challenges.
(2) Experimentally quantify the benefits of an electrochemical model-based
battery management system in terms of fast charge times and capacity loss.
Today, it is unclear if rigorously designed electrochemical model-based
management systems yield significant improvements, due to the lack of
experimental evidence. This project leverages a unique battery-in-the-loop
testbed to reveal the true impact of electrochemical-based management methods.
(3) Create a PDE-based analysis, estimation, and control framework for coupled
parabolic-hyperbolic PDEs, with application to battery thermal management.
Specifically, the project pursues a weak-variations approach to design linear
quadratic estimators and controllers. Overall, this project focuses on
fundamental advancements to estimation and control that will accelerate a
paradigm shift toward multi-physics control-theoretic battery management systems
that will enable a new generation of energy storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.