* 1847853
* EAGER: Collaborative Research:Automated Instruction Assistant for Argumentative Essays
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Smaranda Muresan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 08/31/2021
* USD 159,000.00

Development of students' writing skills promotes critical thinking across
disciplines, and professional success. Yet the past decade of the Nation's
Report Card on students' writing points to a long-standing crisis in writing
instruction that persists through post-secondary school. Students need more
instruction on how to write, and instructors need more support to provide
students with comprehensive, targeted feedback. This project will develop an
Automated Instruction Assistant (AIA) to provide post-secondary instructors with
feedback on essays while they grade them, through the application of natural
language processing and machine learning techniques to the analysis of essay
content and argumentation. The project will apply an iterative design process to
a sequence of two argumentative essay assignments in the context of a freshman
course on academic skills in a computer science department, where the enrollment
is in the hundreds. It will integrate state-of-the art methods in content
analysis and argument mining of text to model text meaning more deeply than in
previous work. Automated support for application of educational rubrics to
argumentative essays will help instructors to provide more comprehensive,
standardized feedback for students, and foster transparent and supportive
writing instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop an AIA that
assigns both a total score to an essay, and individual score dimensions, such as
how well an argumentative essay articulates a major claim. The scores will be
supported by pointers into the text that provide score justification. As a
result, the AIA output can be linked directly to a rubric used by the
instructor, which facilitates instructor reflection, training for graders, and
feedback for students. The technology will integrate and extend the researchers'
previous work on content analysis and argument mining. The content analysis will
take as input a small number of reference essays to generate a model of the
ideas (propositions) in the domain, weighted by importance within and across
essays. The argument mining will identify the propositions that play a role in
an argument, and their argument relations. It will produce an argument graph in
which the nodes are propositions and edges are argument relations. Integration
with the content analysis will ground the propositions in the domain ideas, and
make it possible to exploit the role of importance of ideas in the domain, and
their prominence within an essay. Methods will include novel applications of
dynamic programming and integer linear programming combined with deep learning
of rich, low dimensional semantic vectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.