* 1847287
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Identifying Positively-Selected Introgressed Genetic Variants with Regulatory Effects in Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2021
* Terence Capellini, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2021
* USD 33,433.00

Fifty thousand years ago, modern humans dispersing out of Africa to Europe and
Asia met now-extinct human relatives, such as Neanderthals, and interbred with
them. As a result, genetic variation from Neanderthals exists in the human gene
pool, but the effects of this variation on human biology are not well
understood. In this doctoral dissertation project, the researcher will conduct a
large-scale laboratory-based genetic experiment to test whether Neanderthal
variants can affect the degree to which a gene is active in human immune cells.
By identifying these variants and making publicly available the raw data from
this experiment, the researchers will advance knowledge about the effects of
evolutionary history and genetic variation on the immune system of living
humans. Given that science news often features stories about Neanderthals, the
researchers will utilize popular interest in this area to demonstrate the
biological and medical relevance of studying human evolutionary history. They
will also work with two museums to develop an exhibit that will additionally
highlight the practical importance of this field of research. Furthermore, this
project will help promote women in science given that the research will largely
be undertaken by a female graduate student who is committed to training other
women in science and has been active in the organization for Graduate Women in
Science Engineering at her university.

Although the last two decades have seen great strides in genetic research,
because the specific function of most of the human genome is still unknown,
researchers face difficulty when trying to connect most specific genetic
mutations to their effect on biology. To aid in this discovery, datasets have
been produced that allow correlations between the presence of genetic variation
and biological phenotypes. However, because genetic variants near each other are
often inherited together, it can be difficult to determine which genetic variant
is responsible for the biological effect, limiting the ability to truly
understand the mechanism. This is especially true in the case of Neanderthal
genetic sequences present in living humans, which mostly lay in poorly
understood parts of the genome that are thought generally to regulate the
expression of genes. Nonetheless, correlational evidence suggests that this
Neanderthal genetic variation may be affecting human immune system function. The
researchers will conduct an experiment in which they simultaneously test
thousands of Neanderthal genetic variants and their human counterparts for their
ability to regulate the expression of genes in the immune system, in order to
isolate the specific Neanderthal genetic variants that affect the biology of the
human immune system. This will allow researchers to focus future work on
specific functional testing of these important genetic variants. Furthermore, by
directly comparing correlational findings to the results in a laboratory
experiment, this research will deepen the understanding of these commonly used
genetic datasets.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.