* 1847056
* CAREER: Game-Theoretic Analysis and Design for Cross-Layer Cyber-Physical System Security and Resilience
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Quanyan Zhu, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Nash
* 02/29/2024
* USD 560,000.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPS) are composed of multi-layer tightly integrated and
highly interdependent components. An adversary can exploit the connections
between the layers and launch an advanced persistent threat (APT) attack that is
accomplished through a set of multi-stage stealthy and continuous hacking
processes. Lessons learned from APT attacks have highlighted the fact that the
design for perfect security is not always possible or prohibitively expensive,
and hence resilience is an equally important mechanism that can complement the
imperfect security. The standard analysis tools are insufficient to cope with
the complexity of CPS and address the design of security and resilience
mechanisms. To this end, the project aims to establish an integrated game-
theoretic framework that adopts both reductionist and integrative approaches to
engineer high-confidence CPS. The proposed research uses electric power systems
and the cloud-enabled autonomous systems as two case studies to illustrate the
designs of cyber defense strategies, resilience control mechanisms, and CPS
security-aware contracts as the holistic cyber, physical, and human solution to
for next-generation high-confidence infrastructure systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodologies developed in the project establish an
inter-disciplinary system science to conceptualize and design high-confidence
CPS, and expedite the realization of CPS in a wide range of applications
including transportation, industrial automation, and the power grid. The project
first leverages system engineering principles to create game motifs or gamelets
as building blocks and use them to compose a game of games or meta-game to model
heterogeneous interactions of system components within the layers, across the
layers, and with an adversary. As the perfect security at the cyberspace is not
always possible, the project develops a resilient control mechanism to provide
an alternative paradigm of protection by maintaining critical functions of the
CPS and mitigating the impact of cyber insecurity on the physical layer. At the
socio-economic level, the proposed CPS contracts aim to create an incentive-
compatible secure provision of CPS services and mitigate security risks by
incentivizing proper security management of the service providers and reducing
the risks of the users. The research is fully integrated into the educational
plan via the incorporation of new courses as well as the training of
undergraduate and graduate students via mentoring, participation in test-bed
development, special projects, and internships at research labs. The educational
tool will foster this integration via new hands-on activities and demonstrations
to a broader community. With the aim to increase the participation of high
school students, particularly women and minority students in science and
engineering, the outreach activities include annual high school student summer
camp, girls-in-cybersecurity mentorship program, and the development of
educational short films and documentaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.