* 1847869
* CAREER: Multi-stimuli Responsive DNA-Nanoshells - Compartmentalizing Molecules at the Nanoscale for Enhanced Reaction Selectivity and Sensitivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Jessica Rouge, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 06/30/2024
* USD 632,374.00

Viruses have evolved self-destruct mechanisms that allow them to release their
contents when they are inside the right host. The viruses are decorated with
molecules that trigger their degradation when they encounter specific enzymes
found within certain biological systems. Using inspiration from how virus
particles respond to their environment in highly specific ways, the research
group of Professor Jessica Rouge at the University of Connecticut is developing
new chemical strategies to synthesize shells of very small size that can both
controllably encapsulate small molecules and release them in response to
specific stimuli in complex mixtures. Such strategies are important for
developing more sensitive biological sensors and more accurate drug delivery
systems. This project provides graduate and undergraduate students
multidisciplinary research training in nanoscience, chemical synthesis, and
biochemistry. In addition, an initiative entitled "Catalyzing Curie-osity" is
launched to engage high school teachers and students throughout the state of
Connecticut. Through this joint initiative with the UConn Early College
Experience program, affordable lab protocols are being designed focusing on the
fundamental tools and techniques of bio-nanoscience. These lab modules will be
individually tailored to the needs and resources of specific high schools,
giving students hands -n experience with this exciting class of nanomaterials
and preparing them for future careers related to nanotechnology and chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry program, the Rouge Group is developing novel chemical crosslinking
strategies that can be incorporated into DNA nanomaterials for controlling their
assembly and disassembly in complex biological environments. Using a novel DNA-
surfactant assembly strategy that generates DNA nanoshells compatible with cells
and enzymes, the major goal of this work is to synthesize a combination of
peptide and synthetic crosslinkages that can maintain the nanomaterials
stability in biological systems while exhibiting selectivity for certain
chemical and biochemical stimuli. These stimuli, including temperature and pH
changes, or exposure to specific enzyme classes, will be used to gate the
release of small molecules for initiating chemical and/or biochemical reactions.
Through this work the following goals are addressed: 1) the design of a library
of thermoresponsive crosslinkers that enables remotely controlled substrate
release, 2) the design of ligand-cargo communication schemes for sensing the
local environment of the DNA-nanoshells, and 3) control over solution reaction
selectivity via stepwise substrate release from multi-layered peptide
crosslinked DNA-nanoshells. Compartmentalization of different substrates within
the DNA-nanoshell layers will allow the team to study release rates and
subsequent reaction rates of diverse molecules in aqueous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.