* 1847627
* CAREER: Condensation-Driven Phase-Transitioning Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Sushant Anand, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2024
* USD 529,561.00

Condensation plays a pivotal role in countless natural and industrial
activities, such as in cloud formation, electronic cooling, power generation,
emulsion formation, water harvesting, and materials development. Promotion
dropwise condensation on surfaces (instead of a liquid film) can result in
significant savings in energy and cost in many applications like those mentioned
above. In recent years, hydrophobic, superhydrophobic and liquid infused
surfaces have been tested to promote dropwise condensation. However, the
performance of such surfaces can get compromised easily by a variety of
debilitating mechanisms such as random droplet nucleation within textures
(leading to eventual film formation), surface flooding at high humidity, organic
contamination, and surface degradation. The goal of this CAREER project is to
understand condensation on a class of existing materials that can undergo phase-
transition due to condensation itself. Such materials possess several beneficial
attributes of solid and liquid surfaces that could be the key to overcome many
of the challenges faced by the existing superhydrophobic or liquid infused
surfaces. Investigation of condensation on such materials could also clarify the
long-standing questions on the fundamentals surrounding phase-change, such as
the role of substrate thermal conductivity, condensation rate and relative
humidity on the growth of droplets and heat-transfer rates. Results from this
research will be integrated with educational activities that seek to increase
women/underrepresented-minority student participation in engineering via
undergraduate (UG) student recruitment for water harvesting via condensation,
and engagement with high-school (HS) students through university outreach
program (UIC-CHANCE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objectives of this
CAREER project is to discover new fundamental knowledge to inform development of
coatings for condensation applications based on surfaces that undergo phase-
transitions during condensation. This goal will be accomplished by performing
comprehensive studies to understand water droplet interactions with phase-
transitioning surfaces in absence/presence of condensation to determine the
relation between nanoscale transport phenomena (e.g. temperature distribution
below/around droplets) and the resulting macroscopic effects (reduced droplet
adhesion, delayed droplet freezing on highly subcooled substrate (&lt;&lt;0 oC))
as a function of phase-transition material properties (such as their solid-state
surface structure, water miscibility, thermal properties), thermodynamic
conditions (the degree of subcooling and relative humidity) and interfacial
properties using conventional (optical/IR microscopy) &amp; advanced diagnostic
tools (Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy, X-Ray Phase Contrast
Microscopy). As part of such investigations, a new methodology will be developed
to measure temperature distribution in the condensing surface beneath droplets
with nanoscale spatial resolution. The correlations established from
experimental measurements and theoretical models will be supplemented with
numerical simulations to elucidate the fundamentals of condensation on the
special phase-transitioning surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.