* 1847674
* CAREER: Designer Redox Active Molecules for Sustainable Electrochemical Energy Storage
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Tianbiao Liu, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2024
* USD 594,446.00

In this NSF CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Tianbiao Liu of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Utah State University is developing
low-cost, tunable, and well-defined redox active molecules for aqueous organic
redox flow batteries (AORFBs). These flow batteries are useful for low-cost and
more environmentally-friendly energy storage. The project focuses on the in-
depth understanding of the structure and battery performance relationships of
battery components. The new knowledge provides guidance in developing low-cost
redox active molecules for the use of redox flow batteries as a environmentally-
friendly and scalable energy storage platform, thus, alleviating the global
reliance on fossil fuels and enhancing the sustainable development of our
society. The project lies at the interface of organic, inorganic, materials, and
electrochemistry, and is therefore well suited for the education of scientists
at all levels. Professor Liu develops educational programs serving Utah Stat
University and wider communities throughout the State of Utah. Students at all
education levels participate in building the necessary talent pool of the next
generation of scientists and engineers to work in the critically important and
emerging field of renewable energy storage. Specifically, Professor Liu works
with the USU Eastern Blanding Native American Summer Mentorship Program (NASMP)
and the USU Stars Program. These programs focus on attracting and training
native American students who are underrepresented in STEM disciplines and on
stimulating interest and curiosity in science of academically-talented local
high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aqueous organic redox flow batteries
(AORFBs) employing redox active organic molecules have been demonstrated to be
highly attractive for energy storage. Previous studies of AORFBs have primarily
emphasized full flow battery performance using redox active molecules. However,
few studies have paid attention to the in-depth understanding of the correlation
between physicochemical properties of individual redox active molecules and
their battery performance. This project focuses on the molecular engineering and
property studies of redox active viologens (anolyte), ferrocenes (catholyte) and
2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy molecules (catholyte), and their battery
performance in AORFBs. These three classes of redox active molecules are
investigated to answer the following questions: 1) How do the molecular
structures of redox active molecules determine their physicochemical properties
including solubility, redox potential, number of electrons involving redox
processes, diffusion coefficient, electron transfer rate constants, and membrane
permeability? 2) How do the functional groups of redox active molecules
influence their chemical and electrochemical stabilities in both charged and
discharged states? and 3) Can superior redox active molecules be developed
through in-depth mechanistic understandings to enable high energy and high power
densities, long cycling redox flow batteries?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.