* 1847466
* CAREER: Catalytic Hollow-Fiber Membranes as an Efficient and Scalable Process in Water Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kyle Doudrick, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The use of industrial chemicals has increased dramatically over the past
century. This has led to widespread contamination of water supplies. Several
contaminants cannot be removed using common water-treatment technologies,
potentially impacting human health. To address this problem, the investigator
will develop a highly innovative water treatment system that uses
nanotechnology-based catalysts. These catalysts increase the rate of a chemical
reaction to efficiently clean water in a cost-effective way. Results from this
research may lead to a transformative technology for low cost water treatment.
The researchers will create virtual reality tours of water treatment facilities
in college courses that can be accessed by the public to promote a better
understanding of how environmental engineers protect human
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop nano-
enabled catalysts to solve fundamental and applied water quality problems.
Heterogeneous hydrogenation catalysts (HHCs) are a promising treatment option
for numerous environmentally-persistent contaminants such as halogenated and
oxygenated organic compounds. Recent advancements in nanotechnology make HHCs
more feasible as a water treatment technology, with the achievement of higher
reaction rates and better reaction selectivity for innocuous by-products.
However, challenges remain due to catalyst cost and mass transport limitations.
This research will investigate the kinetic mechanisms, stability, and
scalability of a new HHC reactor - the catalytic hydrogel membrane (CHM)
reactor. The CHM consists of a gas-permeable hollow-fiber membrane coated with
hydrogel-containing catalyst nanoparticles. Using a suite of advanced
electrochemical and spectroscopy tools, the specific tasks of this research are
to: i) quantify bulk reaction and film diffusion rates in model and real water
systems; ii) identify the mechanisms of catalyst deactivation; iii) quantify the
mechanical properties of the hydrogel support; iv) model the performance of a
scaled-up, continuous-flow CHM reactor; and v) investigate the applicability of
CHM for emerging drinking water contaminants. Complimentary to these research
objectives are the investigator?s educational goals to enhance graduate training
through research, improve undergraduate education using virtual reality (VR)
modules, increase underrepresented group participation in engineering, and use
outreach to excite and educate the public about water quality. To enhance
undergraduate education and provide outreach opportunities for all ages, the
investigator will develop and use VR tours of water treatment facilities. This
CAREER program will have far-reaching science, education, and societal impacts,
and it directly address the National Academy of Engineering Grand Challenge of
providing access to clean water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.