* 1847653
* CAREER: A Deformation Mechanism-Based Approach to Understanding the Conversion of Plastic Work to Heat and Stored Energy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Owen Kingstedt, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program will address fundamental
unresolved issues in the understanding of how mechanical work is converted to
heat during rapid deformation events. Current approximations assume ninety
percent of mechanical work is converted to heat during deformation due to an
incomplete understanding of how nano- and micro-scale deformation mechanisms
influence the work to heat conversion process. Computational predictions of
material strength and failure during dynamic events, such as rapid metal
forming, high-speed machining, and vehicle crash, use the ninety percent
approximation, which can be wholly inaccurate. These inaccuracies have
potentially hindered the implementation of promising light-weight magnesium
alloys as safety critical structural components in automotive, aerospace and
railway applications. In this research, a comprehensive understanding of how
individual deformation processes contribute to the thermal state of magnesium
alloys may allow them to supersede comparatively heavy steel and aluminum
components, and thus provide a straightforward path to improved fuel efficiency,
reduced emissions, and fuel-cost savings. As part of the project, the PI will
also provide hands-on learning opportunities for underrepresented communities in
STEM and support the training of undergraduate and graduate students through
research in the laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mechanism-based investigations
have the potential to account for experimentally observed strain, strain-rate,
and loading mode dependencies of the conversion of plastic work to heat. This
project will focus on investigating strain and loading mode dependencies using a
textured hot-rolled magnesium alloy AZ31B. Four loading orientations, three
grain sizes, and two temperature states are judiciously selected to
systematically activate (or suppress) preselected deformation mechanisms,
specifically, basal slip, prismatic slip, pyramidal a slip, pyramidal c-a slip,
and extension twinning. Specimens will be deformed adiabatically using a split-
Hopkinson pressure bar coupled with ultra-high-speed imaging and multi-point IR
thermography. Experiments will provide measures of macroscale mechanical
behavior, full-field deformation maps, and local temperature evolution. Post-
mortem, electron backscatter diffraction and transmission electron microscopy
will be leveraged to identify predominant defect arrangements and defect
interactions. Collaboratively, these in-situ measurements and post-mortem
observations will enable the PI?s laboratory to achieve the project goal to
identify individual mechanism contributions to a deforming material?s thermal
state. This new knowledge can be incorporated into numerical models to more
comprehensively predict material behavior and temperature under adiabatic
deformation conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.