* 1847350
* CAREER: An Integrated Research and Education Program in Gravitational-Wave Physics and Astronomy
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Madeline Wade, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 01/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This award supports projects in the field of gravitational-wave physics and
astronomy through research endeavors with the Laser Interferometer
Gravitational-wave Observatory (LIGO) and an education program that builds a
bridge into the field of gravitational-wave physics and astronomy for high
school and early-career undergraduate students. Some of the most exciting
advancements in our understanding of the universe can come from joint
observations of gravitational-wave and electromagnetic signals, as was evident
from the detection of merging neutron stars in August of 2017 by the LIGO and
Virgo Scientific Collaborations as well as electromagnetic telescopes around the
world. This project will enable prompt follow-up of detected gravitational-wave
signals with electromagnetic telescopes by increasing the speed and accuracy
with which gravitational-wave data from the LIGO detectors can be calibrated and
disseminated to astrophysical analyses. In addition to enabling the advancements
in science that will be obtained from prompt multi-messenger astronomy, this
project will also shepherd the next generation of scientists into this exciting
field. The project funds the development and expansion of a Radio and Optical
Astronomy Research (ROAR) group that serves as a no-barrier-to-entry research
opportunity for high school and early-career undergraduate students at Kenyon
College and in the surrounding community. This group has already launched
several undergraduates into LIGO-related research projects, and this project
will allow that pipeline to expand and improve access to a wide range of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first step in gravitational-wave data
analysis is the accurate and prompt reconstruction, or calibration, of the
detector strain h(t). Currently the calibrated strain data is available to
quick-response gravitational-wave searches in approximately 10 seconds with
minimal information about the quality of the detector data. This project will
propel LIGO data production into the future with very low-latency calibrated
strain data, subtraction of noise in the calibrated strain data, and robust
information about the quality of the strain data. This transformed data product
would then be at the fingertips of quick-response gravitational-wave searches,
thereby improving the ability of these searches to both find and quantify
gravitational waves in the data. The project incorporates undergraduates and
high school students into this cutting-edge field. Undergraduate students will
be involved in implementing low-latency methods for removing noise from the
strain data and using machine learning algorithms to provide predictions about
the probability of loud, transient noise events being present in the data. High
school students and early undergraduate students will be initiated into the
fields of astronomy and gravitational-wave physics through the Radio and Optical
Astronomy Research (ROAR) group at Kenyon College. ROAR students will perform
astronomy observations and pulsar candidate identification that will contribute
to the field of pulsar timing. This program thereby establishes a research
pipeline through which students can engage early in research opportunities and
transition into advanced research areas. The ROAR program brings scientific
research and education opportunities to high school students in a rural area who
would otherwise have little exposure to modern scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.