* 1847464
* CAREER: Modulated Infrared Laser-Induced Fluorescence for Imaging Temperature and Combustion Species in Next-Generation Combustion Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Christopher Goldenstein, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 12/31/2023
* USD 524,989.00

Many next-generation combustion engines (e.g., diesel and gasoline engines) will
operate at lower temperatures in order to improve efficiency and reduce
pollutant emissions. Unfortunately, the combustion physics governing these
engines is not well understood due to a variety of combustion phenomena which
strengthen at lower temperatures. Further, our understanding of these processes
is significantly limited by our inability to monitor the gas temperature and key
molecular species formed throughout the combustion process. The primary goal of
this work is to improve our understanding of combustion initiated at lower
temperatures through the development and application of new laser diagnostics.
Completing this project will provide broadly applicable laser-based imaging
diagnostics capable of quantifying gas temperature and key molecular species.
This work will produce fundamental datasets describing flame physics and
ignition at conditions representative of those found in future engines. This
project will support the research and education of numerous doctoral students
and the greater scientific community working in the fields of combustion, laser
spectroscopy, and optics. This will be achieved through the experimental
research program and the development of a new course and interactive web-based
tools focused on combustion diagnostics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combustion in many
high-efficiency, low-emissions engines is achieved through a complex combination
of autoignition and both cool and hot turbulent flames. These phenomena and the
interaction between them are not well understood, in part, due to the lack of
diagnostics which can resolve the temperature and species fields across both the
low- and high-temperature combustion regimes. Modulated infrared planar laser-
induced fluorescence (MIR-PLIF) techniques providing high-speed imaging of
temperature and both intermediate and stable combustion products will be
developed and applied to bridge this gap. Spectroscopic and kinetic models,
capable of quantitatively predicting infrared fluorescence yields and
vibrational non-equilibrium in high-temperature gases, will be developed to
enable quantitative imaging of molecular species. MIR-PLIF will be used to
determine how thermodynamic conditions alter the time-varying structure of both
cool and hot turbulent flames, and how cool flames influence high-temperature
ignition. Recently developed burner technologies will be utilized and expanded
to enable these studies to be conducted across a wide range of conditions that
are relevant to next-generation engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.