* 1847537
* CAREER: Transformative Mobility Analysis: Mixed Methods Framework
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Amanda Stathopoulos, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Advances in transportation systems, fueled by on-demand mobility-platforms,
crowd-sourcing, ride-hailing and increasing automation, promise to enhance the
livability and competitiveness of cities and rural areas globally. A fundamental
question is whether these innovations will contribute to solving, or
inadvertently exacerbate, critical challenges such as congestion, emissions and
inequitable access to mobility. This Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) research addresses a gap in current approaches by integrating
quantitative and qualitative multi-disciplinary insights and developing methods
to study how society adapts to evolving mobility technologies. Integrating
insights from the social sciences in existing passenger and logistics system
models will help understand how adoption behaviors are affected by diverse
community beliefs and culture in rapidly changing mobility contexts. This
research will have far-reaching effects, delivering new tools to tailor
transformative mobility solutions to citizens' needs, decongest urban networks
and expand mobility to underserved communities. The project includes educational
efforts where students evaluate engineering solutions that align with human
behavior and livability goals. The project will also develop online educational
material and training tools for Chicago high school teachers, to promote careers
in engineering in diverse communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to establish a new foundation and develop methods to better
understand and predict impacts of emerging freight and passenger mobility
adoption. Specifically, this research establishes an analytical community
mobility adoption framework that integrates current quantitative theory, data
and methods (i.e. formal surveys, discrete choice analysis and supervised
learning) with qualitative social science perspectives (theory of social
thresholds, ethnographic data on neighborhood-scale mobility behavior). Robust
policy guidance tools derived through combining qualitative, participatory,
multi-stakeholder research methods and formal policy scenario simulation are
expected to inform communities' transition resulting from the potentially
disruptive socio-technical changes in transportation mobility choices. The
impact will be strengthened by integration with education and outreach
approaches that inspire, challenge and educate future civil engineers to address
mobility challenges with technically informed and culturally sensitive
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.