* 1847979
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Exploration of Positively Selected Regions of the Human Genome Shaping Pelvis and Scapula Evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2023
* Terence Capellini, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2023
* USD 33,800.00

Bones differ in shape and size throughout an animal's body and between animal
species, but the underlying genetic mechanisms that result in different looking
bones are not well understood. This doctoral dissertation project will
investigate DNA "instruction manuals," particularly the "switches" that turn
gene expression on or off during development, that result in shape differences
in hip and shoulder bones of humans and chimpanzees. The project will advance
knowledge about hip and shoulder developmental genetics in the context of modern
human skeletal evolution. The project will support graduate research and
training; 1-2 undergraduates also will have the opportunity to gain lab
experience. The co-PI will use her work in a Life Science Outreach program at
Harvard University as an opportunity to discuss this research and other facets
of human evolution and genetics with New England high school biology teachers
and students, ideally recruiting interested students to visit the lab and serve
as summer researchers. The PI and co-PI's close ties with the Harvard Museum of
Natural History will allow for the development of public exhibits and events
that showcase bone biology, genetics, and human
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers have discussed a number of
evolutionary pressures, primarily related to the adoption of bipedalism, that
are likely to have acted on pelvis and scapula morphology during hominin
evolution. However, little is known about underlying genomic mechanisms that
resulted in the observed changes in the shape and structure of these bones. This
project will investigate portions of the genome that were previously identified
as having potential activity and regulatory functions during embryonic pelvis
and scapula development. The genomic sequences being specifically investigated
overlap with regions of DNA that show signs of having been under positive
selection in the human lineage. For each of these regulatory sequences, the
researchers will test whether the human and chimpanzee versions of the sequence
control gene activity, and whether there are differences in gene activity
between the two species. This work will help to identify sequences likely to
have been under selection during human evolution to produce the modern human
pelvis and scapula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.