* 1847240
* CAREER: Topology and Symmetry Enabled Phenomena in Lasers and Other Non-Hermitian Photonic Media
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Li Ge, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 05/31/2024
* USD 505,182.00

This CAREER award supports an integrated research, education, and outreach
project that focuses on the study of novel phenomena enabled by topology and
symmetry in lasers and other photonic media. Topology and symmetry not only play
an important role in arts and product designs, but they are also fundamental in
determining the behaviors of the microscopic world. Even though such effects are
largely elusive to the naked eye, certain aspects of their intriguing properties
can be discerned using common optical devices, such as a laser not much more
complicated than a price scanner. This project targets a major breakthrough in
our understanding of how energy generation and dissipation, ubiquitous in optics
and related fields, impact the physical rules governed by topology and symmetry.
The outcome of this investigation is expected to advance our fundamental
understanding in optics and physics, as well as in materials science and
optoelectronics. By employing different paradigms to realize novel states
enabled by topology and symmetry, optics and photonics can provide unique
platforms beyond what nature has to offer and lead to technology innovations
that have vital, real-world consequences. The success of the project may
underpin a new generation of sophisticated photonic devices for optical
communications and computing, which have far-reaching impacts on our daily lives
and the whole society. This project aligns with the National Photonics
Initiative, which aims at positioning the nation as a leader in next-generation
photonics technologies; it is also an integral part of the strategic plan at the
researcher's institute to promote cutting-edge research in photonics and other
transformative areas. Leveraging the resources from the City University of New
York, the largest urban university system in the US, the researcher will work
closely with multiple outreach units to increase the awareness and interest of
K-12 students in modern optics and photonics across New York City. The
interdisciplinary nature of this project will provide an excellent research
opportunity for graduate, undergraduate, and advanced high-school students, and
the research will actively recruit and mentor students especially from
underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the
emerging juncture of two of the most energized fields in physics, namely
topological phases of matter and non-Hermitian photonics based on novel
symmetries. Built on the success of identifying the topological origin of the
integer quantum Hall effect, the prediction and observation of topological
insulators have created great excitement and put the study of topological phases
of matter in the spotlight of modern physics. At the same time, the extension of
quantum mechanics into the non-Hermitian regime using parity-time symmetry and
its subsequent realization in photonics have led to an explosion of activities,
exploring spontaneous symmetry breaking in non-Hermitian photonics and the
counterintuitive phenomena they bring. Although there are promising findings
combining these two exciting fields, it remains unclear how the complex-valued
band structure of a non-Hermitian system is related to its edge states and to
what extent the latter are protected by topology and symmetry. This project will
tackle these important and other related questions through the following three
aims: to investigate unusual topological edge states in non-Hermitian photonic
media, focusing on their exotic localization properties and a new type of non-
Hermitian Dirac and Weyl points; to examine a novel non-Hermitian symmetry
termed complex mirror symmetry and its implication on high-order non-Hermitian
degeneracies; and to probe the properties of symmetry-protected photonic zero-
mode lasers using both semiclassical and quantum optical tools. Thanks to the
flexible control of optical gain and loss, different paradigms towards building
topological phases of matter in optics and photonics can be realized in non-
Hermitian media, which not only enrich fundamental optical physics but also lead
to unprecedented photonic devices with unique optical
functionalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Physics Division and The Division of
Materials Research contribute funds to this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.