* 1847710
* CAREER: Intelligent, Closed-Loop Neural Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Rikky Muller, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Neural interfaces will revolutionize disease care for patients of neurological
conditions. Today, implantable neurostimulation (NS) devices have seen
widespread adoption in the treatment of movement disorders, pain, and epilepsy,
and have shown promise in treating psychiatric disorders, memory loss,
depression, and more. Clinical neurostimulators have few channels and provide
simple electrical pulses that are programmed by a doctor in a process that can
take months or even years. There is a need for clinically viable, low-power and
miniaturized systems that enable simultaneous stimulation and recording on many
channels. Providing simultaneous sensing and closed-loop control will allow
devices to automatically optimize parameters for a given outcome and only treat
when symptoms are present, reducing side effects and reducing power. Closing the
loop can provide dynamically delivered therapies that adjust electrical
stimulation in response to a patient's real-time neural state. Furthermore, they
will, for the first time, allow clinical researchers to understand the brain's
response to stimulation and monitor changes (plasticity) over the long term. The
future of medical care centers on wearable and implantable devices that will
continuously monitor body functions and autonomously give treatment in an
intelligent, closed-loop and well-controlled manner without the need for a
doctor's intervention. This future requires broad, interdisciplinary engineering
that combines electronics, artificial intelligence and biology. The
multidisciplinary nature of this project extends to the long-term educational
goals of promoting hands-on bioelectronic science and technology to the next
generation of engineers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops
miniaturized and highly integrated devices for closed-loop neuromodulation that
combine high channel count neural recording with stimulation in a truly closed-
loop manner for the first time. If successful, the proposed work will make
significant advancements in two areas. First, low-power, low-noise integrated
circuit design techniques will be developed to combine simultaneous stimulation
and recording. Stimulation can significantly interfere with neural recording,
resulting in large, persistent artifacts that mask or distort the neural signal
and obscure reliable biomarker detection. Recording and stimulation circuits
will be co-designed to eliminate this interaction. Second, online machine
learning algorithms will be developed and integrated in hardware for dynamic
closed-loop control. The emphasis will be to develop computationally efficient
techniques that minimize the power consumption of the circuit. The two
techniques will be combined into a single integrated circuit for multi-channel
closed-loop neuromodulation that achieves a small footprint and ultra-low power
dissipation that is safe for chronic use in humans. The device will be tested in
animal models of disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.