* 1847042
* CAREER:Exploring the early Earth with high-resolution paleomagnetism
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Roger Fu, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 02/29/2024
* USD 677,056.00

Conditions on the Earth during the first two billion years of its history (4.5
to 2.5 billion years before present) were vastly different from the modern
Earth. Key events in Earth history, including the rise of life and the creation
of continents, took place during this time, yet fundamental questions remain
unanswered. Did the early Earth exhibit the familiar patterns of continental
drift as we see today? When did the first oxygen-producing organisms evolve? Did
a global magnetic field similar to that of the present-day isolate the
atmosphere from loss to the solar wind? This project will use a new generation
magnetic field imaging device, recently developed from advances in quantum
sensing, to examine the magnetic properties of rock samples between 2.7 and 4.2
billion years in age. These experiments are expected to yield new insights into
the initiation of plate tectonics, the evolution of the early atmosphere, and
the rise of oxygen-producing life. In parallel with these measurements this
project will develop a series of lessons with Boston-area middle school teachers
involving student-led observations of the sun through solar telescopes
distributed to the schools. These observations will serve as an introduction to
changes in the sun's properties through time and its impact on surface
conditions on the early Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental challenge to
understanding conditions on Earth during the Archean Eon (4.0-2.5 billion years
ago, or Ga) is the lack of well-preserved rocks dating from that time.
Consequently, attempts to recover information about ancient magnetic fields have
been severely hampered by pervasive remagnetization through metamorphism and
chemical alteration of ferromagnetic phases. This project will apply a recently
developed technology for micrometer-scale magnetic imaging, known as the quantum
diamond microscope (QDM), to address major outstanding questions in Archean
Earth history. The high spatial resolution of the QDM permits direct imaging of
remanent magnetization carriers in complex, altered rocks, which aids the
identification of primary paleomagnetic signals. In Task 1, the QDM will be used
to infer the existence of the geodynamo before 3.5 Ga by recovering magnetic
signals from a newly discovered population of 3.3-4.2 Ga zircons from the
Barberton Greenstone Belt (BGB) of South Africa. As part of Task 2, the project
team will apply both QDM and traditional paleomagnetic techniques on carefully
selected igneous rock units to quantify the mobility of lithospheric plate at
3.45 Ga. Finally, Task 3 of the project will use the QDM to infer the origin of
ferromagnetic iron oxides preserved in 2.78 Ga micrometeorites, thereby testing
the controversial hypothesis that the upper atmosphere of the Earth was oxygen-
rich several hundred million years before the Great Oxidation
Event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.