* 1847498
* CAREER: Bridging the gap from biomass burning and wildfires to atmospheric pollutants
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Erica Belmont, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 04/30/2024
* USD 525,238.00

Wildfire incidence and intensity have increased in some parts of the world in
recent years and are poised to continue increasing in the future due to the
warming climate. Wildfire emissions, which can have significant detrimental
health impacts, will likewise increase. Additionally, some wildfire emissions
absorb and scatter ultraviolet and visible light, which makes these emissions
particularly important in the radiative balance of the earth. The ability to
identify, quantify and model the formation of these emissions would have many
benefits, such as aiding in management decisions regarding wildfires and
informing studies of wildfire health effects. Yet, there is a significant lack
of understanding of what chemical compounds are initially emitted from burning
biomass, and how they evolve in the atmosphere to form the types of aged
emissions that are measured near wildfires. Thus, it is challenging to predict
the formation of these emissions and their impacts. This research will bridge
the gap between laboratory measurements of freshly emitted emissions and field
measurements of atmospherically aged emissions from biomass
burning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop a predictive model of
woody biomass burning emissions which are pertinent to radiative forcing using a
hierarchical approach based upon the three major constituents of lignocellulosic
biomass: hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin. Experiments will be utilized to
develop this model for formation of primary and aged emissions from biomass and
its constituents under conditions relevant to open burning. These conditions
include significant heat and mass transport limitations due to large fuel sizes
and low thermal conductivity of wood, and prolonged smoldering combustion as
opposed to solely flaming combustion. Emissions from biomass pyrolysis and
oxidation will be measured, with an emphasis on evaluating the rates of
production of species that have been identified as highly absorbing and
scattering, for the development of kinetic models. Changes in the composition
and optical properties of those emissions will be studied during photochemical
aging to generate a continuum in understanding of atmospherically measured
compounds from precursor formation through photochemical
transformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.