* 1847651
* CAREER: : Advanced Thermal Management of Lithium-Ion Battery Packs: Combining Physics-Based and Machine Learning Models toward High Thermal Safety
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Huazhen Fang, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Lithium-ion battery (LiB) packs play an essential role in electrified
transportation, grid, renewables and energy-aware buildings. While the demand on
the use of LiB is increasing everyday there are some safety issues that remain
unresolved. These battery packs are susceptible to catching fire which pose a
great danger to human life and property. The fire hazard in these batteries is
caused by a continuous rise of temperature phenomenon (called "thermal runaway")
that is not well understood. This Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) project aims at developing reliable high-fidelity mathematical models
that can help understand this phenomenon and help predict the thermal behavior
more accurately. The success of this project will have huge impact on
electrification happening in various industry sectors including transportation,
grid, energy, and several others. This project will integrate research into
diverse education and outreach activities, including curriculum improvement,
community outreach, and research mentorship, to engage K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite its importance, LiB thermal
management practices are largely empirical or coarse-grained with poor
scientific rigor, thus inadequate for meeting the safety demands. To change this
situation, this research will develop a foundational framework for
characterizing and monitoring LiB packs' spatially and temporally distributed
thermal behavior, which will build on a multi-disciplinary synthesis of ideas
from first-principles modeling, machine learning, distributed estimation, and
network systems. This will drive new knowledge advancement in: 1) a hybrid
modeling methodology that integrates first-principles-based and data-driven
machine learning models, 2) optimal estimation and machine learning theory based
on hybrid models, and 3) hybrid-model-based principles, algorithms and tools for
temperature field reconstruction and thermal runaway detection. The models and
algorithms will be rigorously evaluated through a mix of theoretical analysis,
software-based simulation, and experimental validation using a fully
instrumented PEC SBT4050 battery tester. The results will open a new research
avenue for LiB packs' thermal management while advancing the modeling,
estimation and learning theories for complex spatio-temporal systems, with
potential application to many other engineering
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.