* 1847509
* Collaborative Research: Interpreting the record of Antarctic sediment influenced by metal-rich hydrothermal deposits from their accumulation through early diagenesis and burial
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2020
* Natascha Riedinger, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 03/31/2020
* USD 64,927.00

The Antarctic region is surrounded by spreading centers, areas on the seafloor
where volcanic eruptions and vigorous hydrothermal venting typify the
environment. Hydrothermal venting releases metals into the water column. These
metals are of some economic interest as a natural resource, and they can impact
the biosphere, including affecting faunal composition and microbial processes
that dominate in the region. Additionally, hydrothermal metals settle onto the
seafloor along with other sediments. Marine sediments provide a window into the
past as they accumulate, with each layer containing information about
oceanographic condition at the time of their deposition. However, the amount and
composition of trace metals in the sediment can change as hydrothermal fluids
circulate through the sediment and oceanic crust, thereby impacting this
geologic record. The goal of this project is to collect samples during a sea-
going expedition on the research vessel R/V Polarstern and identify the impact
of hydrothermal fluids on the sedimentary environment. The results will advance
our knowledge on how hydrothermal vents impact the geochemical signals in
sediment deposit and with that their application to reconstruct
paleoenvironmental conditions. The project supports the training of a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the last few years several expeditions in
the Southern Ocean have focused on reconstructing paleoceanographic conditions
in this climate-sensitive region of the planet. In this previous work,
variations in redox-sensitive element distributions in the sediment were
proposed as a valuable tool for unravelling changes in productivity and redox
conditions in the water column over time. However, the potential effect of
metal-rich sediment on this paleoceanographic record has remained unstudied. The
goal of this project is to decipher the potential impact of hydrothermal systems
in the Antarctic region onto the sedimentary trace metal signatures frequently
applied for paleo redox reconstructions. For this purpose we will join an
international expedition on the R/V Polarstern (P119). Hydrothermal deposits and
sediments will be recovered using ROV-guided push cores and piston cores. The
sedimentary signal will be compared with the trace metal signal in the
hydrothermal fluids from two vent sites and background pelagic opal-rich
sediment typical for this area. For this purpose, sulfur, iron and manganese
phases and selected trace metals will be analyzed in the solid phase and pore
waters. Samples will be analyzed for selected constituents onboard the ship. All
other analyses will be carried out at home institutes and samples will be
prepared and stored accordingly. The data will enhance our understanding of the
alteration of primary proxy-signals and the potential impact of hydrothermal
fluids on these proxies and could thus be crucial for its application as redox
proxy for sites in vicinity to hydrothermal input. Additionally, the results
will complement parallel planned research at this location aimed at
understanding the role of hydrothermal vents on faunal composition and microbial
processes in these extreme environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.