* 1847062
* CAREER: Determine the Roles of Material Heterogeneity and Thickness Variability on the Stability of Thin Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Shuodao Wang, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 569,624.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will support
integrated research and educational efforts to generate new knowledge of how
material and thickness non-uniformity (also referred to as heterogeneity) in
thin, bio-compatible materials and bio-tissues affect their mechanical behaviors
under various deformation conditions. Examples of such materials include ultra-
thin wearable bio-sensors, the eardrum membrane, and the heart valves. The award
supports fundamental research that will enable a currently unavailable, non-
destructive material characterization protocol for obtaining the material
property maps, which will allow the deformation and stability of these materials
to be better understood. The innovative approach in this project is expected to
promote scientific advancement in new mechanics knowledge that is important for
a wide range of healthcare and biomedical applications, thereby impacting the
national health and economy. The project will provide opportunities to train
graduate and undergraduate students in the important interdisciplinary areas of
mechanics, materials science, and biomedical devices. The educational outreach
activities are designed to engage young children and under-represented
minorities in STEM education, with the goal of enlarging the STEM talent pool
for the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many important natural and synthesized
heterogeneous thin membranes wrinkle under very small loads. Stability of thin
structures has long been a canonical problem in the mechanics community. Yet to
date, huge discrepancies in buckling loads between theories and experiments are
still usually accounted for by empirical corrections. There is a clear lag in
understanding for predicting the buckling loads of thin heterogeneous membranes.
The objective of this CAREER project is to test the hypothesis that a higher
degree of heterogeneity in thin membranes reduces the critical buckling loads.
The research approach is to experimentally measure and compare the buckling
loads of a set of thin membranes of various degrees of heterogeneity ranging
from highly heterogeneous to homogeneous. Fluorescence stereo microscopy and
inverse finite element analysis will be combined to extract the material
property distributions and thickness variability, and then a theory-guided
numerical model will be developed to identify a quantitative degree of
heterogeneity and elucidate how it is related to reduced buckling
loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Civil,
Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation program (CMMI), and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.