* 1847689
* CAREER: Fundamental Controls of Transport Attributes from Porous Media Microstructure
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Veronica Morales, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 574,098.00

Clean groundwater, a primary source of drinking water for many people, is a
valuable Earth resource. Risks of groundwater contamination frequently arise
from natural, agricultural, or industrial activities. To preserve the safety of
these drinking water sources, it is crucial to understand how contaminants are
expected to move and spread underground. An important factor that influences the
movement of contaminants is the variability of the void spaces in soil and rocks
known as pores. Complex flow patterns arise as groundwater moves through
intricate pores of different shapes and sizes, which make predictions of flow
complicated. Many mathematical predictions of groundwater flow ignore the
complex variability in pores. This oversimplification results in a large
discrepancy between flow predictions and observations. The central scientific
goal of this project is to better understand how contaminant movement is
controlled by measurable features of the pores. The first step of this project
will statistically identify the most relevant attributes of pores that
effectively describe flow in rock. The second step will apply this relationship
to develop a new mathematical model of flow and contaminant movement.
Collectively, this work will deliver more accurate tools to predict contaminant
movement and to help protect water resources. The project will train students
and water managers through the development of an interactive web-based tool
designed to allow users to understand and manipulate groundwater flow in a
virtual environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solving the flow and mass transport
through heterogeneous porous media is central to many technological applications
spanning groundwater remediation, oil recovery, and geotechnical engineering.
The approaches to do so are currently limited, because the required calculations
become computationally expensive as accuracy and domain size increase. The
central scientific goal of this project is to establish a formal quantitative
relationship that explains how local fluid velocities and overall flow
arrangement are controlled by spatially correlated variations of geometric pore
characteristics. This association would enable predicting non-Gaussian velocity
distributions from relevant statistical descriptors of the pore space alone,
which in turn can be used to predict effective transport. Finding this elusive
link will lead to significant improvements in predictive capabilities for
groundwater flow and contaminant transport in heterogeneous porous systems of
arbitrary domain size. To achieve this goal, the proposed work will first
statistically identify how velocity variations are induced by the physical
attributes of the underlying pore space in digitally-scanned rock samples of
diverse heterogeneities. These virtual data contain detailed information of the
structure, the flow and the transport. Next, the newly-determined pore
structure-flow relation will be integrated into the leading modeling framework
for anomalous transport behavior and assessed for performance. The main
educational goal is to enhance student understanding about how groundwater flows
and how contaminants spread in it. This will be done through the development of
interactive web tools for non-experts (targeting high-school, college and
continued education students) that can be used in flipped-classroom
environments. The interactive tool design allows the user to manipulate
groundwater models, explore the results as automatically-generated graphics, and
discover answers to their own questions in a self-directed application of the
scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.