* 1847899
* CAREER: Target-locked single molecule spectroscopy and super-resolution microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Kevin Welsher, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 01/31/2024
* USD 634,986.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, and co-funding from the Molecular Biophysics and Cellular Dynamics
Clusters in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Dr. Kevin
Welsher and his group at Duke University are seeking new ways to enhance
understanding of chemical and biological processes by measuring the function of
single molecules with high precision. Specifically, they are developing "target-
locked" microscopy tools to follow the rapid motions of single proteins and
other cellular matter within cells in real time. The information developed in
this project will help us Understand the Rules of Life by helping us see what
goes on inside biological cells both at high speed and with high resolution. The
Welsher group is also developing a set of experiments for the "home
spectroscopists" aimed at using smartphones to illustrate the principles of
spectroscopy and optics. These experiments illustrate the color components of
various samples using simple red-green-blue values. Online videos "Teachable
Tidbits" are being developed with an aim of demystifying chemistry concepts that
are frequently obscured by mathematics. Finally, the research is guiding
graduate students into the field of microscopy, with an emphasis on learning
microscopy through relatively simple numerical simulations that the students
build from scratch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal molecular motions of single
proteins have traditionally been investigated by single molecule Forster
Resonant Energy Transfer (smFRET), which requires that the protein be tethered
to a surface so that it remains in the focal volume of a microscope. The Welsher
group is developing target-locked smFRET to probe untethered single cytosolic
proteins in real-time, thereby enabling studies of the effect of cellular
crowding and non-equilibrium environments on fast protein domain motions which
have eluded traditional smFRET. The work should provide a more complete picture
of the molecular underpinnings of cellular cargo transport by providing
simultaneous measurement of "tug-of-war" motions of individual motor proteins
and the local nanometer-scale cytoskeletal structure using target-locked super-
resolution (TL-SR) microscopy. The high-speed, high-precision tracking and local
sub-diffraction imaging of TL-SR may enable distinction between existing models
of cargo trafficking. The broader impacts of this CAREER proposal focus on
making microscopy and spectroscopy accessible to students at all
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.