* 1847721
* Workshop: An Annual Retreat to Broaden Participation of Black Social and Personality Psychologists: Oregon 2019, Louisiana 2020
* SBE,SMA
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Ivuoma Onyeador, Society for Personality and Social Psychology
* Continuing Grant
* Josie S. Welkom
* 09/30/2020
* USD 41,850.00

This award was provided as part of NSF's Social, Behavioral and Economic
Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship (SPRF) and Social Psychology programs.
The Black Social and Personality Psychologists' Retreat (BlaSPR) is an annual
conference that focuses on broadening the participation of Black scholars within
the field of social and personality psychology. As of 2016, 3% of members within
the international organization of social and personality psychologists (SPSP)
self-identified as Black or African-American. The underrepresentation of Black
members in the field means that graduate students and early career scholars are
less likely than their White peers (who comprise 63% of SPSP membership) to have
role models and mentors from their racial/ethnic group, negatively impacting
persistence and perceived fit within the field. BlaSPR will create opportunities
for Black scholars to build community among their peers and share critical
information to facilitate success. The conference features workshops on
professional development and productivity, research presentations, and
collaborative writing time. A core emphasis throughout each component of the
conference is helping attendees network among peers and connect with senior
scholars who can serve as mentors. Ultimately, this conference offers an
opportunity to enhance the professional and scientific development of Black
social and personality psychologists and their colleagues, ensuring a robust
pipeline of scholars who will serve as role models for future scientists and
create more inclusive climates in higher education and
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Junior scholars face many hurdles as they traverse
the pipeline from undergraduate study to graduate school and beyond. Although
challenges and hurdles exist for people from all backgrounds who pursue graduate
study in the fields of social and personality psychology, Black scholars
represent a small proportion of the field, which creates additional academic and
psychological challenges and hurdles. Attributional ambiguity can raise
questions about whether one's treatment is because of their race or some other
factor, and the lack of mentorship and low visibility of Black senior scholars
can undermine sense of fit and belonging within the field to threaten
persistence. This conference intervenes to mitigate these consequences and
positively impact the professional trajectories of Black social and personality
psychologists. Over two and a half days, attendees will attend professional
development workshops on productivity, navigating the job market, and applying
for fellowships; participate in research presentations where they will give and
receive critical feedback; and network with peers and senior scholars who may
ultimately become research collaborators, tenure letter writers, and
accountability partners. Overall, by creating a space for Black scholars to
reinforce these crucial research skills and build community, the proposed
conference will help broaden the participation of Black social and personality
psychologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.