* 1847130
* CAREER: Nonlinear Dynamics of Assemblies at High Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Matthew Brake, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 516,000.00

This CAREER project will support research that will contribute new knowledge
related to the failure of structures that operate at high temperatures. This is
particularly important for engines, such as the aeroturbines found on jets, or
the gas turbines found throughout power plants. One challenge facing design
engineers working on these engines is that they must design a structure that has
to operate at temperatures often in excess of 1400 degree Celsius. Temperatures
this high significantly change the way in which components perform; however,
very little knowledge exists for how the specific fatigue (i.e. damage)
mechanisms in these components evolve with temperature. This project focuses on
fundamental research that can lead to the needed knowledge for improving the
design process of these structures. The new knowledge will enable engineers to
design more efficient structures that don't need frequent maintenance and will
provide computational tools to predict the performance of a structure over its
entire life cycle. This project is built on the PI's efforts to create a
research experience that engages underrepresented groups, provides mentorship,
and builds a peer and external support network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
research objective of this CAREER project is to test the hypothesis that
interfaces dissipate more energy in assemblies at high temperatures than
predicted by fretting experiments or models calibrated to low temperature
environments. A second objective is to apply the complex step theorem and the
field of generalized complex number theory to create a new method for
parameterizing nonlinear structural dynamics models as functions of temperature.
To accomplish these objectives, both experimentation and theoretical advancement
will be pursued. Experiments will focus on discovering how nonlinearities in
structures evolve as a function of temperature, and how multiple nonlinearities
interact (e.g. a rocket panel that has geometric nonlinearities due to in-plane
stretching and interfacial nonlinearities due to bolted joints). In parallel, a
new, parameterized reduced order model will be proposed that expresses the
numerical model of a system in terms of temperature and will be validated by the
experiments. This modeling framework is based on an extension of the complex
step theorem to evaluate sensitivities of a system with respect to a specified
variable through the introduction of generalized complex numbers in the system?s
definition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.