* 1847120
* CAREER: Extreme climate perturbations by meteorite impacts and volcanism on terrestrial planets
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Robin Wordsworth, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 498,529.00

Earth is still the only planet known to harbor life at the present. Mars, our
best studied neighbor in the Solar System, is known to have been habitable
intermittently in the past. The work proposed here will shed light on the
processes that have shaped the two planets. Both Earth and Mars have undergone
volcanism and giant impacts. There is evidence that Mars had surface liquid
water at a time when it was very cold but impacts and volcanic events (both of
which could affect the temperature) were extremely common. The project will work
to explain the effects of these two processes simultaneously, rather than
separately. The investigator will use computer models to create a wide range of
possible outcomes for varying levels of volcanic and impact activity. The
results will be useful to terrestrial exoplanet studies as well as to the Solar
System. The investigator will build and expand upon an outreach program to
children 5-7 years old that he has begun in the Cambridge, MA, area. He works
with teachers to present age-appropriate activities in astronomy and planetary
science, and he will involve his students to give them experience interacting
with the public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will address three
key problems in impact/volcano climate forcing in the Solar System. The role of
impacts on Mars in early episodes of fluvial erosion 3-4 Ga will be considered.
On Earth, the effect of the eruptions that may have triggered an important
Snowball event will be studied. Finally, he will use the insight gained from
these case studies to make general predictions about extreme perturbations in
climate for any terrestrial planet, including exoplanets. He will use state-of-
the-art modeling tools, starting with 1D circulation models and working up to 3D
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.