* 1847632
* CAREER: Superdiffusive Heat Transfer in Nanoscale Metal Multilayers
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Richard Wilson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2024
* USD 514,078.00

Classical theory for macroscopic heat transport poorly predicts the evolution of
heat in metals at the nanoscale, especially on ultrafast timescales, e.g. a
trillionth of a second. Engineers working in these areas must currently rely on
simplistic models and incomplete data to estimate transport in metals following
laser excitation. This project seeks to replace such guess work with a concrete
framework for modelling transport. The new framework will be extensively tested
though experimentation. Using a combination of short optical and electrical
pulses to heat nanoscale metal systems, this project will measure heat transfer
over the time- and length-scales that cannot be predicted by existing theory.
This research will be integrated with outreach to middle and high school
students in the predominantly Hispanic local community surrounding UCR. The
research will also be integrated with a mentoring program designed to get
promising community college students involved in research and encourage them to
transfer to UCR to pursue science and engineering
degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to identify,
quantify, and ultimately control the electron-electron and electron-phonon
scattering processes that govern heat flow in nanoscale metal multilayers. On
time-scales shorter than electronic scattering processes, heat transfer can
either be ballistic, superdiffusive, or diffusive. To identify the time- and
length-scales over which various heat transfer regimes apply, and to quantify
the governing electronic scattering processes, this project uses a combination
of ultrafast thermometry methods such as wavelength-dependent time-domain
thermoreflectance measurements, time-resolved magneto-optic Kerr effect
measurements, and temperature dependent electrical conductivity at THz
frequencies. These methods measure the evolution of heat in metal multilayers on
sub-picosecond time-scales. Experimental data on the spatial and temporal
evolution of heat in nanoscale metal layers are used to test first-principles
based models for hot electron transport. The results of this project
significantly advance the basic science of nanoscale heat transfer, and
therefore allow improvements in technologies where thermal management is of
critical importance, e.g. nanoelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.