* 1847091
* CAREER: Computational work design: How networked, intelligent technologies are changing organizational design and worker experience
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Melissa Valentine, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 06/30/2024
* USD 470,000.00

As organizations develop and adopt new technologies for doing work, they also
fundamentally change the way work is organized. Future work is likely to make
greater use of computational work -- work that combines human and computer
capabilities to perform tasks that neither could do alone. New internet and data
analytic technologies are transforming the design of computational work. This
project will use longitudinal observational field research to develop new theory
and fundamental understanding of computational work designs that are currently
used in real-world organizations. The project will emphasize how computational
work can eliminate some types of jobs and tasks, create others, and transform
many jobs that remain. Furthermore, this project will examine how computational
work might affect worker experiences and empowerment. Results could advance
understanding on the impact of machine-intelligent technologies on human and
societal well-being. The research agenda also includes development and
dissemination of an educational curriculum for students and civic leaders to
better understand computational work design and its effects on organizational
structure and worker experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Newly developed work
systems now include dynamic capabilities for future work. Specifically, machine-
intelligent technologies are reshaping work by: 1) collecting data on what
everyone is doing; 2) algorithmically combining human efforts or facilitating
direct human integration; 3) analyzing patterns in work division and integration
activities; and 4) recommending or intervening to create new ways of dividing
and integrating work. New work systems that include such activities can be
understood as being engaged in computational work design. This project will
develop fundamental understanding about computational work designs used in real-
world organizations, with the aim of supporting improvements to their design and
operation, and to the relevant societal infrastructure. Longitudinal,
observational studies of three organizations with advanced deployments of
computational work design will be conducted to develop new theory about
computational work design and worker empowerment, as well as to advance
qualitative research methodology. Furthermore, this project will create and
disseminate an educational curriculum to policymakers and management science
students. Results should advance our understanding of the future of work at the
human-technology frontier and its impact on human and societal well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.