* 1847007
* CAREER: That reminds me: The causes and consequences of remindings
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jonathan Tullis, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 568,665.00

Songs may remind us of a particular event in our life. New faces may remind us
of someone we already know. Smells and tastes can make us think back to earlier
times. More broadly, new stimuli (i.e. sounds, tastes, smells, or sights) can
make us think back to something we already know. When we encounter new problems
or information, we often rely upon our prior knowledge to help us solve the new
problem or understand the new information. "Remindings" are when new information
brings back to mind related, prior experienced episodes. These remindings
sometimes happen when we do not want them (e.g., mindwandering) and fail to
happen when they would be useful (e.g., neglecting to notice a relationship
between a current problem and a previously solved one). This project will
examine why remindings help memory, what makes remindings happen, and how
remindings help us to create knowledge that we can use in many situations.
Understanding how remindings operate will show how the mind is structured and
how memory works. Further, this research may show how students can learn new
information efficiently and effectively. Therefore, the project will include
high school teachers and help them incorporate research-based practices into
their classrooms to support student learning. Undergraduate and graduate
students, especially those from underrepresented groups, will develop their
skills as researchers, teachers, and presenters through this research
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remindings, stimulus-guided retrievals of past
specific episodes, are a fundamental component of cognition that are theorized
to underlie a broad array of vital cognitive skills, including problem solving,
categorization, frequency judgments, and even number representation. The nine
experiments involved with this project will answer three questions: what
cognitive processes underlie remindings, what stimulus characteristics influence
whether remindings occur, and what are the consequences of remindings on
generalizing category knowledge. Learners will study lists of related and
unrelated paired stimuli, including words, sentences, and declarative concepts.
The relations among studied information and lag between presentations will be
experimentally manipulated to affect the amount and consequence of remindings.
Learners' memory for studied stimuli and their ability to transfer their
knowledge to new situations will be tested. Understanding remindings has great
theoretical importance, but it also has significant practical importance, as
processes underlying remindings can be used to benefit students' memory and
generalization across learning materials. For example, theories of reminding
implicate retrieval practice and elaboration processes (both of which boost
student learning in authentic settings). Through presentations, workshops, and
education cafes, high school teachers will learn how cognitive processes
underlying remindings can impact student learning, and will create lesson plans
based around these cognitive processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.