* 1847141
* CAREER: Agile multiplexed multiphoton microscope for interrogation of neural circuits
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Weijian Yang, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project will develop a non-invasive tool that can be used for interrogating
neural circuits across large brain regions. The investigator will develop and
test a novel imaging platform that will take advantage of the progress that has
been made in recent years in the field of nonlinear microscopy and intravital
imaging. The proposed instrument will provide capabilities for high-resolution
microscopy and light stimulation of deeper regions of the brain. This will
enable investigators to better characterize and understand complex neutral
interaction between the neocortex and hippocampus, improving our understanding
of processes such as learning and memory consolidation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plan includes development of a spatiotemporally
multiplexed three-photon microscopy system to simultaneously image the cortex
and the 1-mm deeper hippocampus with large (2x2 mm) fields of view in each
segment. In addition, photostimulation of optogenetic circuits will use both 2-
and 3-photon activation at the cortex and hippocampus, respectively. Validation
of the system will be performed in live mice by studying cortex and hippocampus
tissues to investigate their interaction in a visual discrimination learning
task and subsequent memory consolidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.