* 1847067
* CAREER: Linking Antarctic Cold Desert Groundwater to Thermokarst &amp; Chemical Weathering in Partnership with the Geoscience UAV Academy
* GEO,OPP
* 06/30/2019,06/29/2024
* Joseph Levy, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Michael E. Jackson
* 06/29/2024
* USD 588,519.00

Antarctic groundwater drives the regional carbon cycle and can accelerate
permafrost thaw shaping Antarctic surface features. However, groundwater extent,
flow, and processes on a continent virtually locked in ice are poorly
understood. The proposed work investigates the interplay between groundwater,
sediment, and ice in Antarctica's cold desert landscape to determine when,
where, and why Antarctic groundwater is flowing, and how it may evolve Antarctic
frozen deserts from dry and stable to wet and dynamic. Mapping the changing
extent of Antarctic near-surface groundwater requires the ability to measure
soil moisture rapidly and repeatedly over large areas. The research will capture
changes in near-surface groundwater distribution through an unmanned aerial
vehicle (UAV) mapping approach. The project integrates a diverse range of
sensors with new UAV technologies to provide a higher-resolution and more
frequent assessment of Antarctic groundwater extent and composition than can be
accomplished using satellite observations alone. To complement the research
objectives, the PI will develop a new UAV summer field school, the Geosciences
UAV Academy, focused on training undergraduate-level UAV pilots in conducting
novel earth sciences research using cutting edge imaging tools. The integration
of research and technology will prepare students for careers in UAV-related
industries and research. The project will deliver new UAV tools and workflows
for soil moisture mapping relevant to arid regions including Antarctica as well
as temperate desert and dryland systems and will train student research pilots
to tackle next generation airborne challenges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water
tracks are the basic hydrological unit that currently feeds the rapidly-changing
permafrost and wetlands in the Antarctic McMurdo Dry Valleys (MDV). Despite the
importance of water tracks in the MDV hydrologic cycle and their influence on
biogeochemistry, little is known about how these water tracks control the unique
brine processes operating in Antarctic ice-free areas. Both groundwater
availability and geochemistry shape Antarctic microbial communities, connecting
soil geology and hydrology to carbon cycling and ecosystem functioning. The
objectives of this CAREER proposal are to 1) map water tracks to determine the
spatial distribution and seasonal magnitude of groundwater impacts on the MDV
near-surface environment to determine how near-surface groundwater drives
permafrost thaw and enhances chemical weathering and biogeochemical cycling; 2)
establish a UAV academy training earth sciences students to answer geoscience
questions using drone-based platforms and remote sensing techniques; and 3)
provide a formative step in the development of the PI as a teacher-scholar. UAV-
borne hyperspectral imaging complemented with field soil sampling will determine
the aerial extent and timing of inundation, water level, and water budget of
representative water tracks in the MDV. Soil moisture will be measured via near-
infrared reflectance spectroscopy while bulk chemistry of soils and groundwater
will be analyzed via ion chromatography and soil x-ray fluorescence.
Sedimentological and hydrological properties will be determined via analysis of
intact core samples. These data will be used to test competing hypotheses
regarding the origin of water track solutions and water movement through
seasonal wetlands. The work will provide a regional understanding of groundwater
sources, shallow groundwater flux, and the influence of regional hydrogeology on
solute export to the Southern Ocean and on soil/atmosphere linkages in earth's
carbon budget. The UAV school will 1) provide comprehensive instruction at the
undergraduate level in both how and why UAVs can advance geoscience research and
learning; and 2) provide educational infrastructure for an eventual self-
sustaining summer program for undergraduate UAV
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.