* 1847254
* CAREER: Metamaterials as Elastic Rectifiers: Exploiting the Non-reciprocal Mechanics of Time-Periodic Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Mostafa Nouh, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 01/31/2024
* USD 501,945.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will support
fundamental research to understand and exploit elastic metamaterials with time-
varying material and non-reciprocal structural properties. Metamaterials are
artificially assembled materials-structures designed to have mechanical
properties that are not naturally available. The research aims at developing a
novel class of metamaterials which break the transmission symmetry of incident
dynamic loads, thereby forcing mechanical excitations to travel differently in
opposing directions along the same channel. The study of non-reciprocal
structures enables a realization of mechanical systems which are analogous to
electronic components, such as rectifiers, switches, and logic elements that
have eluded the mechanical domain for decades. New functionalities provided by
such metamaterials will propel new applications in vibration isolation and
suppression in engine mounts, turbine blades, and other aerospace and civil
infrastructures. Reflection-immune metamaterials are also envisioned to have a
lasting impact on medical imaging and photoacoustic tomography where detrimental
artifacts from reflections can be remedied. An integrated research-education
program will leverage metamaterials as an overarching theme for several
educational and broadening participation efforts. The developed educational
tools will cater to students at all levels from elementary, through a
partnership with the Boys and Girls Club of Buffalo, to aspiring undergraduates
via partnerships with the Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation
(LSAMP) and NY State's Collegiate Science &amp; Technology Program (CSTEP).
Research outcomes will culminate in a series of educational demonstrations of
resonance and vibrations concepts to young engineers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
notion of exploiting time-periodic materials as means to break elastic
reciprocity has faced several challenges pertaining to practicality and physical
realization. This CAREER award aims to investigate a feasible path to the
practical implementation of non-reciprocal metamaterials by exploiting the
inherent geometric-dependence of elastic properties in non-axisymmetric cross-
sections, while departing from hard-wired and shunted configurations. The
project will derive the mechanics of a tunable elastic rectifier, which
transmits energy in one-direction only via unidirectional band gaps relying on a
prescribed phase shift between the geometric orientations of an array of
rotating resonators, to induce a spatiotemporal stiffness profile. By developing
a framework for the non-reciprocal wave dispersion mechanics in 2D/3D
structures, the directivity of wave transmission will be characterized and
translated into unprecedented material functions, including directional
excitation filtering, diode-like effects, and the ability to confine the
response to prescribed regions of a given structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.