* 1847811
* CAREER: Probing and Braiding Chiral Majorana Fermions in Quantum Anomalous Hall Insulator-Superconductor Hybrid Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Cui-Zu Chang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 658,927.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The rapidly increasing need for high computing
power requires a drastic paradigm shift away from traditional computers based on
silicon transistors. A quantum computer, which makes use of quantum physics to
store information and execute calculations is expected to be vastly more
efficient and hence more powerful than a traditional computer. An attractive
scheme towards quantum computation involves a newly-discovered class of
materials, called topological insulators, where the interior is insulating but
the surface is electrically conducting. Magnetic elements can be incorporated
into such a topological insulator sample to achieve a curious phenomenon called
quantum anomalous Hall effect. In this state the surface electrons are confined
to the edges of the sample and flow without resistance. It has been predicted
that quantum computation can be achieved in a device where this resistance-free
edge current of the quantum anomalous Hall insulator is utilized. This project
aims to test this prediction. Active education and outreach programs for
graduate and undergraduate students, K-12 students and teachers, and the general
public are integral part of planned work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The coupling of the spin-polarized dissipation-free edge
state of a quantum anomalous Hall insulator and a conventional superconductor
has been predicted to harbor a topological superconductivity phase that supports
gapless Majorana fermion excitation at surfaces or edges of the sample.
Topological superconductivity can reveal transformative new physics, such as
non-Abelian statistics, and enable new architectures for topological quantum
computation. In this project, the principal investigator pursues the quantum
coherent oscillations as a function of vortices number in a micrometer-sized
quantum anomalous Hall/superconductor Mach-Zehnder interferometer to ascertain
the existence of the Majorana fermion and the non-Abelian braiding of such
Majorana fermions in a quantum anomalous Hall/superconductor device with Corbino
geometry. This project also explores the transport signatures of external
electrical field induced topological superconductivity phase in quantum
anomalous Hall/superconductor hybrid structures under homogenous magnetization
and multiple chiral Majorana fermions in high-Chern-number quantum anomalous
Hall/superconductor heterostructures. The success of the project will lead to
significant new understanding of the microscopic mechanisms of topological
superconductivity phase and carries far-reaching technological implications
especially for the development of the topological quantum
computer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.