* 1847541
* CAREER: Hybrid Biorobotic Matrices to Simulate Diaphragmatic and Myocardial Biomechanics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Ellen Roche, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2024
* USD 578,083.00

In order to improve understanding of an organ system, researchers often build
physical/benchtop models that mimic the system sufficiently to reproduce,
observe, and measure functions that are challenging to evaluate in the body.
Though many such models of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems have been
developed to simulate the motions of the beating heart and breathing, none
faithfully replicates the mechanics of the diaphragm or faithfully mimics the
three-dimensional twisting and compressive motion of the heart. Thus, the
overall goal of this project is to build a lifelike, benchtop model that
recreates the motion and function of the heart and the diaphragm using a
combination of advanced robotic techniques and actual organic tissue. This model
will provide insights into physiology, pathology and interdependence of the
systems and serve as an innovative and effective teaching tool for educating
students on cardiovascular and respiratory physiology and pathology. It will
also serve as an anatomically and physiologically accurate testbed for
implantable cardiac devices, representing a vast improvement over existing
models and ultimately reducing the requirement for testing devices in animal
models. Finally, it will act as an impactful visualization tool for educating
and engaging the broader community (for example in museums and in Children's
hospitals). The PI will use this demonstration and teaching model as one of many
approaches in a multi-pronged initiative to recruit, train and retain a new
generation of women in academic scientific
positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to shift
the paradigm of benchtop simulators from one where the respiratory and
cardiovascular systems are independently simulated with synthetic phantoms or ex
vivo tissue and motion is passively driven by fluid or external components to
one where functional dynamic tissue is recreated using programmable biomimetic
soft active materials. Synthetic soft robotic muscular simulators for the
diaphragm and heart muscle (myocardium) will be combined with ex vivo biological
tissue (entire lungs and intracardiac structures respectively) to create "hybrid
biorobots" that will enable accurate representation of lung and heart motion,
while preserving key anatomical structures, thus maintaining form while
recapitulating function. Clinically derived motion data of the diaphragm and
heart will be used to develop algorithms to "program" the design of fiber
reinforced biomimetic soft actuators. Subsequently, these active elements will
be embedded in anthropomorphic matrices to mimic the form and function of the
diaphragm and heart. Diaphragm-driven breathing mechanics and cardiovascular
hemodynamics will be recreated using pressurized anatomical chambers and mock
circulatory loops. The Research Plan is organized under three objectives. The
FIRST OBJECTIVE is to create a modular, active biorobotic diaphragm that can be
integrated into an in vitro testbed that can be used simulate physiological and
pathological biomechanics and generate ex vivo lung ventilation. The in vitro
testbed will integrate pressurized chambers separated by an interchangeable
diaphragm mimic to replicate the physiologic pressures of the thoracic and
abdominal cavities. Soft-robotic actuators will be programmed to mimic the
desired diaphragm motion trajectory as computationally extracted from clinical
MRI data. This will be the first functional soft robotic diaphragm mimic to
replicate a variety of clinically derived diaphragm motions. The SECOND
OBJECTIVE is to create a cardiovascular testbed including a biorobotic heart
that recreates cardiac wall motion and generates pressure changes to simulate
hemodynamic conditions. A novel hybrid fabrication process will be used to
preserve the intracardiac structures (endothelial lining, septum, valves,
papillary muscles and chordae tendinae) of the heart using ex vivo tissue
(porcine hearts) or high-resolution 3D printing. The active heart muscle will be
replaced with a synthetic soft material containing fiber-reinforced actuators
oriented in desired configurations. The biorobotic heart will be integrated with
a partially compliant vascular flow loop to simulate hemodynamics. This will be
the first realization of a soft biorobotic heart that integrates organic
intracardiac tissue with soft robotic myocardium and the first cardiac simulator
where cardiovascular hemodynamics are driven completely by a myocardial
substitute that is capable of replicating twist as well as compression, which is
critically important in the performance assessment of medical implants. The
THIRD OBJECTIVE is to integrate components to make a cardiorespiratory platform
and to demonstrate its utility in a model to simulate respiratory and
hemodynamic biomechanics of Fontan patients. Physical cavities of the
respiratory simulator will be designed based on Fontan patients' CT and MRI
data. Based on previous work, a controller that actuates physiological pressure
profiles during a breathing cycle in a simulated chest cavity of a Fontan
patient with total cavopulmonary bypass will be developed. The respiratory
simulator will then be combined with a partially compliant vascular flow loop to
simulate venous pressure and flow patterns of Fontan patients. This will be the
first combined cardiorespiratory simulator using a soft robotic heart and
diaphragm and the first platform to recreate the Fontan physiology including
both trans-diaphragmatic pressures and abdominal
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.