* 1847914
* CAREER: Developing New Polymer Supported Catalysts with High School, Undergraduate, and Graduate Students
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Chris Hobbs, Sam Houston State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 409,910.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Catalysis Program (CAT) of the Division
of Chemistry (CHE), Professor Christopher Hobbs of Sam Houston State University
(SHSU) works with undergraduate and graduate students to develop new and
recyclable chemical catalysts. Chemical catalysts increase the speed of chemical
reactions. Catalysts are commonly used for preparing important materials such as
plastics and medicines. It is desirable to make catalysts with long lives to
avoid the high costs and environmental problems associated with the metallic
elements that are often used. In this research, polymers supports ("plastic
backbones") are used to recover a catalyst from a reaction so it can be re-used.
Varied separation strategies are developed, depending on the polymer support. In
much the same way that oil separates from water, the polymer-supported catalysts
developed by Professor Hobbs and his students are "phase-selective" so they
physically separate from the products after facilitating a chemical reaction.
This green chemistry approach avoids wasteful and time-consuming purification
steps. Educational aspects of this project are aimed at broadening the scope of
polymer science education at SHSU through the development of new experiments for
laboratory courses as well as hands-on participation in the research lab by
undergraduates. Additional societal benefits include the recruitment and
participation of under-represented students (high school, undergraduate, and
graduate) in research projects and volunteer work as math and science tutors in
the Windham School District, the public-school system for those incarcerated in
the Texas Department of Criminal Justice (TDJC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor
Hobbs and his students develop new polymer-supported ligands and catalysts which
are nonpolar and phase-selectively soluble. These polymer-supported catalysts
are prepared using a combination of ring opening metathesis polymerization
(ROMP), acyclic diene metathesis (ADMET) polymerization, and atom transfer
radical polymerization (ATRP). These are all techniques that offer high levels
of control over polymer architecture. Specific goals of the project target
polymer-supported salen, N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC), and N-heterocycle-based
ligands and catalysts. Professor Hobbs is further preparing the first examples
of phase-selective single chain nanoparticle (SCNP) and unimolecular
ligand/initiator system (ULIS) supported catalysts. Because of their non-polar
phase selectivity, these catalysts may be recovered and recycled under simple
liquid/liquid separation conditions, thus avoiding chromatographic
purifications. The ability to remove and recycle diminishes solvent waste and
highlights the implications of this project as a model for green and sustainable
chemistry. Broader impacts of this work include recruitment of students from
under-represented groups to STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) careers, as well as promoting outreach and volunteerism aimed at
individuals who are incarcerated in the Texas Department of Criminal Justice
(TDJC) System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.