* 1847243
* CAREER: Quantifying evolution of accessible mineral surface areas and pore connectivity for improved simulation of mineral reaction rates
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Lauren Beckingham, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 530,300.00

Chemical reactions are an important part of natural subsurface environments, and
this includes natural rock weathering, contaminant movement and breakdown, and
industrial processes such as carbon dioxide storage, hydraulic fracturing, and
radioactive waste disposal. Many of these processes occur in aquifers and the
way that porosity, permeability, and rock surface chemistry change over time is
crucial to predicting how contaminants move or the quality of water changes.
Computer simulations are often used to help understand how soils and aquifers
change over years and centuries but simulation is difficult because measurements
of reaction rate in the laboratory are so different from measurements in nature
and the reason is not clear. The proposed project will seek to reconcile these
differences by using advanced imaging methods, laboratory rock weathering
experiments, and computer simulations. This will help us simulate and better
understand such processes as contaminant fate, carbon dioxide sequestration, the
dissolution and precipitation of minerals, and changes in water quality. The
project supports a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students who will
be engaged to help increase interest in STEM fields in K- 12 students through
involvement in outreach activities and the Auburn University OutCELL educational
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term research goal is to enhance
understanding and simulation of the rate, extent, and impact of mineral
dissolution and precipitation reactions in subsurface systems to better predict
flow and transport in these systems, enabling improved risk and impact
assessment. As a step towards this goal, the research objective of this CAREER
proposal is to test the hypothesis that mineral reaction rates and permeability
evolution are a function of mineral accessible surface areas, porosity and pore
connectivity. The approach will be to carry out core scale laboratory
dissolution experiments, use imaging methods to measure the reactive evolution
of accessible mineral surface area, porosity, and pore connectivity, and
integrate imaging observations into reactive transport simulations of
dissolution experiments. My long-term educational goal is to equip students with
the knowledge and skills to assess fate and transport in environmental systems
and develop and implement solutions to environmental problems. In pursuit of
this goal, the educational objective of this proposal is to increase
understanding and awareness of K-12, undergraduate and graduate students of
water-rock interactions in environmental systems. The educational approach is to
expand K-12 awareness through demonstrations at the Auburn student-led OutCELL
facility, develop new undergraduate/graduate course materials, and establish a
permanent interdisciplinary student seminar series. The outreach objective of
this proposal is to broaden interest and participation in STEM fields by
initiating interest at the K-12 level through OutCELL and summer camps and
support continued interest at the undergraduate and graduate levels through
participation in outreach, mentoring, and research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.