* 1847550
* CAREER: Search for CP-Violating Hadronic Physics Beyond the Standard Model with Polyatomic Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Nicholas Hutzler, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 620,000.00

The origin of matter in the universe is a mystery. According to all known
physical laws, there should be equal amounts of matter and anti-matter in
existence. However, scientists have not found any large clumps of anti-matter
such as anti-stars or anti-planets. One way to explain this asymmetry may
involve new particles and forces that are not described by the Standard Model of
particle physics. The hypothesized forces could violate some fundamental
symmetries such as Charge conjugation (C), Parity (P), or Time reversal (T)
symmetry in order to explain the matter to anti-matter asymmetry in the
universe. But these same forces would cause other "forbidden" interactions
between electrons, nucleons and electromagnetic fields, which may be detected by
sensitive laboratory experiments. These effects are significantly amplified in
polar molecules due to their very large internal electromagnetic fields.
Searching for these effects with modern, quantum techniques enables "tabletop"
searches for evidence of new particles and forces. This can promote the progress
of science by opening up new, unexplored areas of fundamental
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will search for a nuclear magnetic
quadrupole moment (MQM) in polyatomic 173YbOH molecules. The MQM is a CP-
violating electromagnetic moment that can exist in nuclei with spin I&gt;1/2,
and is enhanced in quadrupole deformed nuclei such as 173Yb. The MQM would arise
from sources such as CP-violating nuclear forces, quark EDMs, and more, making
it a sensitive probe for many hadronic sources beyond the Standard Model.
Polyatomic molecules are a powerful platform for precision measurement since
they generically enable full polarization and internal co-magnetometer states
without interfering with laser cooling. This is a combination of features not
available in other systems. This team will perform a molecular beam spin
precession measurement to search for a nuclear MQM while simultaneously
developing this new platform for precision measurements, which will be useful in
the many systems that benefit from quantum control in
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.