* 1847289
* CAREER: Molten Polymers for Selective Biomass Fast Pyrolysis to Produce Value-Added Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Hsi-Wu Wong, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Biomass from plants (lignocellulosic biomass) has been recognized as a renewable
replacement for fossil-derived resources (e.g. crude oil, coal, and natural gas)
to produce liquid fuels and value-added chemicals. However, existing methods to
convert biomass, such as fast pyrolysis (rapid thermal decomposition of biomass
in the absence of oxygen), typically lead to both desired and undesired chemical
products. The use of catalysts to accelerate desired chemical reaction pathways
has been widely studied to address this challenge. However, the use of
inhibitors to suppress undesired pathways has been rarely explored. Molten
polymers are thermoplastics that melt at high temperature yet thermally degrade
more slowly than biomass, making them good candidates as inhibitors in biomass
conversion reactions. The goal of the proposed research project is to
investigate the reaction pathways of biomass conversion in the presence of
molten polymers. Pathway inhibition with molten polymers will transform existing
biomass conversion technologies by selectively promoting product yields in a
tunable fashion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will examine the ability of
MPs to attenuate undesired reaction pathways via transport and intrinsic
reaction mechanisms. The research involves both experimental and computational
elements on the use of MPs for selectively promoting the yields of desired
products in biomass fast pyrolysis via physical inhibition of product escape and
chemical inhibition of reactions involving hydroxyl groups. This hypothesis is
supported by preliminary results that show a significant increase in
levoglucosan and furfural yields during cellulose pyrolysis in the presence of
MPs. Pyrolysis experiments will be conducted on glucose-based carbohydrates
microscopically mixed with MPs with controlled structures in a microreactor. The
energy barriers of key pyrolysis reactions affected by the MPs will be estimated
from ab initio calculations. The objective will be to reveal the fundamental
mechanisms by which MPs promote product yields in biomass pyrolysis. Integration
of research and education will be accomplished by engaging students through
interactive teaching, experiential learning, and community outreach. This will
be enabled by a game-based software tool, Biomass Conversion Visualizer
(BioCon), to be created as part of this project. BioCon will serve as the
primary platform for the proposed education and outreach activities and will be
designed with assistive technology to broaden the participation of students with
learning disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.