* 1847771
* CAREER: Computing Radiation Spectra in Compton Sources with High Precision
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Balsa Terzic, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

X-rays enable scientists to study the internal structure of materials on all
length scales from the macroscopic down to the positions of individual atoms.
This capability has had profound impact on science, technology, and on the world
economy. The community is in agreement that future advances in many areas of
science and technology depend on understanding the structure-function
relationships at the nano-scale, where new properties emerge. Controlling the
fabrication of complex materials at that scale will allow for novel physical,
chemical, and biological functionality. Output flux and brilliance of Compton
sources rivals, and by some measures exceeds, modern synchrotron sources,
bringing the most advanced scientific and medical X-ray probe into the
university, industrial, and medical laboratory. In this context, this project
will improve the calculation of radiation spectra in Compton sources. If
successful, the new approach is expected to play a pivotal role in ushering a
new era in hard X-ray source technology. Combined with powerful optimization
tools, this will lead to substantial improvements in performance for all
existing and future Compton sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a relativistic
electron beam interacts with a laser beam, intense and highly collimated
electromagnetic radiation is generated through Compton scattering. Increasing
the laser intensity changes the longitudinal velocity of the electrons during
their collision, which leads to considerable broadening in the scattered
radiation spectra. The effects of such ponderomotive broadening are so
deleterious that most Compton sources either remain at low laser intensities or
pay a steep price to operate at a small &lt;br/&gt;fraction of the physically
possible peak spectral output. In this project, the PI and his collaborators
will build on previous work that showed that the ponderomotive broadening for
individual electrons can be eliminated by suitable frequency modulation
(chirping) of the incident laser wave. The PI will generalize this chirping
prescription to realistic electron beams and laser pulses, in order to quantify
its advantages. High-fidelity simulations of Compton sources with chirping are
expected to lead to substantial savings in the operational costs of the existing
as well as the design and construction cost of new Compton
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.