* 1847315
* CAREER: Enhancing perception and cognition while minimizing side effects through closed-loop peripheral neural stimulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Qi Wang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Perception, cognition, and behavioral performance are heavily influenced by
arousal level. For example, a student will likely perform much better on exams
when alert than when drowsy or overly anxious. Arousal is regulated by several
neuromodulatory systems, including the locus coeruleus (LC), which is a cluster
of neurons in the brainstem whose damage often leads to neurodegenerative
diseases. Thus, from an engineering standpoint, it is plausible that control of
LC activity could maximize behavioral performance in healthy individuals and
treat LC related disorders. However, the small size and deep location of the LC
in the brainstem makes it challenging to access and manipulate. To overcome this
challenge, this project will use peripheral vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) to
control LC activity. The vagus nerve, which runs from the brainstem to the colon
area, is easy to access non-invasively, and the LC is the main brain structure
that mediates the effect of VNS on brain activity. Using cutting-edge machine
learning and nonlinear control theory, this project aims to develop an
engineering framework for controlling LC activity via periphery VNS and
measuring pupil size, which is also an indicator of arousal level. The success
of this project will lead to the development of non-invasive methods to enhance
human perception and cognition and treat LC-related brain disorders, e.g.,
Alzheimer's disease, bipolar disorder, depression and Attention Deficit
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD). Research activities in the planned studies will
enrich the undergraduate curriculum and provide interdisciplinary research
opportunities for undergraduates and graduate students, who will contribute to
the national highly-qualified workforce in the rapidly-growing biotechnology and
biomedical engineering field. Moreover, the project is expected to broaden the
participation in STEM of under-represented minority and female students with
social-economically disadvantaged backgrounds. The proposed educational
curriculum and outreach activities will also engage the general public to
increase their awareness of how STEM disciplines can be applied to solve
problems in the nervous system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI's long-term career
research goal is to enhance human perception and cognition through control of
population activities within the nervous system. Toward this goal, this project
is to develop an engineering framework that uses peripheral nerve stimulation to
control neural population activity to achieve optimal behavioral performance
while minimizing unintended side effects and to functionally validate this
technology in an animal model. The vagus nerve-to-locus coeruleus (LC) pathway
will be used as a model system to develop and test the technology. This pathway
was chosen because an FDA approved non-invasive vagus nerve stimulator exists
and the LC plays a pivotal role in modulating brain functions through regulation
of arousal levels. Studies will include assessment of LC spiking activity and
pupil size, which is a noninvasive proxy of LC activity that will be useful in
future translation of the technology developed. The Research Plan is organized
under three objectives. The FIRST OBJECTIVE is to identify the optimal parameter
space of VNS (vagus nerve stimulation) for selectively modulating LC
activity/pupil size while minimizing side effects on heart rate using Bayesian
active learning. A cohort of animals will be implanted with electrodes for left
VNS at the level of the carotid artery (blunt dissection) and with a wireless
electrocardiography (ECG) transmitter to monitor heart rate. A genetically-
encoded calcium indicator will be selectively expressed in LC neurons using
viral vectors, enabling calcium imaging of the activity of LC populations of
neurons. The average spiking activity of the LC neurons will then be inferred
from the fluorescence signals. Bayesian active learning will be used to discover
the VNS parameter spaces in which VNS has high efficacy in driving LC
activity/pupil size while leaving minimal effects on heart rate. Stimulation
will be presented in the form of bursts of charge-balanced bi-phasic current
pulses with short inter-pulse intervals. The parameter space will include
current amplitude of the higher amplitude phase of the pulses, pulse width of
the higher amplitude phase, pulse polarity (i.e. cathode-leading or anode-
leading), pulse waveform, asymmetry ratio, inter-pulse interval, number of
pulses per burst, and inter-burst interval. The SECOND OBJECTIVE is to
synthesize a nonlinear closed-loop controller for control of LC population
activity/pupil size while minimizing changes in heart rate through VNS. Non-
parametric Gaussian Process (GP) models will be used to model the nonlinear
synamics of the vagus nerve-to-LC and vagus nerve-to-pupil circuitry. A
nonlinear predictive model controller based on the GP models will be synthesized
to control LC population activity/pupil size through VNS in a closed-loop
fashion. Different nonlinear optimization methods will be tested in the
controller, and extensive simulations will be conducted to evaluate its
performance. The THIRD OBJECTIVE is to functionally validate the technology in
awake behaving animals. The extent to which the controller is able to maintain
optimal behavioral performance while producing minimal side effects for animals
in real-world applications will be examined. Rats instrumented for monitoring
the spiking performance of neurons in the LC will be trained to perform a
tactile detection task, e.g., licking a water spout in response to a whisker
deflection. Their behavioral performance will be quantitatively evaluated from
the probabilities of their correct and incorrect responses to sensory stimuli.
The behavioral performance and heart rate of animals in sessions with the
stimulator on will be compared to those in sessions with the stimulator off.
Different firing rates will be tested to determine which firing rate results in
optimal behavior performance. The successful completion of the above objectives
will provide, for the first time, an engineering framework to guide the design
and validation of optimal, closed-loop stimulation for enhancing
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.