* 1847404
* CAREER:Water and Energy Sustainability in the Built Environment: Systems Science for the Blue City
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ashlynn Stillwell, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2024
* USD 508,546.00

This career project is targeted to advance water and energy sustainability in
the built environment through integrated research and education at the frontier
of systems science. Water and energy are two vital and highly interconnected
resources. In the energy-water nexus, innovations in infrastructure and policy
can transform cities towards sustainability goals. Moving beyond the traditional
sustainability paradigm of the "green city" focused primarily on energy, this
project aims to create solutions for water sustainability, termed here the "blue
city". Advancing both water and energy infrastructure systems can be
synergistic: the "blue city" is to be explored as a component of the "green
city". To advance sustainability in the built environment, the project plan
considers the utility, city, and residential scales to capture the range in
different systems science approaches, from top-down and bottom-up perspectives,
including the integration between the two approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
integrated research (R) and education (E) objectives are: R1) Characterize the
energy sustainability of the water sector in urban areas, using operational data
from U.S. cities; R2) Deploy smart water metering systems in residential homes
to disaggregate and characterize end uses; R3) Integrate water data with energy
data to predict city-scale outcomes from efficiency programs and investments;
E1) Develop, implement, and evaluate in-class, online, and informal coursework
integrating concepts of water and energy technologies and policies; E2) Organize
and implement STEM programming events on water and electricity topics in
collaboration with the Girl Scouts of Central Illinois. Outcomes from the
research and education objectives are anticipated to generate new, previously
unquantified knowledge of the energy-water nexus. At the utility scale, systems
science advancements include collecting,organizing, curating, and openly
publishing a comprehensive database of treated flow and energy consumption (and
recovery, where applicable) at U.S. water and wastewater utilities, and
benchmarking direct and indirect water and energy consumption from an urban
metabolism perspective. At the residential household scale, innovative expected
results include creating characteristic models of residential water demand
patterns from a previously unstudied temperate-humid climate, using Chicago as a
testbed. Integrating the utility and household scales to the city scale,
advancements include predicting resource efficiency outcomes from statistical
models correlating electricity and water consumption. Additional contributions
include citizen science training and data collection with Girl Scouts and
innovative pedagogical approaches to water and energy sustainability curriculum,
building on findings from research analyses and producing data to inform
research approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.