* 1847226
* CAREER: Rapid elucidation of genotype-to-phenotype relationships in Clostridium
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Nicholas Sandoval, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 506,939.00

Bacteria produce chemicals and biofuels from plant waste. They need to be
engineered in order to make the process cost-effective. Clostridia produce
important chemicals but are difficult to engineer. This project seeks to develop
the genetic tools and techniques to make engineering of Clostridia easier. This
will have implications for chemical and fuel production from plant waste
materials. The investigator will coach an iGEM (International Genetically
Engineered Machine) team. The team will have members from Tulane and three
community colleges. A quarterly podcast to inform the general public about new
advances in synthetic biology will also be produced.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is designed to establish
relationships between genotype and phenotype in Clostridium. CRISPR (Clustered
Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats) interference and activation
methods will be the primary tools. The project will focus on the tolerance to
fermentation inhibiting byproducts in C. pasteurianum. The results of the work
are expected to greatly increase the knowledge base for the rational engineering
of production strains using waste biomass. The high-throughput methods to be
developed here can be adapted to other microbial
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Cellular and
Biochemical Engineering Program in CBET, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.