* 1847306
* Children's Understanding of Indirect Attacks on Credibility
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Stacia Stolzenberg, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 01/31/2023
* USD 200,000.00

When children allege sexual abuse, their report becomes central to assessing
whether the crime occurred. However, children are susceptible to suggestion --
both from those who aim to influence their reports and those who aim to
establish what children are alleging. Given children's susceptibility to
courtroom questioning, the manner in which children are questioned about prior
suggestive influence is incredibly important. How do children understand when
attorneys are attacking the credibility of their reports, and how does the
subtle phrasing of attacks influence children's responses? This investigation
will assess how attorneys are questioning children in recent cases of alleged
sexual abuse, as well as how children understand and respond to such questions.
The findings can provide concrete recommendations for those questioning children
about alleged crimes, helping to establish productive techniques that elicit
accurate responses. In doing so, the proposed research has the potential to
improve legal decision making in cases involving children, by providing
questioning methods that better distinguish true from false allegations of
abuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will utilize a mixed-methods
approach. First they will conduct a systematic field assessment of how children
are questioned in recent cases of alleged abuse. The findings will provide an
indication of the frequency, content, context, and responsiveness to such
assessments of credibility about suggestive influence. Second, a series of
laboratory studies will assess children's comprehension and response patterns to
such questions, with the materials developed in tandem with the findings from
the field assessment to approximate courtroom questioning. In the laboratory
studies, the researchers will also include questioning alternatives not used
frequently by attorneys. Such findings will assess the boundaries on what
children understand. Furthermore, doing so can result in producing alternatives
that meet the needs of legal actors questioning children about suggestive
influence, while allowing children to provide accurate and complete
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.