* 1847125
* CAREER: Optimal Interdependent Operation of Electricity Distribution Grids and Water Distribution Systems in Smart Cities
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Nikolaos Gatsis, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Electricity distribution networks and water distribution systems are critical
infrastructures that are vital for the social well-being. Although they are
traditionally operated independently, they are interconnected and
interdependent. The interdependency is manifested through the electricity
consumption of water services facilities, such as pumping, treatment, and
wastewater management. It is becoming recognized by various stakeholders that
socio-economic benefits can be reaped from the coordinated operation of coupled
infrastructure components and services in an urban district. The objective of
this project is thus to put forth a framework that addresses challenges in
resource management for coupled electricity distribution networks and water
distribution systems. The potential benefits include more reliable and economic
delivery of electricity and water to the end-user. Furthermore, this project
supports education through enhancement of the power engineering curriculum at
the University of Texas at San Antonio as well as outreach to high school
students and local community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project puts
forth novel multi-period optimization methods for optimal asset utilization and
resource scheduling in electricity distribution grids and water distribution
systems. Specifically, the multi-phase operation of electricity distribution
grids with wye and delta connection variants is explicitly modeled. Tight
polyhedral relaxations for optimal power flow in distribution grids with step-
voltage regulators are developed and are extended to account for other utility
or end-user assets. Novel optimization schemes building on contraction mappings
and penalty methods overcome the nonconvex and nondifferentiable nature of the
hydraulic equations that govern water distribution systems. Comprehensive models
for energy-optimal joint management of electricity and water distribution
systems are developed. The physical coupling between the two networks is
explicitly accounted for, while optimized multi-period pump and water tank
operation takes advantage of the inherent time flexibility and can provide a
form of energy storage. The developed models can also be incorporated in
distribution service restoration sequences. The research is validated with a
real-time power network simulator at the University of Texas at San
Antonio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.