* 1847786
* CAREER: Understanding the Structure and Function of the Endothelial Glycocalyx through Single Molecule Visualization
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Jan Scrimgeour, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 541,591.00

Non-Technical&lt;br/&gt;The blood vessel wall is a living interface between
flowing blood and tissue. This interface is rich in polymers, and its properties
are meticulously maintained and curated by the body to control the distribution
of material from the blood stream into the surrounding tissues. This project
will apply advanced microscopy techniques to study how material crosses the
polymer rich interface of the blood vessel wall, and seeks to build our basic
understanding of structure of the interface and its biological function. The
research effort is closely linked to an educational plan that seeks to develop
new laboratory experiences for students at the interface between physical and
life sciences. This plan is focused on the inclusion of undergraduate
researchers in the outlined research, the development of a new laboratory
course, and a sequence of related K-12 outreach activities. These endeavors seek
to establish strong links between the field of biophysical research, the
undergraduate life science curriculum, and K-12 cross-curricular activities to
highlight roles played by materials in living systems. This project will expand
our knowledge of the basic physics of the polymer rich interface in the blood
vessel wall and its role in maintaining the integrity of the blood vessel wall.
The results of this project may lead to the development of new drug delivery
methods or selective filtering technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical environment
of living cells plays an essential role in regulating cell function and
maintaining the integrity of tissue. In the vascular wall a polymer brush
tethered to the cell surface, known as the glycocalyx, forms a critical part of
the cellular microenvironment. Current models of the glycocalyx leave important
questions about their role in vascular function unanswered. Two areas of
particular importance are: (i) how these brushes are dynamically structured when
exposed to pulsatile fluid flow and (ii) how this affects key functions of the
vasculature such as material transport from the bloodstream to surrounding
tissues. This project will address these questions using fast particle tracking
and advanced fluid flow control to directly visualize the dynamics nanoparticles
interacting with the glycocalyx of living cells. The primary goal of this
project is to expand our understanding of the role of interfacial polymer
brushes in maintaining the integrity of the vasculature and regulating material
transport from the blood stream to the layer of endothelial cells in the blood
vessel wall. This could lead to new diagnostic techniques to detect the early
warning signs of vascular disease, reveal new mechanisms for drug delivery or
lead to new approaches for selective filtering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.