* 1847203
* CAREER: Unconventional Mid-infrared and Terahertz Sources Employing Graphene Plasmonics and Intersubband Transitions in Quantum Wells
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Peter Qiang Liu, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,661.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;The mid-infrared (MIR) to terahertz (THz)
spectral range has its unique and crucial scientific and technological
importance. Countless molecular species have strong and "fingerprint" like
absorption lines in the MIR to THz spectral range, and consequently absorption
spectroscopy based molecular sensing technologies with superior sensitivity and
selectivity can be developed in this spectral range. Furthermore, as the demand
for communication bandwidth keeps growing rapidly, wireless communication
technologies are moving from the GHz frequency range towards the THz frequency
range. Therefore, research advances in the MIR to THz range will continue to
drive development of technologies and applications in important areas such as
health care, homeland security, environmental protection, energy production,
communications and internet of things. However, current device technologies for
this spectral range are not as diverse and mature as those for the other
spectral ranges. Aligned with the long-term career goals of the principle
investigator, this CAREER proposal aims at developing new types of MIR and THz
light sources based on unconventional device architectures and operating
principles. Specifically, the proposed light sources will synergistically
combine the advantages of graphene plasmonics and intersubband transitions in
quantum wells, which are two powerful device technologies for the MIR to THz
spectral range. Exploiting strong interactions between intersubband transitions
in quantum wells and graphene surface plasmons (GSPs) is expected to lead to
devices with improved performances, lower cost and extended functionalities. The
proposed CAREER project will provide valuable opportunities and resources to
help the participating students becoming the next-generation scientists and
engineers who can play leading roles on the competitive global stage. The
principle investigator will also actively organize and participate outreach
activities which will disseminate the research outcomes and/or stimulate K-12
students' interests in the STEM disciplines. These activities will be designed
to attract participation of students of diverse backgrounds, including those
from the under-represented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;This proposed CAREER project aims at first thoroughly studying the
fundamental properties of strong interactions between GSPs and intersubband
transitions in quantum wells, and subsequently utilizing the obtained knowledge
to develop two types of unconventional MIR and THz sources, which are (1)
graphene plasmonic antenna-enhanced light emitters and (2) electrically-pumped
GSP sources. Coupling between MIR or THz GSPs and resonant intersubband
transitions in quantum wells establishes an intriguing physical system and a new
platform for device applications. This project will focus on investigating
several fundamental aspects of these interactions, including the potential
modification of transition selection rules, the Purcell effect, the dependence
of interaction strength on graphene carrier density and structure geometries,
and the transition energy shift associated with non-vertical transitions. A
comprehensive understanding of these aspects is crucial for the subsequent
device development. Conventional MIR and THz light emitters suffer from the low
efficiency of radiative transition process which has a lifetime by orders of
magnitude longer than the non-radiative lifetime. The proposed graphene
plasmonic antenna-enhanced MIR and THz light emitters aim at exploiting the
strong interactions between GSPs and intersubband transitions, which are
expected to lead to a drastic reduction of the radiative lifetime and hence a
significant improvement of output power and power efficiency. In contrast to the
conventional methods of generating GSPs via optical excitation, the proposed
devices employing graphene plasmonic waveguides coupling to intersubband
transitions are electrically pumped surface plasmon sources, which are much more
compact and convenient to use in applications such as on-chip sensing and
communications. Both types of proposed MIR and THz sources have large frequency
tunability, which is another key advantage of graphene based
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.