* 1847950
* CAREER: Small Molecule Activations Enabled by Coordination-Driven Self-Assembly
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Timothy Cook, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2024
* USD 675,000.00

Nature provides many examples of catalysts (molecules that speed reactions up)
that contain multiple metal atoms in their active sites. These catalysts are
very effective at changing small molecules into more desirable products and play
a role in many critical processes, such as photosynthesis and respiration.
Understanding how multiple metal atoms can work together requires control over
the size and shape of a given catalyst. In this project, Dr. Cook is using self-
assembly methods to design highly tunable catalysts in which size and shape can
be systematically changed to see how they affect small molecules. His group can
change the distance between metal centers, the type of metals present, and the
nature of the supporting organic building blocks. The study of these systems
provides a deeper understanding of small molecule activations. Ultimately, they
may serve as guides for the design of catalysts that enable renewable energy and
greener routes to chemical feedstocks. In parallel with this research program,
Dr. Cook is using 3D-printing technology as a tool to illustrate self-assembly
and other fundamental chemistry concepts with interactive, dynamic models for
the classroom. These efforts include a partnership with the Buffalo Public
School System to provide research opportunities and professional development for
teachers in the design and use of classroom materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Cook
of the University at Buffalo is using self-assembly as a synthetic methodology
to construct architectures in which metal-containing porphyrins, diglyoximes,
and related polypyrrole macrocycles serve as catalytically active sites. These
self-assembly reactions use metal-ligand bond formation as a driving force to
organize cofacial geometries. This synthetic approach provides modularity and
control over metal-metal separation, substrate access, structural rigidity, and
molecular modifications to tune electronic structure. The role of these
parameters on the electrochemical reduction of molecular oxygen, protons and
carbon dioxide is being established using activity studies, electrochemical
methods, and structural analyses. The resulting information about the structure-
activity relationships and mechanistic insight governing selectivity, turnover
frequency, and catalyst stability is providing a deeper understanding of small
molecule activations. Dr. Cook is actively designing classroom materials for
STEM education centered on interactive, dynamic models to illustrate self-
assembly and general chemistry concepts for use by high school teachers and
undergraduate lecturers. These activities involve the Buffalo Public School
System through research opportunities and teacher professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.