* 1847774
* CAREER: First-Principles Investigation of Energy Transport Within Ordered Organic Assemblies
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Sahar Sharifzadeh, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 542,320.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
computational research and education focused on understanding the interaction of
light with ordered assemblies of carbon-based organic molecules, with the goal
of realizing advanced solar energy conversion materials. Solar energy conversion
refers to the process of harnessing light from the sun and converting it to
electricity or chemical energy; this is a promising technology for addressing
the challenges associated with the projected future growth in energy needs. This
technology requires new materials, designed specifically to achieve more
efficient and inexpensive solar energy conversion devices. In contrast to the
traditional inorganic materials used in solar energy conversion devices, organic
materials are abundant, and their properties can be extensively tuned using
techniques of synthetic organic chemistry. The PI will utilize advanced computer
simulation techniques to investigate how electrons within organic assemblies
respond to light and develop physically intuitive models of the influence of
molecular structure on electronic properties. The goal of this research is to
use computer simulation to discover new rules to design organic assemblies that
can convert solar energy efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
integrate education and outreach with research through numerous channels. The PI
will incorporate simulation methods developed in this research project into the
graduate level course "Computational Materials Science". In collaboration with
the Boston University Technology Innovation Scholars Program, where
undergraduate students interested in becoming teachers will contribute to
teaching at diverse high schools throughout the Boston area, lesson plans will
be developed that incorporate the applicability of the research to solar energy
conversion. Together with the research team, the PI will participate in the
Boston University U-Design program, introducing middle school age kids to
computational science by means of design projects. In collaboration with the BU
Outreach and Diversity Program, the research team will deploy activity kits to
museums across the world, introducing the scientific concepts to the broader
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational research
and education aimed at developing a physically intuitive understanding of
optical excitations and energy transfer within organic assemblies. Organic
materials are a highly tunable class of optically active materials that are
promising for photovoltaics and artificial photosynthesis. The field of organic
chemistry can synthesize molecular assemblies with a great degree of precision;
however, understanding needed to design these systems for efficient energy
transfer is lacking. Theory and computation will be used to develop a deeper
physical intuition about the excited-states of organic materials. This project
focuses on the role of long-range order on the optical properties of organic
molecules in the condensed phase. The PI and research team will employ first-
principles electronic structure theory to better understand how optically
excited states within ordered organic assemblies can be controlled to deliver
improved photovoltaic and photocatalytic efficiency. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
determination of structure-property relationships is critical for the design of
new molecules; the PI and her research team will quantify aspects of the
optically excited state, such as the interaction of excitons with phonons, which
significantly impacts energy transfer and conversion but is challenging to
understand and quantify. Furthermore, these studies will shed light on the
behavior of electron-hole pairs in systems where excitonic effects are strong.
Additionally, new computational methodology will be developed for probing the
role of electron-phonon interactions, which are very difficult to characterize
in extended systems. Feedback from experimental collaborators aiming to validate
the predictions will be used to improve the computational approach, and thereby
increasing the impact of this research. The ultimate result of this research
will be to provide new design rules to enable the development of organic
materials that can efficiently direct optical excitations along molecular
assemblies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate education and
outreach with research through numerous channels. The PI will incorporate
simulation methods developed in this research project into the graduate level
course "Computational Materials Science". In collaboration with the Boston
University Technology Innovation Scholars Program, where undergraduate students
interested in becoming teachers will contribute to teaching at diverse high
schools throughout the Boston area, lesson plans will be developed that
incorporate the applicability of the research to solar energy conversion.
Together with the research team, the PI will participate in the Boston
University U-Design program, introducing middle school age kids to computational
science by means of design projects. In collaboration with the BU Outreach and
Diversity Program, the research team will deploy activity kits to museums across
the world, introducing the scientific concepts to the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.