* 1847843
* CAREER: Modulating Local Tumor Hypoxia using Cryogel Scaffolds to Regulate Dendritic Cell Function and Activity
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* SIDI BENCHERIF, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 620,046.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Hypoxia is an abnormal decrease of oxygen
levels in tissues. Although different tissues and cells have distinct thresholds
and susceptibility to hypoxia, at a cellular level, hypoxia and hypoxic
responses generally occur at approximately 1-3 % oxygen. Compelling evidence has
shown that reduced tissue oxygenation is present in various diseases, and more
particularly cancer. A large number of human solid tumors profoundly lack
oxygen, exhibiting hypoxic tumor areas; this condition is mainly due to an
imbalance between delivery of oxygen via the blood circulation and consumption
by cancer cells. Hypoxia can arise via a number of mechanisms. For instance,
fast growing hypoxic tumors typically have poor vessel bio-distribution,
increased vascular defects, and low vessel number. Furthermore, highly
proliferating cancer cells that outgrow the neovascularization also participate
in tumor hypoxia. An increasing list of cancers with hypoxic regions has been
reported over the last decade and include endometrial carcinoma, ovarian,
melanoma, lymphoma, breast, bladder, brain, head and neck, renal, colon,
gastric, pancreatic, prostate, and non-small cell lung cancers. The research
objective of this proposal is to apply standard methods of biomaterials science
and engineering to emulate a hypoxic tumor microenvironment and better
understand the interplay between tumor and dendritic cells, the major directors
of immune responses. The proposed studies are likely to offer new modalities in
cancer immunotherapy and are expected to justify the use of hypoxia-suppressive
biomaterials, reinforce tumoricidal functions of immune cells, and ultimately
increase tumor rejections. The educational goal of this proposal is to introduce
biomaterials science and engineering to high school students (develop hands-on
science curriculum, promote practical research experience, and foster STEM field
trips to the campus), enhance undergraduate research exposure and experience to
underrepresented students (Hispanic, African-American, and female), and expand
the Northeastern University co-op model to include graduate and academic lab
experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Hypoxic cancers
are usually aggressive, resistant to standard therapies, and thus very difficult
to eradicate. A better understanding of how these hypoxic cancer cells interact
with the immune system would allow tailoring of efficient therapies and better
outcomes. Hypoxia can inhibit differentiation, antigen capture, maturation,
lymph node homing of dendritic cells (DCs), the main regulators of immune
responses, which can impair downstream T cell development, differentiation and
cytotoxic activity. Immunosuppression represents one of the fundamental tumor
immune evasion mechanisms. Therefore, it is important to expand our
understanding on how hypoxia affects DCs and find ways to circumvent hypoxia-
driven immunosuppression locally and restore immune cell function and activity.
To address this need, the primary research objective of this proposal is to
engineer biomaterials to modulate the local hypoxic environment to understand
immune cell function and activity. To achieve this goal, this proposal has three
aims: 1) Design injectable oxygen-generating cryogel scaffolds to controllably
deliver oxygen, 2) Engineer a B16-F10 melanoma tumor microenvironment in three-
dimension and deliver oxygen locally to modulate inherent and tumor-induced
hypoxia, and 3) Disrupt hypoxia and modulate oxygen tension to understand how
local oxygenation can regulate dendritic cell survival and function and impact
their activity in an in-vitro ovalbumin (B16-F10/OVA) melanoma model. The long-
term educational goal of the proposal is to promote and train the next
generation of scientists to work in academia, industry and clinical settings
developing innovative biomaterials to improve human quality of life. The major
aims of this program are: 1) Introduce K-12 students to Biomaterials Science
(develop a hands-on science curriculum, implement practical research experience,
and foster STEM field trips to campus), 2) Enhance undergraduate research
exposure and experience to underrepresented students (Hispanic, African-
American, and female), and 3) Expand the Northeastern University co-op model to
include graduate and academic lab experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.