* 1847129
* CAREER: Investigation of strain and superior functionalization schemes for large enhancement of thermal conductivity in polymer-graphene nanocomposites and binary semiconductors
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Jivtesh Garg, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

High thermal conductivity polymers and semiconductors hold potential to
significantly improve thermal management in wide range of applications including
electronics, automobiles, aerospace, power generation and energy harvesting. The
research objective of this project is to investigate ways to significantly
enhance thermal conductivity of polymer-semiconductor composite materials,
through superior bonding between polymer and graphene with higher interfacial
thermal transport and by controlling orientation of polymer chains and graphene
nanoplatelets. The educational objectives of the project are to engage high
school students through a summer camp program. To stimulate fascination with
thermal transport, high school students will measure thermal response in
different nanocomposites through colorful visualization of temperatures maps
using infra-red imaging. Simultaneously the program will aim to enhance
diversity by engaging Native American students from various tribal colleges in
Oklahoma. The participants will develop understanding of both atomistic
simulations and also perform experimental characterization of thermal
transport.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Within polymers, thermal conductivity is
highest along the polymer chain axis. Simultaneous alignment of polymer chains
and planar direction of nanoplatelets, to conduct heat along the most efficient
directions in the two components, is achieved in this project through strain.
Alignment is characterized through microscopy and imaging. Non-equilibrium
Green?s function technique has been used to reveal covalent bonding schemes
enabling superior phonon transmission between polymer and graphene.
Functionalized polymer composites prepared through such schemes are thermally
characterized in this work through both experiments and atomistic simulations.
Energy gap in the vibrational spectra of semiconductors has been shown to
suppress scattering of low energy phonons, leading to large enhancement in their
lifetimes, and overall material thermal conductivity. Strain can further
increase energy gap, resulting in higher phonon lifetimes. Strain effects are
quantified in this project by deriving interatomic force interactions from
density-functional theory and using them with an exact solution of the phonon
Boltzmann transport equation to predict thermal conductivity. Design of next
generation high thermal conductivity polymers and semiconductors will lead to
high impact opportunities for improving thermal management in a wide array of
technologies. This award is jointly funded by the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Directorate of
Engineering and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research in the
Office of Integrative Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.