* 1847939
* CAREER: Molecular-Scale Behavior of Actinide Elements at the Mineral-Water Interface
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Amy Hixon, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 06/30/2024
* USD 472,150.00

Professor Amy E. Hixon of the University of Notre Dame is supported by a CAREER
award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences program in the Chemistry Division
to study actinides. The actinide elements are those with atomic numbers 89-103
(i.e., actinium through lawrencium, including uranium, thorium and plutonium).
All actinides are radioactive; that is, they release energy upon radioactive
decay. Several actinides (e.g. uranium) are used in nuclear reactors and nuclear
weapons. Americium is used in most modern smoke detectors. The actinides are
important to society due to their use in medicine, power generation, and
national security. Since the actinide elements are radioactive, they are far
less studied than other elements on the periodic table. In this project, Dr.
Hixon studies the environmental behavior of the actinide element plutonium using
both experiments and models. The goal is to address the relationship between
plutonium concentration, the particle size of the solid, and the structure of
the solid. The education of a future workforce that understands the health and
safety aspects of radioactive elements contributes directly to advancing
national health and securing the national defense. By using the facilities at
Los Alamos National Laboratory, this CAREER program gives students the
opportunity to work within federal laboratory facilities leveraging and
advancing new and novel techniques such as Pu-239 NMR spectroscopy. The nuclear
energy lesson plan kits are a valuable resource for the South Bend Community
School Corporation, which has a large minority student population. Finally, the
"Get to Know Nuclear" Girl Scout events serve as a platform to inspire young
women to study science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the sorption and reduction of
plutonium at the solid-water interface. Experiments involve batch experiments
and spectroscopic analyses, such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy, nuclear
magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and magnetic susceptibility measurements. These
approaches show how three variables affect the structure of plutonium associated
with the solid. The first variable is plutonium concentration. The second
variable is the concentration of aluminum in an iron mineral. The third variable
is the particle size of the solid. Modeling shows how and why these variables
are important and are used to predict the behavior of plutonium in new systems.
Dr. Hixon is also developing lesson plans to teach high school students about
radioactive materials and hosting events for local Girl
Scouts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.