* 1847133
* CAREER: Multiscale Optimization of Additively Manufacturable Spatially Varying Cellular Microstructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Ali Tamijani, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Cellular structures rely on patterns of solid materials and voids to achieve
desirable combinations of high strength, light weight and other properties. A
well-known example of this is the honeycomb pattern, but in general a cellular
structure can consist of cells with varying shape, size and orientation.
Cellular structures are important in many applications, including light-weight
aerospace structures, biomedical devices, energy absorbers, heat exchangers, and
acoustic insulation. However, general techniques for optimally designing
cellular structures remain a challenge. This Faculty Early Career Development
Program (CAREER) award supports fundamental research to create new techniques
for optimally designing cellular structures to achieve unrivaled performance for
specific engineering applications. The design approach will permit cellular
shape and size to vary optimally throughout the structure and will incorporate
manufacturing constraints associated with 3D printing techniques in the
optimization process. Two applications are identified to evaluate the
methodology and demonstrate its benefit to society: improved orthopedic implants
and lightweight aircraft wing structures for improved energy efficiency. This
CAREER project will integrate cellular structure design and fabrication concepts
into interactive learning plans through hands-on demonstrations, visual tools,
concept-mapping, and a cellular design computer app. Aimed at audiences from
K-12 to the general public, with specific emphasis on diverse underrepresented
groups, the educational plan consists of four components: (1) educator training,
(2) student extracurricular activities, (3) curriculum development, and (4)
public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theoretical and experimental
foundations of this CAREER award will allow a shift from optimizing the topology
of macrostructures to topology and morphology of cellular microstructures
expanding design flexibility without placing excessive demands on computational
resources. This project provides new fundamental understanding of abnormal
features such as disconnectivity in optimized cellular microstructures and the
level of homogeneity in the fabricated optimized designs. Innovative aspects of
the research include utilizing a harmonics decomposition that is adaptable to
different cell types to represent the cellular configurations in the
optimization process and implementing cell size and length scale constraints in
the methodology to ensure fabrication feasibility. The relationships between the
optimized cellular geometries and mechanical properties and structural
performance are studied through simulation and experimental testing. The
optimized microstructures will be 3D printed and various manufacturability
characteristics such as deformation and powder trapping will be studied for
different cell types and length scales. To investigate the effectiveness of the
novel optimization framework for different design requirements, application
studies will be performed on optimizing an orthopedic implant for stiffness and
strength and multi-disciplinary design optimization of a honeycomb wing skin
with octet truss internal support structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.