* 1847138
* CAREER: Enabling Non-Line-of-Sight Imaging with Terahertz Holography
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Georgios Trichopoulos, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Title: Non-line-of-Sight Imaging Using Terahertz
Waves&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This work is focused on using
terahertz (THz) waves to implement cameras that see hidden objects. THz waves
are extremely high frequency signals (100 GHz 10 THz) that enable unique imaging
capabilities. Unless looking into a well-polished surface, human eyes and
regular cameras can only discern objects that are in the line of sight,
therefore an object located around a corner is not visible. On the other hand,
terahertz (THz) waves exhibit strong reflections from common building surfaces.
Using THz cameras walls or doors can appear as mirrors, thus allowing to peek
inside rooms and cavities otherwise hidden from direct sight. Such capability
will augment vision and situational awareness of first responders and rescuers
in unreachable and uncharted environments. Interestingly, non-line-sight imaging
capabilities could be leveraged from the next generation of ultra-fast wireless
communication systems. Future communication systems will be equipped with
antennas that can operate as cameras and transfer data. The synergy of THz
communications and imaging will enable uninterrupted links and user mobility.
Additionally, non-line-of-sight imaging will enable localization of users with
centimeter-level accuracy for applications in virtual/augmented reality or
assisted healthcare. The proposed project will also emphasize on educating a
broader audience of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students. With the
use of augmented reality headsets, the students will implement software that
allows the visualization of THz imaging capabilities in the real-world.
Additionally, the PI will collaborate with local first responders and military
veterans to educate them through workshops on the capabilities and opportunities
of the new imaging technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is
to design image reconstruction algorithms and hardware topologies that will
enable real-time, 3D THz imaging of both line-of-sight (LoS) and non-line-of-
sight (NLoS) objects from a single observation point. The five-year career-
development plan has the following objectives: 1) Analyze the mechanisms that
distort images in multipath imaging and implement algorithms to invert the
process for accurate image reconstruction. 2) Design topologies for NLoS THz
imaging and understand the requirements for communication and imaging
coexistence. 3) Implement methods for simultaneous localization and mapping and
synergy between imaging and communication protocols for efficient channel
estimation. The intellectual merit of this work is to understand wavefront
distortions of THz waves in multipath and multi-reflection scenarios and use
this knowledge to implement inverse scattering methods to reconstruct images
from backscattered signals. This knowledge will also help us understand the
hardware imaging requirements and how NLoS imaging can collaborate with
communication hardware for novel applications. Using the 3D images of the
surrounding, the proposed research will provide a new approach for channel
estimation for the next generation of ultrafast wireless communications. In the
long term, this research will contribute to the national security by enabling
first response, surveillance and reconnaissance in hostile and uncharted
environment, allow autonomous navigation in crowed spaces, and provide a path
for the integration of imaging and communications for faster wireless data
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.