* 1847962
* CAREER: Correlated Topological Phases in Rare-earth-based Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Madhab Neupane, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 01/31/2024
* USD 695,887.00

Non-Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Materials can be classified into two
categories based on the movement of the carriers: metals and insulators. Metals
conduct electricity because of the free movement of the electrons whereas
insulators cannot conduct electricity. The topological insulator (TI) is a new
state of matter in which a material is non-conducting throughout its bulk but is
guaranteed to have very stable conducting states on its surface. This surface
conduction is protected against disturbance by the basic constraints of the
material's underlying symmetry. Topological properties of materials are a
fascinating subject of study in contemporary condensed matter physics. The
discovery of the first TI tremendously accelerated research into phases of
matter characterized by non-trivial topological states such as Dirac, Weyl and
nodal-line semimetals, the topological crystalline insulator, and the
topological superconductor. Dirac and Weyl semimetals provide a platform to
study both bulk (linearly dispersive) and surface (Fermi arc) states. It is
important to note that, to date, most of the observed topological materials
realized experimentally are found in weakly correlated electronic band systems
where the correlation between the electrons are largely ignored. This research
proposes to discover and understand the electron correlation in topological
materials. Topological quantum materials promise to bring upon a new age in
areas such as spintronics and quantum computation among other next generation
technologies. Progress in these areas helps to increase the ability to store and
process larger amounts of data at higher speeds. There are other applications of
strategic interest such as cryptography and safe communications. This project
aims to help recruit, mentor, and prepare underrepresented minority students
into Physics PhD programs through the American Physical Society (APS)-funded
Bridge Program as well as to increase the production of highly qualified high
school Physics teachers through "PhysTEC" program. Education materials based on
the progress of the quantum materials are prepared to help students, teachers
and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The
field of topological materials has grown exponentially since the first three-
dimensional topological insulator material was discovered in 2007. It is
currently impacting large bodies of condensed matter physics, chemistry,
materials sciences, and engineering communities worldwide. Moreover, most work
thus far has focused on simple materials where electronic correlation effects
can be largely ignored, and the topological properties are well described in
terms of a single-particle band structure. The introduction of strong electron
correlation opens up a novel field of research in a topological insulating
state. This project aims to discover and understand the unusual Dirac fermion
states in strongly correlated electron systems, the nature of the correlations
in these novel states are distinctly different from those found in graphene,
topological insulators, and Weyl semimetal. Specifically, this project utilizes
high-resolution angle-, spin- and time-resolved photoemission spectroscopy
techniques to study the electronic and spin properties as well as the momentum
resolved dynamical properties of the bulk and symmetry-protected surface
properties of rare-earth (4f)-based compounds to discover and understand the
possible signature of the strongly correlated topological phase. The planned
research provides the electronic signatures for the correlated topological
phase, heavy Weyl fermion phase and magnetic topological insulator phases, as
well as their light-matter interactions, thus opening up a new direction of
research into the topological and Weyl phases facilitated by strong
correlations. The educational component of the project is to motivate students
from high schools to universities to pursue quantum materials research so that
they become potential leaders in the field of condensed matter physics,
spectroscopy, vacuum technology, laser technology and nanoscience. The
educational plans create a system that inspires, educates, and provides the
opportunities necessary for the younger generations to take steps and become the
scientists of tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.