* 1847398
* CAREER:  Reducing the projection uncertainty for Arctic sea ice loss
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Alexandra Jahn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 06/30/2024
* USD 833,726.00

Arctic summer sea ice cover has been declining rapidly over the past few
decades. Scientists estimate that future warming will lead to even greater
losses, with implications not just for the Arctic but for the global climate
system as a whole. Currently, different climate models exhibit a wide spread in
their predictions of sea ice loss. In this CAREER award, the investigator will
assess the causes of these discrepancies with the ultimate goal of reducing the
uncertainty of Arctic sea ice projections. She will also develop a course based
undergraduate research experience (CURE) class in climate science involving 80
students over 4 years at her home institution. CURE classes are effective in
increasing student retention and self-efficacy in other disciplines, with
particularly positive benefits for diverse students. Class materials will be
made available on CUREnet for other faculty interested in implementing a CURE
research experience in Atmospheric and Oceanic Sciences. Finally, the project
will support training for a postdoctoral scientist and graduate student and will
further the career of a female, tenure track
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate the physical
causes of the large spread in Arctic sea ice model projections and mean states
between climate models, with the goal of enabling process-based model selection
to refine sea ice projections. The Coupled Model Intercomparison Project Phase 6
(CMIP6) models provide the first opportunity for this type of process-based sea
ice analysis, due to the new output requested by the Sea-Ice Model Inter-
comparison Project (SIMIP) for CMIP6 and spearheaded by the investigator as
SIMIP co-chair. This CAREER award will provide insights into the contributions
of sea ice dynamics, sea ice thermodynamics, and ocean mixed layer processes to
the spread in sea ice predictions. It will also provide an assessment of the
ability of models to simulate realistic sea ice internal variability and
facilitate the improvement of future climate models by providing information to
modeling groups on important processes that can explain model
biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.