* 1847612
* CAREER: Deformational Evolution and Serpentinization of the Mantle Wedge Corner in Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Ikuko Wada, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 08/31/2024
* USD 546,410.00

Subduction zones are regions where one tectonic plate sinks into the mantle
beneath another plate. In between the two plates, a wedge-shaped piece of the
upper mantle experiences extensive physical and chemical transformations. While
cooling down, the corner of the mantle wedge is sheared and hydrated by fluids
that arise from the dehydrating sinking plate. As rocks become hydrated through
a process called serpentinization, the wedge corner becomes weaker and lighter.
Serpentinization also causes rock expansion and changes in permeability which in
turn affects fluid migration in subduction zones. The resulting fluid
distribution and weakening have strong implications for important geological
processes, such as great earthquakes and volcanic eruptions in subduction-zone
settings. To better constrain the physical properties of the wedge corner, the
PI will quantify the spatial extent of serpentinization using numerical
modeling. The models will account for geophysical observations collected in
subduction zones in North America and Japan and incorporate experimental data on
rock deformation and hydration. The project outcomes will further our
understanding of subduction-zone dynamics. They will also help interpreting
seismic observations and assessing geohazards near plate boundaries. This
project will support an early-career female scientist, the training of two
graduate students in Earth Science, and educational outreach toward K-12
students and teachers, and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inferring the extent
of serpentinization in the mantle-wedge corner from seismic velocities is
challenging because of the strong elastic anisotropy of the mineral antigorite.
Antigorite is the main product of serpentinization in the wedge corner. It
develops crystal-preferred orientations (CPOs) through deformation and
topotactic growth from its parent mineral olivine. This can make the wedge
corner highly anisotropic, but antigorite CPOs in this region are not well
understood. Fracture permeability in the wedge corner controls the extent of
serpentinization. However, the effect of background and reaction-induced
stresses on fracture permeability is also unclear. To quantify serpentinization
in the wedge corner, the PI will use three distinct classes of numerical models:
(1) a time-dependent thermo-mechanical model for mineral texture evolution, (2)
a mechanical model for spatial variations in the stress state and (3) a
hydraulic-chemical-mechanical model for the development of reaction-induced
fractures. The models will account for seismological, geodetic, gravity and
magnetic observations in the forearc regions of three subduction zones
(Cascadia, Nankai, and NE Japan). The PI will also integrate in the modeling
experimental results on the rheology and microstructures of the relevant
minerals. Model outcomes will help to constrain CPOs in the mantle wedge corner
and the degree of serpentinization. They will also improve our understanding of
background and reaction-induced stresses and their effects on serpentinization.
This project has direct implications for our understanding of subduction zone
dynamics and broader implications for the assessment of geohazards near plate
boundaries. It will support an early-career female scientist, two graduate
students and educational outreaches toward K-12 students and teachers, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.