* 1847782
* CAREER: Proximity Effects in van der Waals Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Patrick Vora, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 446,433.00

Non-technical description: Quantum phenomena promise to reshape the
technological landscape over the coming decades. A drastic improvement in
computing power is expected when quantum computers become reality, but this may
also present new security risks as quantum computers can break conventional
encryption schemes with ease. Quantum cryptography offers a solution by
providing unbreakable encryption through the utilization of entangled photon
pairs. However, the lack of efficient methods to produce entangled photons,
along with a strong demand for workforce fluent in quantum science, are
significant challenges. The main objective of this NSF CAREER research is to
develop a new method for entangled photon production based on two-dimensional
materials. By exploring the new physics present at the two-dimensional
superconductor-semiconductor interfaces, the principal investigator lays the
foundation for entangled photon production by Cooper pair injection. The
educational objective of this CAREER proposal is to improve the curricula at
George Mason University to prepare students for entering the growing quantum
workforce. The principal investigator works with local communities to create a
transdisciplinary team focusing on quantum materials, to build an active and
vibrant community of materials scientists through public engagements, and to
inspire underrepresented K-12 youth to pursue a career in the quantum sciences
through outreach activities. These efforts take advantage of existing outreach
programs at George Mason University as well as the principal investigator's
newly founded Quantum Materials Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description: The principal investigator endeavors to build a strong research
program at George Mason University focused on understanding quantum phenomena in
two-dimensional materials. The research objective of this NSF CAREER project is
to explore proximity effects in two-dimensional materials with a focus on the
superconductor-semiconductor interface. The ultimate goal of this research is to
develop new pathways for a high-purity, on-demand entangled photon source for
quantum information technology. The research approach relies on the assembly and
characterization of van der Waals heterostructures. The principal investigator
uses optical, magnetic, and electronic characterization techniques to study the
properties of these heterostructures with a variety of different stacking
arrangements between tungsten diselenide and niobium diselenide. The envisioned
outcomes of this research project are: 1) a new understanding of the interaction
between Cooper-pairs and excitons using magneto-optical spectroscopy, 2)
fabrication and exploration of superconducting light-emitting diodes based on
van der Waals heterostructures, and 3) production of entangled photons from an
atomically-thin superconducting light-emitting diode. The principal
investigator's studies take advantage of the unique facilities developed in his
laboratory and the strong relationships with researchers at nearby national
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.