* 1847818
* CAREER: Exploring Mysterious Whistler Mode Waves in Earth's Plasmaspheric Plumes
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Wen Li, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 764,558.00

This project investigates how very low frequency radio waves, known as whistler
mode waves, affect the Earth's Radiation Belt dynamics. Lightning produces
whistler waves, which travel along the Earth's magnetic field lines.
Understanding these waves and how they are amplified is important to national
security and commercial interests. Military and commercial communications
utilize the same very low frequency radio wavelengths and are therefore
disrupted by whistler waves. The resulting scientific results will lead to
improvement of predictive space weather models. This fits directly into the
goals of the National Space Weather Strategy and Action Plan, released in 2015.
The project supports a female faculty member and will train and educate graduate
and undergraduate students in both research and outreach activities. The
proposed outreach program will target K-12 students through development of
interactive in-class presentations, hands-on activities, and tours of the BU
observatory and planetarium. The outreach will engage undergraduate and graduate
students in both research and communicating space science to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Whistler mode waves in plasmaspheric plumes exhibit
unexpectedly large amplitudes that suggest that waves in this region are very
effective in driving energetic electron precipitation. Currently, radiation belt
models do not incorporate this effect. In order to understand the role whistler
waves in plasmaspheric plumes play on radiation belt dynamics, this award will
combine theory, modeling, and data analysis. Quasilinear diffusion theory will
be used to evaluate electron scattering due to wave-particle interactions. This
will be combined with modeling from a Full Diffusion code to calculate electron
diffusion coefficients and a 3D diffusion code to simulate radiation belt
electron dynamics. Analysis of observations from multiple spacecraft, including
the Van Allen Probes, THEMIS, POES/MetOp, and GPS, will establish density, wave,
and particle properties associated with the generation of whistler waves in
plasmaspheric plumes. The data will be compared to the developed model to answer
the science questions. The study is unique in that it focuses on whistler waves
generated in plumes, a region not previously
investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.