* 1847493
* CAREER: Formation, Growth, and Phase State of Organic Nanoaerosols in Indoor Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Brandon Boor, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Although air pollution from automobiles, factories, and other outdoor sources is
well-recognized as a potential health risk by the public, Americans spend 90% of
their time indoors. It is thus essential to improve the quality of air in homes
and offices. Human exposure to particles in air pollution is responsible for
adverse health effects. An important class of indoor particles are nanoaerosols
- particles smaller than 100 nanometers in size. New research is needed to
better understand the fate and transport of nanoaerosols in buildings to better
predict human exposure. The goals of this CAREER development plan are to
elucidate the fundamental mechanisms governing the dynamics of indoor
nanoaerosols and to inspire a new generation of engineers to solve emerging
indoor air quality (IAQ) challenges. This research will provide a foundation to
transform our ability to improve IAQ and promote human health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research seeks to understand the complex
formation, growth, and transformation of organic nanoaerosols (nOA) in indoor
environments. The specific research objectives are to: 1) investigate nOA
formation mechanisms down to molecular length scales using state-of-the-art
aerosol instrumentation; 2) explore nOA coagulation and condensational growth
dynamics; 3) discover how size-resolved nOA phase state is influenced by indoor
nOA source type, relative humidity, temperature, and molecular composition; 4)
elucidate the role of nOA phase state on hygroscopic growth/shrinkage and
filtration kinetics; and 5) characterize nOA dynamics in occupied environments
through field campaigns at the Purdue ReNEWW House (Retrofit Net-zero: Energy,
Water, and Waste) and Herrick Living Lab offices. This research will transform
our ability to observe nOA nucleation events at the nanometer level, thereby
establishing how nOA formation, growth, and phase state vary with different
indoor nOA sources. New knowledge on how nOA transformations influence
deposition on heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) filters will be
produced. This research will utilize full-scale building test systems to
understand nOA transport, transformation, and exposure under realistic building
operations. An educational framework will be developed that will inspire a new
and diverse generation of civil and environmental engineering students to solve
IAQ challenges facing the U.S. and global community. Through a combination of
service, experiential, and team-based learning, this CAREER education plan will
engage and excite undergraduate and graduate students at Purdue University in a
holistic way. International IAQ projects in Kenya and outreach events at the
ReNEWW House will offer a platform for demonstrations of the nOA research to the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.