* 1847938
* CAREER: More Accurate Galaxy Merger Rates to Propel Studies of Gravitational Waves and Star Formation in Galaxy Mergers
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Julia Comerford, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,039,498.00

Mergers are one of the main drivers in the evolution of galaxies over cosmic
time as they morph from aggregates of gas into spiral and elliptical structures.
Knowledge of their status will provide the best possible empirical merger rate
as function of stellar mass, allowing the determination of the mechanisms for
the dynamical evolution of SMBH binaries to the gravitational wave regime, and
the role of galaxy mergers in driving star formation. These estimates will be
used to answer two fundamental research questions: How long does it take for
SMBH binaries to merge? What are the roles of galaxy mergers and secular
processes in driving star formation? A public education program in astronomy
will be given at Rocky Mountain National Park by two CU undergraduates under the
supervision of the PI to educate the public on scientific topics related to the
research program. It is estimated that this program will reach 12,000 to 18,000
visitors to the park over the five years of this grant. During the academic year
the students will devote their time to research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
largest integral field spectrographic survey of galaxies, MaNGA, will enable
merger classifications for over 10,000 galaxies, which will be combined with
merger timescales from the latest GADGET-3 galaxy simulations and IllustrisTNG
cosmological simulations to make the best possible empirical estimates of the
galaxy merger rate as a function of stellar mass, mass ratio, and redshift.
These estimates will address understanding of the role of galaxy merger rates
and the processes giving rise to SMBHs as well as the timescale for their
mergers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.