* 1847666
* CAREER: Data-Driven Personalized Chronic Disease Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Anil Aswani, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award will contribute to
the advancement of the national health and welfare by designing effective data-
driven methods for personalized management of chronic diseases. Increased
incidence and prevalence of chronic conditions such as diabetes and obesity have
led to unsustainable growth in U.S. healthcare spending and have significantly
impacted well-being. Currently, chronic diseases are managed by choosing
treatments based on average patient outcomes in clinical studies with relatively
homogeneous patient populations. While it is well-recognized that an
individual's disease trajectory is influenced by patient-specific traits,
personalized treatment has been limited by difficulties in disentangling the
complex relationships between treatment plans, patient characteristics, disease
prognosis, and adherence to treatments. This award will support the development
and validation of algorithms and models that combine data from large patient
cohorts and from specific patients in order to bring management of chronic
diseases into the home setting. The educational components of this award will
support development of hands-on teaching modules and research mentoring
opportunities, with the aim of broadening interest in operations research and
its impact on problems in healthcare, particularly among underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will develop and analyze new tools
to identify causal relationships from medical data, develop and analyze new
tools to personalize treatments based upon identified causal relationships while
considering dynamic and stochastic variations, and validate effectiveness of
these tools through simulation studies based on medical datasets of diabetes and
weight loss patients. The approach will be to develop new statistical and
optimization methods that identify causal relationships between treatment plans,
patient characteristics, disease prognosis, and adherence to treatments; and
then use these estimated causal relationships to personalize treatments. This
research goes beyond existing approaches that identify only correlations in data
and which generally lead to sub-optimal treatment plans. Anticipated outcomes of
this research include new statistical and optimization models, new theoretical
analyses, and a clinically-relevant understanding of the strengths and
limitations of the developed models. Success in this project has the potential
to improve health outcomes and reduce healthcare costs through increased
personalization of treatment and automation of healthcare
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.