* 1847793
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM/IEEE Symposium on Edge Computing (ACM/IEEE SEC)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Yifan Zhang, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Matt Mutka
* 02/28/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This award is to assist United States-based graduate students to attend the
Third Association for Computer Machinery (ACM)/Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Symposium on Edge Computing (SEC 2018) in Bellevue,
Washington. Participation in SEC 2018 and similar conferences are valuable and
important activities of the graduate school experience. It provides students
with the opportunity to interact with more senior researchers, and exposes
students to leading work and practical industry practices in this important area
of research. This may have an important impact on career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will be held in Bellevue,
Washington on October 25-27, will span three days, and will consist of technical
paper presentations, panels, posters, and demonstrations. It will also feature
keynote speeches from leading researchers and practitioners in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student travel to conferences is an important activity.
Funds will be dispersed with preference given to students who would not
otherwise be able to attend the conference and students who are not already
scheduled to present a paper, paying particular attention to diversity and
relevance of the student's research interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.