* 1847806
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Variation in human bone structure across subsistence strategy transitions
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Timothy Ryan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 28,556.00

Humans have lightly built skeletons compared to both non-human primates and
extinct human ancestors. Most research on human skeletal variation has focused
on comparing bone structure among geographically, genetically, and behaviorally
diverse human groups. In order to understand the influence of behavior and
mobility on human bone structure, this doctoral dissertation project will
quantify skeletal variation among human groups that are genetically and
geographically similar, but behaviorally distinct. This research integrates
archaeological evidence of human behavior and microcomputed tomography data to
investigate bone structure as an intersection between behavior and biology. Low
bone mass related health complications are a prominent expense within the U.S.
healthcare system; this project will provide insights into the factors that may
contribute to the risk of low bone mass related health issues from an
anthropological perspective. The project will also contribute to the development
educator workshops for using publicly available 3D image data for classroom-
based research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent work has found that human
groups with higher levels of activity tend to have more robust cortical and
trabecular bone structure compared to groups with relatively lower activity
levels. However, much of this research has relied on comparing geographically
and genetically distinct human groups. This project investigates the
relationship between cortical and trabecular bone structural variation across
several post-cranial elements within and between human groups that are
genetically and geographically similar, but behaviorally distinct in order to
test whether the relationship between behavior and bone structure is maintained,
or if other factors such as diet, genetic background, and environment play a
larger role in forming adult skeletal phenotype than previously considered.
Microcomputed tomography scan data of the humerus, cervical vertebra, femur,
tibia, talus, and calcaneus will be collected. Cortical and trabecular bone
structural variation will be quantified and compared between groups with
different subsistence strategies including foragers, horticulturalists, and
intensive agriculturalists. Additionally, the amount of variation in cortical
and trabecular bone will be investigated within and between both individuals and
skeletal elements in order to understand how different levels of bone structural
organization respond to variation in subsistence strategy and mechanical
loading.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.