* 1847469
* CAREER: Controlling Low Temperature Plasma Activation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Elijah Thimsen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Low temperature plasmas (LTPs) have been used successfully to excite relatively
inert materials into states that promote useful chemical reactions. Applications
of LTPs are diverse and include bonding of advanced lightweight structural
materials, semiconductor processing, carbon dioxide utilization, wastewater
treatment, plasma-assisted wound healing, and agricultural technologies. The
discovery and exploration of LTP activation processes has historically proceeded
by trial and error, which is expensive and time-consuming. This proposal aims to
develop a fundamental understanding of LTPs to accelerate the development of new
applications based on them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research hypothesis of this
project is that chemical reactions occurring in LTPs proceed towards a
superlocal equilibrium state, which can be derived from first principles.
Preliminary data supports the hypothesis, which will be further tested
experimentally using gas-phase reactions that are of interest for energy and
environmental applications. Under conditions of superlocal equilibrium,
different species can have different temperatures at the same location in space.
The superlocal equilibrium state in LTPs is expected to be a function of the
background gas temperature, electron temperature, total pressure, electron
concentration, and mole numbers of different species. Chemical systems
containing carbon, hydrogen and oxygen will be studied that are of considerable
interest for energy and environmental applications, with carbon dioxide and
methane being two key molecules. To characterize the C-H-O system, which is
multiphase, a robust and reliable method will be developed to measure plasma
parameters over a wide pressure range in LTPs that produce solids. Integration
of research and education will be focused on developing active learning modules
on chemical equilibria for high school students, in collaboration with a
Chemistry Teacher from a local High School, and for undergraduate students
taking a Thermodynamics course at Washington
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.