* 1847828
* CAREER: Multiscale Assembly of Conjugated Polymers at Dynamic Reconfigurable Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2025
* Ying Diao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlled assembly of electrically
active materials has been a cornerstone to the electronics and energy
industries. Recent years have witnessed a surge of semiconducting polymers which
promise diverse applications from flexible electronics and transparent solar
cells to imperceptible medical devices. However, it remains a central challenge
to control the assembly of semiconducting polymers from the molecular to the
device scales, which critically impact their device performance. This research
addresses this challenge by developing dynamic, reconfigurable interfaces to
direct the assembly of semiconducting polymers into highly ordered structures
across length scales. The fundamental mechanism of surface-directed polymer
assembly will be elucidated to guide the design of such interfaces. This
approach, inspired by how biominerals (e.g. bone) are formed, is in contrast to
conventional approaches wherein highly ordered, rigid surfaces are employed to
direct assembly of electronic materials. This work may ultimately enable high-
performance, low-cost printed electronic, energy and biomedical devices in forms
that seamlessly interact with the human body and the living environment, which
would have impact on the electronic, energy and healthcare industries. The
fundamental insights from the planned work can be further extended to areas
beyond semiconducting polymers, given the broad applicability of surface-
directed assembly to the manufacturing of a wide range of functional materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities of the project are integrated
with the research component, aiming at narrowing the gap between increasing
demand in high-tech workforce and limited enrollment in STEM education in the
US. Both polymer sciences and electronics have been at the center stage of high-
tech industries. The overarching goal is to attract, nurture and retain STEM
talents, particularly women, through public engagement, educational outreach,
undergraduate and graduate education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to elucidate the fundamental
mechanisms of interfacially-driven assembly of conjugated polymers from the
molecular to centimeter scale, and to develop a new dynamic templating approach
to achieve polymer assemblies with prescribed order and controlled properties.
Although it is known that the multiscale morphology of conjugated polymers
(molecular conformation/packing, mesoscale domain size/orientation, macroscale
crystallinity/alignment) can modulate the electronic, optical, and mechanical
properties by orders of magnitude, it remains a central challenge to assemble
conjugated polymers into highly ordered structures across multiple length
scales. This project will provide better understanding of the assembly mechanism
of semi-rigid donor-acceptor conjugated polymers, which exhibit distinct
assembly behavior from the well-studied flexible polymers. The planned work
focuses on a particularly important problem in this area: to elucidate the role
of interfaces in directing conjugated polymer assembly, considering the
predominance of surface-induced nucleation during thin-film deposition from
solution. A key aspect that distinguishes this work from previous research is
the focus on dynamic, reconfigurable interfaces. This approach is inspired by
dynamic, cooperative assemblies ubiquitous in biological systems, which require
minimal energy input to attain exquisite structures across length scales. Using
a hypothesis-driven approach, this research will provide new fundamental
insights on polymer assembly at dynamic, reconfigurable interfaces by
complementing in-situ multiscale structural characterizations with free-energy
modeling based on nucleation theory. This study will lead to fundamentally new
insights on macromolecular assembly -- a subject at the heart of materials
research. Many polymer assembly processes take place at interfaces due to
generally lower free energy barriers, whereas the mechanism of surface-directed
assembly process is much less understood; this is a challenge that this work
ultimately addresses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.