* 1847791
* CAREER: Ocean-atmosphere interactions through the lens of stable water isotopologues
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Jessica Conroy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2024
* USD 698,085.00

How large-scale spatial patterns of precipitation and evaporation over the
oceans will vary in the future remains uncertain. This project will advance
scientific understanding of the hydrologic cycle and how it is archived in key
oceanic and atmospheric variables over years to centuries in the tropical
Pacific. It serves as a key example of interdisciplinary research that
integrates oceanic and atmospheric perspectives on the hydrologic cycle and
incorporates modern observations, model simulations, and paleoclimate data. This
project will also provide mentoring and training opportunities for the next
generation of the geoscience workforce through an authentic research-based
undergraduate course and the NSF-funded STEMSEAS (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Math Student Experiences Aboard Ships) program, which provides
ship-based, 6-10 day exploratory experiences for undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds. The formal assessment of these activities will provide evidence for
the role of faculty mentorship and authentic research experiences in knowledge
attainment, the degree to which students self-identify as scientists, and how
they understand the nature of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goals
of this project will be attained through measurement of stable oxygen and
hydrogen isotope ratios in seawater, precipitation, and water vapor from Palau
and the Galapagos, in the western and eastern tropical Pacific, respectively.
These data will reveal the relationship between seawater stable isotope values
and sea surface salinity, with implications for reconstructions of past salinity
and precipitation minus evaporation (P-E) from isotope-based paleoclimate
proxies. This project will also demonstrate the ability of stable isotope values
in seawater and precipitation to represent zonal gradients of P-E and the Walker
Circulation, necessary information for interpretation of large-scale syntheses
of isotope-based paleoclimate information. Finally, it will address the nature
of the evaporation signal in seawater, precipitation, and water vapor stable
isotope ratios, the results of which are important for isotope-enabled
hydrological simulations, isotope-based paleoclimate interpretations, and
understanding the drivers of tropical marine boundary layer humidity, which has
implications for clouds and climate feedbacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.