* 1847693
* CAREER: A Universal Block of "Series Connected SiC MOSFET" for Medium/High voltage converter
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Qin Lei, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

CAREER: A Universal Block of Series-Parallel Connected SiC MOSFETs for High
Voltage High Power Conversion System&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Power electronic
systems are widely developed nowadays in electrical vehicles, renewable energy,
data center, medical equipment, lighting, and other industrial or consumer
applications. The systems in these applications need to shrink system components
and achieve light weight and high efficiency simultaneously. These goals of
power electronic systems can be accomplished by multiple improvements of power
modules such as lower loss, higher frequency, higher temperature and downsizing.
In order to make breakthrough in these demands for power modules, it is
important to replace the device material from Silicon (Si) to the next
generation ones such as Silicon-Carbon (SiC) or Gallium Nitride (GaN). Although
the low voltage SiC power device is expected to replace the Silicon device with
the rapid increase of market adoption of SiC technology, Silicon device are
still dominant in high-voltage high-power applications. The goal of this
research is to develop the high voltage high current SiC module based on the
existing commercially available device technology to enable the use of SiC-based
semiconductors in the high-voltage high-power conversion systems. System
benefits such as improved efficiency, reduced part count along with reduced size
and weight should make this technology attractive for adoption in these
applications. The comprehensive nature of this project will also support a
multi-faceted program of research training, with impact at both the graduate and
undergraduate levels. The outcome of this project will be disseminated through
the undergraduate and graduate courses to prepare the students for future
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to
significantly improve the efficiency and power density of high-voltage high-
power conversion systems. To achieve the goal, the proposed approach is to
replace the high voltage Si IGBT (3.3kV, 4.5kV, 6.5kV) by series and parallel
connected low voltage SiC MOSFETs (1.2kV, 1.7kV). Specifically, a game changing
and universally applicable standard block of "series-parallel connected SiC
MOSFET" will be developed with excellent dynamic voltage/current sharing and
high reliability. In order to reach this objective, it is worth noting that the
series-parallel connections of multiple devices have the following design
challenges that must be addressed: unequal static and dynamic voltage/current
sharing which is normally due to the part-to-part device parameter variations,
the gate loop parasitic differences, the gate resistor tolerance, the isolation
level differences and the signal transmission channel to channel delays;
immunity to the conventional de-saturation protection for short-circuit failure;
excessive voltage ringing due to the additional loop inductance contributed by
the connected bus bars between devices. The advanced methods are proposed to be
integrated into the block to overcome these challenges. The feasibility and
advantages of the standard block will be demonstrated in the power-down-scaled
medium voltage drive, medium voltage PV power conversion, Extreme Fast Charging
(XFC) station medium voltage power conversion prototypes. Except for that, the
technology will be applied to GaN device to form high voltage high current GaN
module competing with the single SiC MOSFET as well and the efficiency/density
benefits will be demonstrated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.