* 1847952
* CAREER: Nanostructural strain to control stability and function in halide perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Aaron Fafarman, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2024
* USD 599,555.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
fundamentally expands the palette of materials available for solar cells and
other applications by rendering metastable structures stable. Metastable
structures exist only temporarily before reverting to their "preferred" stable
structure. In spite of this drawback there exist a vast number of metastable
materials with otherwise ideal properties for a variety of technological
applications. For example, among the diverse class of materials known as metal
halide perovskites metastable variants are known that combine ideal properties
for efficient solar cells (over 23% efficient solar-to-electricity energy
conversion) with extremely low-cost and scalable synthesis. This project
provides critical new avenues to exploiting such ideal behaviors in structures
that have not been prepared in stable forms before. The novel techniques
employed in Aaron Fafarman's research group to achieve the stabilization of
these structures relies on the ability to make very small - one ten-thousandths
of the thickness of a human hair - metastable materials and thereby with control
induce strain in the structures. This makes it possible to selectively enhance
their stability. The tremendous social dividends of the low-cost solar cells
that could result from utilizing the fundamental principles established in this
work include reduced emission of green-house gases, increased domestic energy
security, a sustainable energy economy and growth of jobs in the development and
manufacture of an important high-tech commodity. Additionally, through this
project, undergraduate and graduate students receive interdisciplinary training
in chemistry, solid-state physics and electrical engineering tools and concepts,
emerging with skills for a twenty first century manufacturing economy. Also, as
part of this work, local, public junior high students get hands-on experience
synthesizing solar energy conversion materials in a format designed to bolster
their interest in the STEM field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER award project, supported by the Solid State
and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research, develops
near-ambient-temperature chemical and physical approaches to synthesize and
stabilize non-equilibrium semiconducting ionic crystals by understanding and
controlling lattice strain with nanoscale precision. Through defined nanostrain,
this research provides entirely novel avenues for the synthesis of halide
perovskites into complex, far-from-equilibrium, functional materials - avenues
that may prove generalizable to a much wider class of ionic solids. The
correlations between strain and compositional stability, perovskite phase-
stability and functional properties are tested in three ways: by imparting
reduced dimensionality (nanostructuring), applying negative pressure and
inducing spatially defined-strain perturbations. Negative pressure is achieved
in a versatile scheme due to frustrated thermal contraction of a material
embedded in a second material with a smaller thermal expansion coefficient. Both
by nanostructuring alone and by engineered thermal stresses, low density and
high symmetry crystal polymorphs are stabilized that are inaccessible in the
bulk. In a related concept, spatially defined-strain perturbations are utilized
as a means to modify the as-made distribution of impurity ions in doped ionic
crystals. The resulting spatially engineered composition gradients can be
harnessed for a variety of functional purposes; they also comprise a tool for
probing the strain-structure-function relationship. The tremendous social
dividends of the low-cost solar cells that could result from utilizing the
fundamental principles established in this work include reduced anthropogenic
emission of green-house gases, increased domestic energy security, and a
sustainable energy economy. Additionally, through this project, undergraduate
and graduate students receive interdisciplinary training in chemistry, solid-
state physics and electrical engineering tools and concepts, emerging with
skills for a twenty first century manufacturing economy. Also, as part of this
work, local, public junior high students get hands-on experience synthesizing
solar energy conversion materials in a format designed to bolster their interest
in the STEM field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.