* 1847143
* Smart and Connected Communities - 2019 PI Meeting
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,04/30/2020
* Thaisa Way, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2020
* USD 108,232.00

The Smart and Connected Communities (S&amp;CC) vision is to improve the well-
being and prosperity of diverse communities by connecting residents to each
other and their environments through smart technologies. Achieving this vision
will require solving complex and interlocking physical, social, behavioral,
economic, and infrastructure challenges, which will only be possible through
close engagement with community stakeholders to understand the community needs
and develop actionable solutions. This proposal is for the 2019 S&amp;CC Program
Principal Investigator (PI) meeting. The meeting will allow PIs from the
National Science Foundation's (NSF) S&amp;CC Program and graduate students
spanning multiple technological and social disciplines to interact with Program
Directors, community partners and stakeholders, and representatives from other
Federal Agencies in order to disseminate project objectives and accomplishments
and foster new and emerging collaborations. This will be the second S&amp;CC PI
Meeting, and will include grantees from both the 2017 and 2018 S&amp;CC
solicitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planned sessions of the PI meeting will
address cross-cutting themes of S&amp;CC, including improving outcomes in under-
served communities and sustaining S&amp;CC technologies beyond the development
and prototyping stages. These discussions will be enhanced through networking
activities for NSF PIs and participating community partners. In addition, the
S&amp;CC PI meeting will be held in conjunction with the Smart Cities Connect
annual meeting in Denver, Colorado. The S&amp;CC Connect meeting is a multi-day
meeting that brings together city and municipality leaders who are working on
S&amp;CC problems and are interested in forming partnerships with others
including academic researchers. An important aspect of the meeting is an
opportunity for networking between the S&amp;CC PI community and civic leaders
attending the broader Connect meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.