* 1847736
* CAREER: Seismo-acoustic signatures of volcanic unrest and eruption: Local, regional, and remote
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Robin Matoza, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 750,000.00

Seismology and acoustics are complementary geophysical methods for quantifying
volcanic eruption processes and both now play a critical role in volcano
monitoring and hazard mitigation. Seismic data record elastic wavefields
propagating through the solid Earth, while acoustic data record acoustic
wavefields propagating through the fluid atmosphere. Collectively, seismic and
acoustic (seismo-acoustic) signals recorded before, during, and after eruptions
inform our understanding of how volcanoes work and enable volcano monitoring
scientists to forecast and assess eruptions. Seismic data currently form the
backbone of most volcano-monitoring systems. Seismic signals at erupting
volcanoes capture magma transport and rapid depressurization associated with
explosive eruptions. Infrasound, acoustic waves with frequencies below 20 Hz,
the lower-frequency limit of human hearing, is a newer technology, and provide
accurate constraints on the timing and duration of explosive eruptive activity.
Infrasound from major explosive eruptions can propagate for thousands of
kilometers in atmospheric waveguides and infrasound sensor networks are
sometimes the only ground-based technology to record an explosive eruption. This
project supports a 5-year comprehensive research program on the source,
propagation, and remote detection and quantification of the seismo-acoustic
signatures of volcanic unrest and eruption. This research program will be
integrated with a range of undergraduate and graduate educational activities at
the Department of Earth Science, University of California, Santa
Barbara.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will collect next-generation, multi-
parametric, seismo-acoustic field data from active volcanoes in Vanuatu, Mexico,
and Chile at local (&lt;15 km), regional (15-250 km), and remote (&gt;250 km)
distances from the source. In tandem, the lead researcher will develop an array
of computationally intensive data processing methodologies and modeling and
inversion strategies to systematically mine large volcano seismo-acoustic
datasets and test multiple scientific hypotheses about the source and
propagation of these wavefields. Specifically, he will investigate: (1) Acoustic
source directivity of volcanic explosions; (2) Seismo-acoustic wave
partitioning, conversion, and coupling; (3) Non-linear infrasound propagation;
(4) The influence of topography and atmospheric structure (primarily wind and
temperature) on linear and non-linear infrasound propagation from volcanic
explosions; and (5) the capability of regional and remote infrasound and seismic
networks to detect, locate, characterize, and catalog explosive eruptions. This
work has the potential to dramatically advance the field of volcano seismo-
acoustics, bridging the gap between local and regional to global scale studies.
The Vanuatu field deployments will combine ground-based broadband seismic and
infrasonic networks with multiple novel airborne infrasound tethered-balloon
(aerostat) acquisition systems together with 3D aerial (drone) imaging and other
multi-parametic data. Each geophysics field experiment team will include up to
five undergraduates and two graduate students from UC Santa Barbara. The
experiments will involve significant international collaboration with multiple
researchers and graduate students from the US, New Zealand, Vanuatu, Mexico, and
Chile. In the field, they will collect geo-referenced video data from novel 360
degree, virtual reality capable cameras, unmanned aerial vehicles, and other
systems, allowing the creation of a rich immersive material for virtual field
trip exercises that will share the excitement of volcano geophysics fieldwork
and scientific discovery to General Education undergraduate students at UC Santa
Barbara and elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.