* 1847111
* CAREER: Structure and Dynamics of Highly Turbulent Premixed Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Peter Hamlington, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 04/30/2024
* USD 500,645.00

Highly turbulent premixed flames are found in a range of engineering and natural
systems, including engines, gas turbines, and even supernova explosions. Much of
the current knowledge in this area has been obtained from numerical simulations
of idealized configurations using relatively simple chemical models. To address
the need for greater realism, this project will use advanced computational tools
and more sophisticated chemical modeling to study the characteristics and
behaviors of highly turbulent premixed flames in practically relevant
configurations. Ultimately, physical insights resulting from this project will
enable more accurate simulations of advanced energy systems. Complementary to
the research goals of this project, a new summer workshop on computational fluid
dynamics will be established for under-represented minority students. The goal
of this workshop is to give the next generation of scientists and engineers,
from all backgrounds, experience in modeling real-world energy systems. These
students will improve their understanding of the engineering design process as
well as become aware of the environmental and engineering issues related to the
continued use of combustion for energy generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will make use of adaptive mesh refinement (AMR) for overcoming the
computational cost of simulating more complex practical configurations,
including those where secondary flows, shear, swirl, and walls are important.
Using AMR, new direct numerical simulations will be performed, and the resulting
datasets will be examined using Lagrangian and scale-dependent diagnostics to
address three fundamental questions: (i) How does high intensity turbulence
affect premixed flame structure, dynamics, and chemical pathways? (ii) How are
turbulence structure and kinetic energy dynamics affected by premixed flames?
(iii) How do flame properties depend on configuration and operating conditions?
The configurations examined will include bluff-body stabilized flames,
interacting jet and Bunsen flames, and swirling multi-nozzle combustors. Each of
the simulations will be performed in close collaboration with experimentalists,
allowing validation of all results. In addition to refining theories and models
of highly turbulent combustion, the proposed project will impact the broader
combustion community by publicly sharing data and statistics from each of the
simulations, as well as all analysis codes and diagnostic
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.