* 1847172
* CAREER: What a Tangled Web We Weave - Topology and Mechanics of Textiles
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Elisabetta Matsumoto, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 04/30/2024
* USD 727,563.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
theoretical research and education on mechanical properties of knitted textiles.
Textiles are simultaneously ubiquitous and not well understood. Knits are
lightweight, strong, stretchable and flexible. These properties, coupled with
cheap, programmable manufacturing techniques make knits prized for industrial
and domestic applications. This research will probe the relationship between the
structure of the stitches and the mechanical properties of knitted textiles.
Small changes in stitches can vastly alter the properties of the bulk fabric.
The goal of this research is to identify and quantify the relationship between
mathematical properties of the stitch and fabric properties. Reverse engineering
these properties enables fabrics with bespoke properties to be created merely by
changing their stitches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research acts as a conduit
between curvature in fabrics and the physics and mathematics of curvature in
nature. To further explain this connection, the PI will create open source
virtual reality simulations of curved space. Virtual and augmented reality
enable users to visualize, move through and interact with objects and concepts
that they could not in the real world. The PI and her research team will create
a series of virtual reality modules to introduce vector fields and vector
calculus to introductory physics and mathematics students. Virtual reality
capitalizes upon kinesthetic learning and 3D visualization to enable students to
interact with one of the first truly three-dimensional objects they encounter in
the standard physics curriculum. These will be implemented first in the honors
physics course and will eventually be made open source for anyone to use or
develop further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research into mechanical
properties of knitted textiles. Textiles are a natural conduit between
curvature, topology and everyday life. These innately hierarchical materials
have a wealth of emergent geometric and elastic properties, including: soft
elasticity at low strain, high extensional rigidity at large strain, low bending
modulus, high resistance to global failure, and programmable local curvature.
These properties, coupled with cheap, programmable manufacturing techniques make
knits prized for industrial and domestic applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each knitted stitch is entangled with its neighbors,
creating a locally knotted structure. The topology of these textile "knots"
creates physical constraints that are responsible for the emergent elasticity of
textiles. Previous studies into knitted elasticity have considered only a single
type of knitted fabric. However, manipulating the local stitch topology has a
profound impact on the elasticity; it can increase or decrease the extensional
rigidity, change the crossover between soft elasticity and nonlinear behavior,
and even create local topography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike many coarse-
grained physical systems, a satisfactory set of overarching equations that
determine the mechanics of textiles is lacking. Understanding the entanglement
topology of knitted stitches is key to creating a predictive model of elastic
and geometric responses of textiles. This CAREER project will create a framework
which unites textile topology with its emergent elasticity. These are broken
into two aims: (1) the research team will identify topologically allowed knitted
stitches, from which (2) their effect on the local geometry and elasticity of
the fabric can be predicted. Techniques from knot theory and 3-manifold topology
will be used to create a comprehensive set of stitches. These stitches and their
topology will provide the yarn-level basis for an elasticity model. The behavior
of each stitch and interactions between stitches will be coarse-grained into a
2D surface model of fabric elasticity. The research team will use anisotropic
geometric elasticity theory to relate the local properties of the yarn and the
topology of the stitches to the mechanical response of the bulk textile. This
framework will be the first set of constitutive relations that govern textile
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research acts as a conduit between
curvature in fabrics and the physics and mathematics of curvature in nature. To
further explain this connection, the PI will create open source virtual reality
simulations of curved space. Virtual and augmented reality enable users to
visualize, move through and interact with objects and concepts that they could
not in the real world. The PI and her research team will create a series of
virtual reality modules to introduce vector fields and vector calculus to
introductory physics and mathematics students. Virtual reality capitalizes upon
kinesthetic learning and 3D visualization to enable students to interact with
one of the first truly three-dimensional objects they encounter in the standard
physics curriculum. These will be implemented first in the honors physics course
and will eventually be made open source for anyone to use or develop
further.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research in the
Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate and the Civil, Mechanical, and
Manufacturing Innovation Division in the Engineering Directorate contribute
funds to this proposal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.