* 1847139
* CAREER: Large-scale laboratory-generated earthquakes to study earthquake scaling and fluid-fault interactions.
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Gregory McLaskey, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 03/31/2024
* USD 611,622.00

Earthquakes occur at a variety of scales. Large earthquakes threaten our cities
while tiny ones can be used to understand and monitor underground processes.
Subsurface fluids play an important role in earthquake source processes. They
can trigger fast, destructive, earthquakes or promote slow, nearly-silent, fault
slip which can generate weak tremors. To better understand the role of fluids in
earthquake processes, the PI will carry out fault-rupture experiments in a
controlled laboratory environment on meter-scale rock samples. These experiments
will be a stepping stone between previous smaller-scale laboratory studies and
larger field studies. In the experiments, sensors will track the fluids on the
fault planes and monitor acoustic wave propagation by methods analogous to those
used in seismology. The goal is to better understand the role of fluids in the
generation of tremors and other seismic signals, and to scale these observations
to natural events. This work will improve our capability to interpret seismic
observations, notably tremors, hence earthquake hazard assessment. It will also
support a graduate student and educational outreaches toward undergraduates and
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the fundamental
processes underlying fluid-assisted earthquake triggering and frictional slip,
and the scaling of laboratory observations to the field. The team will carry out
rock-rupture experiments. They will use a new apparatus that squeezes a 3-m slab
of granite and can generate magnitude-2.5 dynamic slip events, where rupture
nucleation, propagation and termination occur within the sample. These new
large-scale experiments with confined ruptures allow simulating natural
earthquakes in the laboratory. Over 60 sensors are installed on the sample, the
laboratory equivalent of seismic and geodetic networks. The simultaneous
measurements link seismic observations to fault slips and stress changes. Fluid
injection experiments will be first carried out on small transparent plastic
samples, where fluids can be tracked visually, then on meter-scale rock samples
where fluids will be monitored acoustically. Finally, the results will be
compared to those of 20-m-scale fluid-injection experiments at Grimsel
underground laboratory in the central Swiss Alps. The goal is to improve the
interpretation of natural earthquake and tremor seismograms, hence earthquake
hazard assessment. This 5-year project will also support a graduate student and
the development of a wooden footbridge building competition. It will engage
young people in 4-H programs and at community colleges in up-state NY rural
counties, traditionally underrepresented in STEM. The goal will be to scale up a
14 ft. wooden bridge competition that started as a Cornell class project to
footbridges that meet local needs in the City of Ithaca and other
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.