* 1847038
* CAREER: Leveraging Defects &amp; Disorder for Fast Ion Conduction
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Yan-Yan Hu, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2024
* USD 415,331.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Significant technological advancement relies on
creating new materials with unprecedented functions or improving existing
materials for superior performance. This project aims to pave a new path beyond
the current state of the art for designing and discovering functional materials
by understanding the impacts of defects. Defects in materials are disruptions to
the periodic order of atom arrangements and serve as a double-edged sword. On
one hand, defects are critical to delivering many key properties of materials,
for instance, fast ion conduction necessary for energy storage with high-energy
and high-power densities, and on the other hand, they can lead to materials
performance failure such as short-circuit in batteries, instability, or short
lifetime. The new knowledge gained from this research activity fills the gap in
fundamental understanding of defect chemistry, enables controlled creation of
functional defects in technologically important materials, and allows
minimization of detrimental defects for improved materials performance. The
outcomes advance technologies such as energy conversion and storage, data
manipulation, sensors, and actuators. Students trained within this project will
typically find employment in national laboratories engaged in R&amp;D of
chemical and materials science, or high-tech industries that enable novel
technologies - both pathways can enhance national competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: The lack in understanding structural defects,
including their nature and function, has limited the proper employment of
defects to enhance materials performance or to minimize performance failures.
This project aims to achieve controlled defect creation in functional materials
in order to deliver new properties or significantly enhance materials
performance by characterizing, understanding, and predicting defects at
different time and length scales. This research combines theoretical
investigation and advanced characterization (nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy and imaging and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy)
to examine defect formation, evolution, and their impacts on ion conduction and
materials stability in 3D solid ion conductors. The insights gained will
transform materials design and lead to more efficient materials discovery for
technological advancement in energy storage. University students (at both the
undergraduate and graduate levels) are trained in first principles calculations,
materials informatics approaches, advanced materials synthesis and/or
characterization. A materials chemistry seminar program in partnership with a
historically black institution is established to recruit minority students.
High-school internship and middle school mentorship programs at FSU are
leveraged to engage K-12 students in scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.