* 1847324
* CAREER: Integrated Optofluidic Chips towards Label-Free Detection of Exosomal MicroRNA Biomarkers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Chao Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2024
* USD 532,000.00

Cancer is a major global cause of morbidity and mortality. With the increasing
heterogeneity and complexity observed in cancers, the need for accurate
diagnosis and molecular monitoring of disease progression has become more
important than ever. Liquid biopsy of microscopic vesicles from our cells
circulating in human bodily fluids is a promising, inexpensive, and minimally
invasive approach for cancer diagnosis and personalized medical treatment.
Particularly, detecting the biomolecules carried by these vesicles, including
nucleic acids encoding genetic information, has emerged as a promising strategy
for early diagnosis. However, the existing diagnostic tools for such
technologies lack the needed sensitivity, specificity, speed, and cost-
effectiveness necessary to become clinically viable. This CAREER proposal fully
exploits the cutting-edge development in small-scale technologies such as
nanophotonics, nanofluidics, and biosensing to provide novel solutions for the
detection of diagnostic nucleic acids from clinical samples with an improved
sensitivity, reduced sample volume, and decreased analysis time. The success of
the proposed technology will have significant impact on early-stage diagnosis as
well as prognosis and management of diseases, including cardiovascular diseases,
autoimmune syndromes, neurodegenerative disorders, and infectious diseases. By
integrating research and education, the project will promote public awareness of
the importance of nanobiotechnology in health care, and to cultivate the next-
generation of scientists and engineers in nanotechnology and biosensing to
address grand challenges in affordable and portable disease diagnosis. Further,
this project aims to attract the participation of K-12 students and
underrepresented individuals (e.g., female and Native American students) in STEM
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER proposal is
to validate the hypothesis that an integrated and multiplexed optofluidic
platform can accurately detect exosomal miRNAs. In pursuit of this goal, a
nanofluidic chip (ExoMiRChip) will be designed to functionally integrate label-
free exosome purification, on-chip exosomal miRNA extraction, and plasmonic
miRNA sensing. Theories and experiments will be combined to address fundamental
challenges in achieving high-resolution and high-throughput exosome nanoparticle
sorting, high-sensitivity and high-specificity miRNA detection, and multi-
functional integration of nanofluidic systems. This project will explore
scientific unknowns in exosome nanoparticle fluidic dynamics at the nanometer
scale, and aim to comprehensively elucidate the limiting factors in on-chip
exosome purification. The project will innovate optically coupled ultrasensitive
plasmonic nanosensors functionalized with sequence-specific locked nucleic acid
(LNA) probes, and use them to identify the critical factors affecting accurate
detection of exosomal miRNA, including the plasmonic sensor design,
nanostructure fabrication, miRNA molecular concentration, and the miRNA
selectivity. Successful nanofluidic integration on the ExoMiRChip will
significantly reduce sample volume in diagnosis (from milliliters to
microliters), minimize bias and contamination, improve diagnosis speed
(estimated from days/weeks to hours), and potentially enable multiplexed
biomarker detection. We expect the project to be transformative in future
biosensing and applicable to a wide variety of
biomolecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.