* 1847583
* CAREER: Modeling Matter and Improving Aqueous Transfer Processes with Molecular Distributions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Christopher Fennell, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 580,926.00

Christopher Joseph Fennell of Oklahoma State University is supported by an award
jointly funded by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Dr. Fennel and coworkers are developing new
methods and resources for the computational representation of molecules and
their environments. Molecular simulations provide an atomic-level view and
unprecedented insight into why chemical systems act as they do. To be
successful, the simulations require computational models that accurately depict
reality. Dr. Fennell develops such physically accurate and computationally-
efficient models. Dr. Fennel and his research group are investigating a new
approach for modeling matter using molecular distributions. Molecular
distribution models encode how molecules change in response to their unique
local environments. These models offer a dramatic reduction in computational
cost over more mathematically complex approaches. This project includes an
innovative education effort which is closely integrated with the research
activities. The outreach brings new understanding of molecular systems to
children, students, and the general public. Dr. Fennell's Molecular World
Building program uses molecular modeling, virtual reality, and 3D printing and
laser cutting to craft interactive chemical experiences that are accessible to
novice learners aged 7 through 70+ years old. This work provides unique training
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students and reaches the public by
way of focused on-site summer camp sessions, portable hands-on activities for
external venues, and broadly accessible internet resources that convey
structure, interactions, and diversity in molecular
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular modeling is a rapidly growing area of
science that can provide an atomic-level view and unprecedented insight into the
driving forces in chemical systems. This growth is critically dependent on the
development of models and techniques that are able to accurately capture
microscopic molecular behavior and properties. Dr. Fennel and his research group
work to advance the field of classical molecular modeling by developing a new
approach for modeling matter using molecular distributions. Molecular
Distribution Modeling uses sets of simple functions to develop ideal liquid
mixtures that encode how molecules change in response to their local
environments. Molecular distribution liquids do this without the direct need for
more complex and computationally expensive polarizable and quantum mechanical
considerations, leading to over 500x performance gains over costly polarizable
methods. These models are straightforward to develop, extend directly from
recently popularized techniques for improving classical molecular force fields,
and inherit all the computational benefits of classical molecular simulations.
Finally, Dr. Fennel is building and extending synergistic education activity
modules and experiences for his Molecular World Building program that can
translate into university chemistry courses and impact external science
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.