* 1847926
* CAREER: Quantifying Nitrogen-Oxide (NO) Activation and Coordination Modes through Synthesis, Spectroscopy and Computations
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2024
* USD 505,224.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Sabine Chantal E.
Stieber of the Department of Chemistry at the California State Polytechnic
University, Pomona (Cal Poly Pomona) is studying small molecule reactions at
metal centers. Reactions utilizing small, nitrogen containing molecules found in
the atmosphere are of considerable interest as mimics for existing biological
processes involved in agricultural nitrogen fixation (such as in legumes) or for
reducing the health effects of automobile pollutants. Advancing the knowledge of
metal-nitrogen oxide interactions may also offer insights towards the
development of catalytic systems for converting nitrogen oxide pollutants into
useful chemicals. This research is especially challenging as the nitrogen oxide
species are often unstable and short-lived, and thus require the development of
new characterizational tools at a national synchrotron facility. These new tools
are coupled with computational efforts and the synthesis of air-and moisture-
sensitive inorganic complexes. The project is designed to enable undergraduate
researchers to conduct impactful research and gain experience with a range of
techniques. The research is integrated with education through student-led
research modules in computational chemistry and crystallography. The efforts
broaden research opportunities for all students and enable the recruitment of a
diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current methods to characterize
metal interactions with nitrogen oxide-containing species are insufficient to
provide complete chemical characterization of bonding, oxidation states, and
functionalization, all of which are necessary for developing synthetic systems
for nitrogen functionalization. A key challenge of studying nitrogen oxide-
containing species is isolating the unstable species and characterizing them. To
overcome these stability issues, Professor Stieber uses spectroscopic techniques
that stablish spectral fingerprints for metals bound to different coordination
numbers, modes, and oxidation states of nitrogen oxide species. This project
examines X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) as an analytical technique for
characterizing coordination modes and redox activities in coordination
complexes. The current project utilizes synthetic, synchrotron and computational
methods to study more complex and challenging systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.