* 1847331
* CAREER: The role of small wetland connectivity in controlling greenhouse gas emissions and downstream carbon fluxes from headwater tropical streams
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Diego Riveros-Iregui, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 685,281.00

Headwater streams are the small streams that carry water from the upper reaches
of a watershed to the main channel of the river. Headwater streams connect
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems and have a high proportion of stream water in
direct contact with adjacent soils. For this reason, headwater streams play an
important role in controlling the biological and chemical quality of waters that
are ultimately delivered to large rivers and communities downstream. This study
examines changes in carbon and the movement of carbon at the interface of
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in tropical headwater streams. This project
will examine the fluxes of carbon dioxide from different terrestrial and aquatic
landscape elements such as upland areas, wetlands, and streams. The results of
this project will have direct implications for the natural resource management
of high-elevation watersheds that are the source of drinking water for millions
of people in South America. Through a partnership with the Museum of Life and
Science in Durham, NC, this project will design and implement educational
activities directed at large and diverse audiences, including populations that
are traditionally underrepresented in the sciences. This work will enhance the
college research experience of underrepresented students in science while
empowering them to serve as ambassadors in their local communities. The students
will participate in an international research experience focused on hydrological
and ecological data collection, and will be supported through a research-
intensive, year-long program focusing on increasing their long-term career
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A growing body of work recognizes inland waters as
fundamental players in the carbon cycle. In particular, headwater streams are
known to remove terrestrial carbon in the form of greenhouse gases such as
carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, and as dissolved organic, inorganic, or
particulate forms downstream. This study seeks to quantify the role of
hydrologic connectivity across multiple landscape elements (i.e., uplands,
floodplains, wetlands, and streams) on regulating the partitioning between
atmospheric and downstream carbon losses. The study will be conducted in an
ecosystem where both water fluxes and carbon storage per unit area are among the
highest on Earth: the Andean Paramos of Ecuador. Results from this research will
provide a comparison of carbon dioxide effluxes across terrestrial and aquatic
landscape elements on a per unit area (or per unit time) basis and as a function
of the hydrologic wetness status of the year. The broader impacts of this
project include the design and implementation of educational activities directed
at large and diverse audiences, including populations that are traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences. After successfully completing field, outreach,
and professional development activities, participating undergraduate students
will receive a research designation on their transcript and graduate as Carolina
Research Scholars. Materials from this work will be used to develop teaching
lectures for different audiences, including K-12, undergraduate and graduate
students, and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.