* 1847078
* CAREER: Non-equilibrium Many-Body Dynamics in Topological Quantum Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Edwin Barnes, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2024
* USD 493,922.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education on topological materials. Recent years have witnessed an
explosion in research on topological materials spurred by their unusual quantum
behavior and by the novel technologies they promise to enable. Such materials
can host currents that require relatively little power to drive due to their
topological properties, and in some cases these currents can be activated by
applying light or magnetic fields. These features of topological materials make
them candidates for important applications currently pursued including a new
wave of low-dissipation electronics, photodetectors, and solar cell devices.
Making these technologies a reality requires a deep understanding of their rich
physics. The goal of this project is to develop new theoretical techniques that
can be used to make accurate predictions about the behavior of currents in these
materials in the presence of applied electric fields, magnetic fields, or
lasers. These predictions could then be used to guide further progress toward
new experiments, technological applications, and advances in fundamental
understanding of topological materials and materials more generally. To realize
these and many more technological advances going forward, it is crucial to
strengthen the workforce in condensed matter physics and more broadly in STEM
fields. Current projections indicate that insufficient numbers of students are
obtaining degrees in these fields to maintain present technological output
levels. This project focuses on recruiting more students to STEM in three ways:
(i) By giving students a better understanding of the field and related career
paths through high school lecture series; (ii) By providing research
opportunities to high school and undergraduate students; (iii) By mentoring
graduate and undergraduate students to prepare them for STEM careers. These
efforts will be carried out with a particular emphasis on strengthening
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education on topological materials. The research component addresses fundamental
questions pertaining to the transport of spin, valley, or charge in driven
topological materials. Despite enormous interest and rapid progress, much of the
basic physics of these processes remains unclear due to the non-equilibrium,
many-body nature of the problem. The PI aims to shed light on these processes by
developing theories based on advanced techniques that enable one to retain time-
dependent information about both system and bath without sacrificing
calculability. The main goals of the project include: (i) Explain non-
equilibrium and many-body phenomena in topological quantum materials. Primary
focus is given to optical driving and polarized spin injection in topological
insulators and transition metal dichalcogenides, and to chiral anomalous
transport in Weyl semimetals. (ii) Develop a theory of dynamic feedback
mechanisms that arise under external driving. This theory will employ
generalized master equations, dynamical maps, and other techniques to track the
evolution of both carriers and their quantum environment. Methods for
controlling the bath will be devised to mitigate adverse effects and develop new
technological capabilities. The developed techniques will be applicable to a
broad range of many-body systems. (iii) Understand the interplay of strong
Coulomb interactions and topology in the transport of spin and valley
polarization in 2D materials and in anomalous charge transport in 3D semimetals
by combining many-body and non-equilibrium theory techniques. (iv) Develop an
outreach program that recruits more students into STEM fields, including quantum
condensed matter physics. This will consist of high school lecture series and
research internships for undergraduate and advanced high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.