* 1847948
* CAREER: Photocontrolled Dynamic Covalent Crosslinkers for Light-Responsive Polymer Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Julia Kalow, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 736,371.00

Polymers that respond to external cues with changes in their physical properties
can serve as sensors, actuators, controlled delivery systems, tissue mimics, and
healable materials. Light is one of the most appealing stimuli because it can be
delivered remotely with precise control over space, time, intensity, and color.
The research group of Professor Julia Kalow at Northwestern University studies
how light can be used to control the formation and breakage of reversible
chemical bonds in polymers. When these photoswitchable chemical bonds are used
to link polymer strands, the resulting polymer networks exhibit reversibly-
controlled changes in properties, such as stiffness and adaptability. The novel
materials and insights from this research help to create the next generation of
high-performance, re-processable polymers. Additionally, the polymer materials
may mimic tissue mechanics, acting as user-controlled matrixes to study
biological processes like muscle contraction and to build synthetic organs. The
broader impacts expand the exposure of students with visual impairment to STEM.
The educational program develops assistive technologies for visually impaired
students and their teachers. Students with visual impairment are often left out
of traditional outreach activities and laboratory experiences. Professor Kalow's
team works to fully include these students in STEM as the newly created polymer
materials are used to create assistive tactile
displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry program of the Division of Chemistry, the
Kalow group prepares new photoswitches and elucidates how control is translated
from the molecular to macroscopic level. This fundamental research combines
physical organic techniques, synthesis, and mechanical characterization to study
three distinct mechanisms for photoswitching dynamic covalent crosslinkers:
crosslink stability, crosslink exchange rate, and crosslink topology. The
research aims to marry photoswitch conformation and dynamic covalent bonds to
achieve dramatic and reversible physical changes in soft materials. The expected
outcomes of the research are the development of new photoswitches containing
dynamic covalent bonds, improvement in the reversibly photocontrolled gels,
elastomers, and vitrimers, and increased fundamental insight into the
relationship between molecular reactivity and
viscoelasticity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.