* 1847808
* CAREER: Scaling Electrolytes to a Single Monolayer for Low-Power Ion-Gated Electronics with Unconventional Characteristics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Susan Fullerton, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 540,000.00

The continuous miniaturization of electronics over the past sixty years has
yielded devices that are less power hungry; however, due to physical
constraints, the geometric scaling approach is nearing an end. New materials and
engineering approaches are needed to push electronics towards lower power and
higher information density. One such material is the two-dimensional (2D)
semiconductor, a sheet-like material that is only a single molecule thick. Ions
- like those used in rechargeable lithium-ion batteries - can be used to control
the amount of charge passing through the 2D material to make the operating
process more power efficient. This CAREER research reimagines the role of ions
in electronics by developing a completely new type of electrolyte to induce
charge in the 2D material. Similar to the 2D semiconductor, this electrolyte is
also a single molecule thick, and adds new functionalities, such as information
storage. The CAREER project explores this new material for application spaces
including logic, memory, security and brain-inspired computing. The postdoctoral
scholar, graduate and undergraduate students who work on this research benefit
from an interdisciplinary project combining soft matter and electronics with the
goal of engineering next generation electronics. The research component provides
educational examples to be used in the classroom and in outreach efforts to
middle and high school students. For example, to inspire curiosity and
exploration, a microscope that attaches to the camera of a smart phone will be
used by the students to inspect the electrolytes used in this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the era of geometric device scaling of
high-performance electronics is coming to an end, two-dimensional (2D) materials
are being explored for their exciting new physics that can impart novel
functionalities in application spaces such as information storage, neuromorphic
computing, and hardware security. To develop next-generation electronics based
on these materials, charges must be reconfigurable and well controlled. Electric
double layer (EDL) gating using ions can provide both ultra-high carrier
densities and doping that can be reconfigured between p- and n-type in 2D
semiconductors. However, conventional electrolytes are not considered an
integral and practical component for future electronic devices because their
physical properties (e.g., liquid phase, micron-thick, thermally unstable) are
incompatible with the materials and processing of integrated circuits. This
CAREER project scales a solid-state electrolyte to the single molecule limit for
use in non-volatile, low-power, multi-bit information storage. The intellectual
merit comprises materials innovations that include the demonstration of a novel
class of electrolyte and the use of this electrolyte to store information.
Electrolyte scaling will introduce functionality that can be used by the
electronic materials community to explore the fundamental properties of 2D
semiconductors and to develop electronics with new device characteristics. The
broader impacts are (1) the translation of EDL gating from a measurement tool
for exploring transport in 2D crystals to an active device component that
enables completely new functionalities, and (2) student training at the
intersection of physical chemistry, device physics, and engineering. Outreach
activities focused on polymer crystallization will inspire meaningful engagement
and independent exploration that increases understanding for middle and high
school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.