* 1847701
* CAREER: Targeting novel phosphors for the next generation of solid state white lighting
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Jakoah Brgoch, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/29/2024
* USD 656,135.00

Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Replacing a traditional light bulb with an energy-
efficient, phosphor converted-light emitting diode (pc-LED) is one of the
simplest and most promising methods to dramatically decrease electricity
consumption. These devices are conventionally based on blue- (450 nm) or UV-
(370-410 nm) emitting light emitting diodes (LEDs) that are coated with a rare-
earth substituted inorganic phosphor encapsulated in an optically transparent
polymer. In combination, these emissive lights produce a functional and
efficient white light. Unfortunately, the availability and variety of inorganic
phosphors that are necessary to efficiently convert the LED emission and create
white light are limited, which increases the upfront cost of pc-LEDs and
inhibits their widespread adoption. The known phosphors are also often thermally
insulating oxides or nitrides, which lead to extreme operating temperatures
(above 150 Celsius) under LED excitation that can degrade phosphor performance.
Consequently, the next generation of pc-LEDs requires the development of new,
efficient inorganic phosphors with enhanced thermal properties to reduce their
cost and encourage the replacement of traditional light bulbs. This NSF CAREER
award project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research, establishes a research approach that
connects machine learning, computation, and materials synthesis to target new
inorganic phosphors with improved thermal response allowing them to operate in
extreme environments. The results from each research step feed back into the
original machine learning and computational models to improve the accuracy and
reliability of the models. Further, this CAREER award is used to enhance the
participation rate of undergraduate research at the University of Houston, with
a particular focus in engaging underrepresented groups. This includes a newly
established "Boot Camp in Computational Chemistry" to provide STEM students, as
well as faculty at undergraduate institutions and community colleges in the
Houston-area, the opportunity to learn the basics of computational chemistry.
Emphasizing the importance of using a computer to understand chemistry, while
also providing opportunities for hands-on research, leads to a new generation of
STEM graduates who are prepared for a globally competitive
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This NSF
CAREER award, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research, addresses the global need to develop more
efficient light sources to replace conventional incandescent and fluorescent
bulbs. In the US alone, lighting accounts for 22% of total electrical energy
use, which translates to $50 billion per year spent on lighting, accompanied
with 130 million tons of carbon emitted into the atmosphere from fossil fuel
plants. Solid state white lighting, which uses a blue-emitting light emitting
diode (LEDs) coated with a luminescent powder called a phosphor, has emerged as
highly efficient, long-lasting light source capable of replacing incandescent
and fluorescent lighting. New LEDs that emit ultraviolet light have recently
been recognized as chips that could yield an even better light source. However,
to make use of this technology, it is necessary to discover new, efficient
phosphor systems that can convert the ultraviolet LED light into white light.
This CAREER award's research and education program support Prof. Jakoah Brgoch
at the University of Houston to establish new computational and machine-learning
techniques that are capable of increasing the rate at which new phosphors can be
identified. This information can then be used to direct the Brgoch group's
synthesis towards the most promising phosphor systems, whose properties can be
analyzed using computational methods to understand the enhanced optical
response. This cooperative research approach not only leads to higher
performance materials, but it also has the potential to transform the lighting
industry by identifying new and improved materials. Further, this award is used
to enhance the participation rate of undergraduate research at the University of
Houston, with a particular focus in engaging underrepresented groups. The
efforts include a newly established "Boot Camp in Computational Chemistry" to
provide STEM students, as well as faculty at undergraduate institutions and
community colleges in the Houston-area, the opportunity to learn the basics of
computational chemistry. Emphasizing the importance of using a computer to
understand chemistry, while also providing opportunities for hands-on research,
leads to a new generation of STEM graduates who are prepared for a globally
competitive workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.