* 1847451
* CAREER:Phase Transitions in Algorithms, Complexity, and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2019,01/31/2023
* William Perkins, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 01/31/2023
* USD 342,938.00

Gibbs measures (or Boltzmann distributions) originated in statistical mechanics
to model the phases of matter, but have since found numerous practical
applications in statistics, machine learning, coding theory, and mathematical
physics due to their simple encoding of complex dependencies. Two algorithmic
tasks associated to Gibbs measures are essential in applications: sampling from
a given model and efficiently approximating its normalizing constant, the
partition function. This project aims to elucidate the connection between phase
transitions in the underlying statistical physics model and the computational
complexity of these two problems. The project features an integrated research
and education plan, with the complementary goals of advancing fundamental
knowledge of Gibbs measures and improving interdisciplinary mathematical
education. The educational plan has activities aimed at three levels: outreach
workshops to introduce high school students to mathematical research; the
creation of tools for undergraduate instructors to implement effective
pedagogical techniques; and the development of new graduate courses in
applications of statistical physics across disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the research has three main goals.
First, to develop efficient sampling algorithms for Gibbs measures in the low
temperature, phase coexistence regime for models with a bounded number of ground
states. Second, to make the powerful but non-rigorous cavity method from
statistical physics into a rigorous mathematical tool for understanding the
algorithmic tractability of random computational problems. Third, to understand
fundamental geometric objects in high dimensions -- sphere packings, sphere
coverings, and spherical codes -- by utilizing tools and insights from
statistical physics. The pursuit of these three goals will introduce new
probabilistic methods in computer science, statistics, and
combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.