* 1847956
* CAREER: Heterogeneous Nucleation in Reversible Martensitic Transformations
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Patrick Shamberger, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2024
* USD 469,909.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Some solids undergo reversible phase
transformations, which involve the rearrangement of atoms and the distortion of
bonds, resulting in changes to the shape and properties of a material. This
behavior can be used to develop compact and efficient actuators, sensors, and a
variety of microelectronic devices. Structural transformations start near a
defect or imperfection in a material, which facilitates the rearrangement of
atoms. However, when considering transformations in small volumes of material,
the probability of encountering such a rare defect is low, resulting in
unpredictable and inefficient operation. In extreme cases, this can stop the
transformation from occurring entirely. This project's aims are to understand
the role that defects play in initiating structural transformations, and to find
an approach to introduce such defects into a material. This would allow the
operation of devices at micrometer and nanometer length-scales. The broader
objectives of this proposal include developing distributable interactive
materials science experiments ('lab in a box') that can be performed remotely to
engage distance students. Additionally, this proposal will engage undergraduate
(UG) students, and in particular transfer students from community colleges,
through targeted UG research opportunities and through societally impactful
engineering design challenges related to the proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;Diffusionless solid-
state phase transformations generally nucleate from sparse, high energy atomic-
scale defects in the crystal lattice. One of the grand challenges in materials
science is understanding how material heterogeneity and disorder can be
harnessed to influence the properties of materials. In particular, while
dislocation defect models of heterogeneous nucleation in martensitic
transformations (MTs) are fairly well-developed, the role of clusters of point
defects is very poorly understood, despite initial observations that irradiation
induced defect clusters can serve as potent nucleation sites. The outcomes of
this study will advance the science of nucleation of MTs 1) by measuring the
number density of native nucleation sites as a function of thermodynamic driving
force, and determining the role of lattice compatibility in governing size-
dependent nucleation behavior, and 2) by experimentally quantifying the potency
of irradiation-induced defect clusters and He nanobubbles. These observations
will be used to develop and test a defect-cluster based MT nucleation model. The
educational outcomes of this proposal will impact two paradigm shifts currently
underway in UG engineering education: 1) broader adoption of active learning
methods, and 2) effective and scalable approaches to distance
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.