* 1847845
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the genetic architecture and adaptive characteristics of human hair
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Mark Shriver, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2022
* USD 31,703.00

Scalp hair in the absence of body hair is a uniquely human trait, whose
evolutionary significance is not well understood. This doctoral dissertation
project will develop a digital tool for the quantitative measurement of hair
fiber morphology, to investigate the underlying genetic architecture of hair
morphology across human groups, and experimentally test the function of scalp
hair as a barrier to solar heat gain. The methods developed as part of this
project will advance our understanding of human adaptive traits and also inform
forensic and dermatological research. Data collected for this project will
increase the representation of understudied groups in research. This project
will provide valuable research opportunities for undergraduates from groups
underrepresented in STEM research fields and will generate materials for
teaching about human biological diversity in a non-racial
paradigm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human hair morphology varies on a continuous
spectrum from straight to tightly curled; however, research in genetics,
dermatology, and forensics incudes a range of descriptors that can be
qualitative (e.g. wavy, frizzy) and racial (e.g. 'Caucasian hair,' 'African-type
hair'). By developing a method to quantify hair morphology and studying the
genetic variation in a diverse group of African Americans, this study leverages
genetic admixture as a means of elucidating genotypes underlying hair morphology
across human groups. The experimental work in this project will test the
hypothesis that human scalp hair morphology evolved in early Homo as a
protective mechanism against heat gain from solar radiation. This project will
additionally carry out a series of tests of selection on candidate loci
(previously associated with hair morphology or hair follicle development) to
test whether there is evidence of selection in hair-related genes that would
support a thermoregulatory explanation for the evolution of human scalp
hair.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.