* 1847215
* CAREER: Transforming Neural Interfaces Using Stretchable, Transparent, Multifunctional Nanomesh Microelectrodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Hui Fang, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

To understand how the brain functions and cure brain disorders, neuroscientists
and clinicians need brain mapping devices. This project will develop the next
generation of stretchable and transparent electrode arrays with unprecedented
scale and resolution for brain recording and stimulation. This program will not
only generate broad impacts in neuroscience through proactive device translation
efforts in and beyond this project, but also create unique opportunities for
novel neuroprosthetics. Through generating neural interfaces that will allow
human-like performance in neuroprosthetic limbs and retinal prostheses with
chronic biocompatibility, this program will impact more than 3 million people in
the U.S. who live with upper limb loss, paralysis due to tetraplegia, blindness
due to retinitis pigmentosa, or epilepsy. The proposed multidisciplinary
educational/outreach program will engage hundreds of students through research
experiences for underrepresented K-12 students, active undergraduate research
involvements, graduate leadership training in device translation, and augmented
engineering curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this
project is to investigate a set of foundational materials and device problems to
for the first time establish a new unique device technology "multifunctional
nanomesh microelectrodes" to shift the current paradigm of neural interface from
rigid, opaque neuroelectrode arrays towards ultrasoft and transparent ones.
Stretchable and transparent neuroelectrode arrays are two emerging neural
interfaces due to their chronic biocompatibility and multimodal compatibility,
respectively. However, both systems are currently confounded by their
scalability since fundamentally, no existing electrode materials can
simultaneously provide the required system-level properties of electrochemical
interfaces, electrical conductance, and chronic biocompatibility in addition to
the mandatory mechanical stretchability or optical transparency. Based on strong
preliminary results, the PI hypothesizes that multifunctional nanomesh
microelectrodes can possess an unprecedented combination of all functionalities
needed for this aforementioned paradigm shift including low impedance, large
stretchability, high transparency, and chronic biocompatibility. This project
will holistically test this hypothesis through innovative theoretical design,
experimental realization, and system demonstration/validation, and proactively
integrate closed-loop device translation and experiential education activities.
Vertically, the unprecedented combination of large throughput, chronic
biocompatibility and multimodal compatibility of the resulting neural interface
device will yield profound impacts to both our studying of complex networks in
the central nervous system and interfacing with the brain. Laterally, the
multifunctional-nanomesh device concept, theoretical framework, and fabrication
knowledge can also be transformative in many other fields such as
optoelectronics, energy storage, and nanogenerators if stretchability and/or
transparency are desired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.