* 1847837
* CAREER: First-Principles Predictions of Solute Effects on Defect Stability and Mobility in Advanced Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Liang Qi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education activities in developing and applying computational methods for
understanding the behavior of crystalline defects in metal alloys, which are
metallic materials composed by more than one chemical element. Atoms in metals
and alloys are arranged in crystal structures with almost perfect periodic
patterns, but these structures still contain a small number of imperfections or
"defects", variations from perfect periodicity. Many mechanical and physical
properties depend on how defects are generated and move under the influences of
alloying elements, or solutes, in crystal structures. For example, the strength
and ductility of metals and alloys are usually controlled by a type of defect
called dislocations, and some solute atoms can slow down or speed up dislocation
motions to make alloys stronger and more brittle, or softer and more ductile.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on defects in advanced alloys
based on certain transition-metal elements, such as tungsten, molybdenum,
titanium, and zirconium. These alloys can have excellent mechanical properties
at high temperatures and are critical for many energy, transport, and aerospace
applications, such as structural components of nuclear reactors, turbine engines
and electric generators. To develop these advanced alloys with enhanced
performance would require the understanding of solute effects on defect
behaviors and the corresponding variations of mechanical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop and
apply computational methods to predict how solute atoms affect the stability and
motion mechanisms of defects in advanced transition-metal alloys.
Conventionally, accurate quantum mechanical calculations are applied to study
metals and alloys in perfect crystal structures or containing simplified defect
structures, but defect behaviors in realistic alloys depend on the evolution of
complex structures on the nanoscale and mesoscale, lengths comparable with one-
thousandth of a millimeter. The PI aims to discover intrinsic, universal and
quantitative mechanisms that determine defect-solute interactions based on
analyses from quantum mechanical calculations. Using these results, the PI will
develop the models to predict the solute effects on defect behavior and
mechanical properties by bridging the knowledge gaps between electronic,
atomistic and mesoscale levels. The research will provide generalized models,
computational methods, software tools, and an open access data repository for
both the scientific and industrial communities to speed up the development of
novel advanced alloys in large compositional space. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
also proposes educational and outreach activities by integration of research and
innovative teaching methods. The PI plans to apply virtual reality techniques in
teaching complex crystal and defect structures to undergraduates, and to utilize
the tools of computational materials science in teaching alloy designs to
graduate students. Proposed outreach activities include the education of K-12
students with a diverse background on the topics of crystal structures and
thermodynamics based on their interest and familiar subjects such as food
processing to increase the public awareness of materials science and
engineering. The PI will also participate in the high-school research projects
by the Center for Engineering Diversity and Outreach at University of Michigan.
All education modules based on virtual reality and simulation tools will also be
shared through the public data
repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an integrated research
and education project to develop new computational approaches to study defect-
solute interactions and their effects on the mechanical properties of advanced
transition metal alloys by bridging the gaps across electronic, atomistic and
mesoscale length scales. Interactions between solute atoms and crystalline
defects, including dislocations, and twin and grain boundaries, play essential
roles in determining the mechanical and physical properties of many advanced
alloys. First-principles theory is ideal for investigating such interactions.
However, first-principles calculations are limited by increasing computational
intensity with system size, making it difficult to predict the solute and
impurity effects on the stability and mobility of defects involving complex
atomistic structures, such as dislocation kinks, twin nuclei, and grain boundary
complexions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, the PI discovered a series of strong
correlations between defect energetics and local electronic structures in
several types of advanced transition metal alloys. These new findings suggest a
path to predict accurately complex defect-solute interactions by understanding
chemical bonding mechanisms at the electronic level. Based on this approach, the
PI aims to: (i) identify generalized and quantitative correlations between local
electronic/atomistic structures and defect-solute interactions for multiple
types of defects and solutes based on chemical bonding models, first-principles
calculations and machine learning methods, (ii) apply the above correlations to
construct mesoscale simulation methods and phenomenological models to predict
the solute/impurities effects on defect stability and mobility, and (iii) employ
the above methods and models to evaluate the mechanical behavior, such as solid-
solution hardening/softening, twinability, and grain boundary embrittlement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to advance fundamental
understanding of the intrinsic physical mechanisms of defect-solute interactions
that are critical for advanced transition metal alloys to achieve excellent
mechanical performance under varying environmental conditions. It will explore
the application of machine learning methods for alloy design based on physical
models at electronic and atomistic levels. The investigated defect structures
will be incorporated into the virtual reality tools to enhance the
undergraduates' understanding of lattice and chemical defects and their effects
on materials properties; the generated data and computational tools will be
applied in education modules to help graduate students to learn the state-of-
the-art materials design approaches. These data and tools will also be utilized
in outreach education and research activities for K-12 students with diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.