* 1847513
* CAREER: Fluid-Structure-Control Interactions in Bioinspired Robots with Actively Morphing Fins
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Matteo Aureli, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will benefit the
national interests from a scientific, economic, and security perspective by
supporting fundamental research on bioinspired underwater robots equipped with
actively morphing fins. The research work is inspired by marine creatures that
continuously change their fins' shape and stiffness to achieve optimal energy
advantage for different swimming regimes. This project will study the
fundamental role of active fin stiffness and shape control for the purpose of
enhanced underwater propulsion. Understanding this novel swimming paradigm will
allow for robotic vehicles with highly efficient operation, enabling missions
with extended duration and autonomy. As a result, the new knowledge will enable
the development of next generation underwater robots for scientific exploration
and ecological conservation of water bodies, underwater resource prospecting and
mapping, and surveillance or stealth operations for defense purposes. Through an
integrated research and education plan, this project will positively impact
graduate and undergraduate students and will support K-12 STEM education in the
state of Nevada and beyond, with emphasis to broadening participation of
underrepresented students in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
objective of this CAREER project is to establish the bioinspired framework of
unsteady fluid-structure-control interactions which will address fundamental
scientific questions in dynamical systems and enable an engineering paradigm
shift in soft robotic underwater propulsion. This research will contribute new
understanding of the complex interplay of morphing active flexible structures
and the surrounding fluid environment by synergistically leveraging structural
and fluid nonlinearities via self-sensing and feedback control. Models for self-
sensing and control via smart materials embedded in artificial fins will be
formulated and implemented. The system coupled dynamics will be studied
theoretically and experimentally characterized via image-based motion analysis
and flow diagnostics. Modeling, simulations, and experiments will be translated
into robotic platforms to study bioinspired locomotion and test hypotheses on
the effectiveness of active morphing. This project will advance the theory of
nonlinear systems with time-periodic coefficients, by investigating control-
induced instabilities and complex structural resonances mediated by nonlinear
hydrodynamic actions. It will elucidate the potential of harnessing vortex
shedding for flow control and its relation to modulation of hydrodynamic forces
and power dissipation. Furthermore, this project will advance the current state-
of-the-art in underwater robotic propulsion, by exploiting the transformative
concept of active stiffness and shape morphing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.