* 1847578
* CAREER: Reliability and Resilience Assurance of Cyber-Physical Energy Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2025
* Mohammed Ben-Idris, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/28/2025
* USD 885,000.00

Recent cyber-attacks and reconnaissance missions on cyber-physical energy
systems (CPESs) have contributed to concerns regarding these systems' security,
reliability, and resilience. As the deployment of new communication,
computation, and control technologies in modern power systems increases, more
sophisticated tools will be required to analyze and prevent failure and attack
propagations between and within system layers. The objective of this project is
to harden CPESs against failures and attacks and to educate future engineers
about the new types of threats to future power systems and required tools to
strengthen them. The proposed research encompasses the following key areas:
classification of system layers and characterization of their interactions;
establishment of new reliability and resilience indices; and development of
advanced comprehensive models and methods for reliability and resilience
assessment and enhancement of CPESs. The impacts of the proposed project extend
well beyond these specific research areas. First, the problem of reliability and
resilience assurance in power grids is timely since cyber-attacks and network
reconnaissance missions have been increasing in recent years. Second, given that
power grids are critical to the nation's economy and security and that the
consequences of blackouts and damaged grid equipment are severe, it is becoming
imperative to harden them against attacks and failure propagation. In addition
to these large-scale contributions, the proposed research promises a direct and
substantial educational impact, most notably by developing new curriculum,
incorporating several project aspects into power reliability and resilient
control courses, enhancing graduate and undergraduate research programs, and
creating new student mentorship and career opportunities. The proposed research
will contribute to the establishment of science and engineering principles for
the design, reconstruction, and digitization of CPESs to ensure a secure,
reliable, and resilient power supply, and will equip future generations of
engineers with the necessary tools to operate and enhance
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the objective of this proposal is to harden
CPESs against failures and potential cyber- and physical-attacks, the proposed
integrative approach addresses the reliability and resilience of future power
grids and provides solutions to problems related to various research domains.
The anticipated outcomes will advance the following topic areas: (1)
characterizing inter- and intra-actions between and within system layers and
sub-layers; (2) establishing a set of reliability and resilience indices to
contribute to the power and energy industry's goal of developing standardized
and universally accepted resilience indices and metrics for CPESs; (3)
developing efficient hybrid evaluation methods based on the snowflake
development theory for reliability and resilience assessment that is amenable to
CPESs; and (4) developing a game theoretic approach to determine proactive
defense solutions against unknown and unpredicted emerging threats. The research
proposed here will contribute to the development of a transformative
mathematical framework and methodology that will enable - both through direct
consequences and through promotion of further research solutions to hurdles that
presently impede the hardening of CPESs against catastrophic failures and
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.