* 1847729
* CAREER: Wearable Biomarker Analysis for Point-of-Person Monitoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Sam Emaminejad, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Addressing the grand societal healthcare challenges, regarding both human
suffering and the ever-growing cost of healthcare, necessitates a paradigm shift
from generic and reactive medicine to personalized, proactive, and preventive
medicine. Accordingly, wearable biomonitoring technologies play a critical role
in promoting awareness and adoption of healthy lifestyles for disease prevention
and enabling actionable feedback. Currently, commercialized wearable sensors and
Internet of Things devices are only capable of tracking physical activities and
vital signs, and fail to non-invasively access molecular-level biomarker
information to provide insight into the body's dynamic chemistry. Also, at the
current state, blood-based sensing techniques that provide direct measurements
of circulating biomarkers cannot be scaled across the general population for
point-of-person daily monitoring (due to their invasive nature and risk of
infection). Alternatively, other biofluids can be probed, which share biomarker
partitioning pathways with blood and can be accessed non-invasively. In this
regard, sweat is an excellent candidate, because it is a rich source of
biomarkers that originally diffused from blood and can be retrieved in a
wearable format and without user intervention. By attaining reasonable level of
predictive accuracy in providing non-invasive proxy measures of blood
biomarkers, wearable sweat sensors allow for monitoring the well-being of
individuals and enable actionable feedback to improve their health and
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses fundamental
bottlenecks critical to advancing the field of sweat-based biosensing at device,
sensor, and data analytics levels. In the proposed approach, by devising
programmable iontophoretic sweat induction and microfluidic interfaces, the
interfering effects of confounders and contamination will be mitigated. A high
throughput electro-modification sensor development methodology will be devised
for the multiplexed construction of chemically diverse sensing features in
microarray formats, which will be tailored to accurately measure sweat
biomarkers on body. Furthermore, an analytical framework will be developed to
provide undistorted measures of the sweat biomarkers, thus rendering individual-
level temporal estimates of blood biomarker levels to establish the correlation
and clinical utility of sweat readings. Upon achieving the proposed milestones,
a new class of biomarker analysis platforms, with real-time information sensing
and transmission capabilities, emerge that can facilitate general population
well-being and performance monitoring. Equally important, the versatility of the
devised methodologies allows for their use, with minimal reconfiguration, to
target biomarkers in other biofluids (interstitial fluid, saliva, urine, and
blood). The large data sets that will be collected through these technologies
will expand our understanding of personal and societal health needs. Future
generations of scientist will be trained by synergistically integrating the
outreach and education plans with research activities. A diverse community of
high school/undergraduate students will participate in research. The research
findings will be integrated in the biosensing courses that the PI is
developing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.