* 1847334
* CAREER: Ensuring Co-Sustainability of Food Production and Environmental Quality in the U.S. Midwest Agroecosystems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kaiyu Guan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2024
* USD 509,900.00

The past 200 years have seen the US Midwest be transformed from natural
prairie/wetlands to fertile croplands that currently produce about one third of
the world?s corn and soybean. This landscape was transformed by human activities
through extensive subsurface "tiling" (drainage piping) and intensified uses of
fertilizer and other inputs. However, this transformation has also created
important questions about environmental sustainability. With further stress from
climate change, can the US Midwest remain as the global food basket for the next
100 years? How can food production and environmental quality both be sustained
in this landscape? In the US Midwest agroecosystem, carbon (e.g. crop growth),
hydrology (both water quantity and quality), and nutrient cycles are all closely
intertwined across scales, from the field/headwater scale to the whole river
(greater Mississippi river basin) network and continental scales. Any human
activities and practices do not just affect one component, rather the complete
set of interconnections. Thus, a "system" analysis of the complex feedbacks and
interactions is required to assess potential adaptations in the US Midwest
agroecosystem. This project adopts a system view to holistically model and
quantify the coupled "food-water-nutrient nexus" for the US Midwest
agroecosystem. These models will significantly advance the understanding of the
processes and predict agroecosystem behavior under current and future climate
conditions. Two promising management practices (i.e. controlled drainage, and
nutrient management) to achieve co-sustainability of food production and
environmental quality will be assessed&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of
the research is to establish an advanced understanding of how crop growth,
hydrology, and nutrient cycles interact under different human management and
climate conditions in the setting of the US Midwest agroecosystem. The project
will develop a coupled land-river model and a model-data fusion approach, and
integrate field-level collected data and remote sensing measurements.
Specifically, tile drainage extent and drainage strength will be estimated in a
spatially explicit manner at the regional scale for the three key states in the
US Midwest, by a new model-data fusion approach based on ecohydrological
processes. This dataset of tile drainage will then be used to develop a coupled
land-river network model (ecosys-THREW) to quantify feedbacks/interactions among
the water cycle, nitrogen cycle, and crop production across spatial scales in
this agroecosystem, as well as to assess the potential of promising human
management practices to allow co-sustainability of food production and
environment quality in the US Midwest. Simulation results from the coupled
ecosys-THREW model are expected to be used by policy makers and farmer
communities to assess the agroecosystem conditions and potential impacts of
various conservation practices at the regional scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.