* 1847932
* CAREER: New Metalloenzyme-Catalyzed Transformations in Natural Product Biosynthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Mohammad Seyedsayamdost, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 06/30/2024
* USD 700,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division and the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering Program in the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems are funding Dr.
Mohammad R. Seyedsayamdost from Princeton University to discover novel reactions
carried out by metalloenzymes during natural product biosynthesis. Natural
products are small molecules synthesized by diverse microorganisms and released
into the environment where they have varied biological functions. The natural
products are also a major source of therapeutics. Metalloenzymes are often
implicated in the production of these molecules, but the reactions that they
catalyze are in most cases unknown. The proposed experiments help define the
transformations catalyzed by hundreds of metalloenzymes during natural product
biosynthesis. In doing so, the research expands the chemical repertoire of
metalloenzymes and delineate new biosynthetic strategies, which may be used in
the industrial production of commodity molecules. At the same time, the
experimental plan enables rigorous training for of graduate and undergraduate
students who do research at the interface of chemistry and biology. The project
is integrated into an outreach program designed to grow the scientific skills of
teachers at local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent explosion in
microbial genome sequences has brought to light an abundance of new
metalloenzymes. With the substrates of many of these enzymes unknown, mining
this daunting and novel catalytic landscape is a big challenge. In this project,
a bioinformatic approach is used to link substrates to yet uncharacterized
metalloenzymes. The reactions carried out by these enzymes are then elucidated
using biological experiments, NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry. Their
detailed mechanisms is the subject of spectroscopic and kinetic studies. These
investigations broaden the reaction scope of metalloenzymes and define new
biosynthetic pathways. The results will shed light on the strategies that nature
utilizes to catalyze difficult transformations during the synthesis of complex
natural products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.