* 1847841
* CAREER: Elucidating How the Liquid Side of the Electrochemical Interface Controls Catalytic Selectivity during Carbon Dioxide Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Matthias Waegele, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 674,179.00

Efficient use of carbon dioxide could provide sustainable routes to essential
chemicals and fuels. Such processes could help reduce the carbon dioxide
emissions that may contribute to environmental changes. The combined use of
electricity and catalysis (electrocatalysis) to convert carbon dioxide to
valuable products is a promising solution to this problem. The selective
production of a single chemical instead of a mixture remains a great obstacle to
the adoption of this technology. To address this challenge, Dr. Matthias Waegele
is seeking to understand how the physical and chemical properties control the
product selectivity of electrocatalytic processes. The insights derived from
this project are critical for the design of carbon dioxide conversion processes
with high product selectivity. Dr. Waegele is engaging non-academic communities
and underrepresented undergraduate students in learning about chemistry's
central role in developing sustainable energy sources. These activities include
research internships for minority undergraduate students and workshops for high
school students to promote participant interest in scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Matthias Waegele of Boston College is
supported by the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry to
study how the liquid side of the copper (Cu)/electrolyte interface exerts
control over the product selectivity of electrocatalytic carbon dioxide
reduction to hydrocarbons. To establish robust interfacial property/reactivity
relationships, his research team is characterizing the electrocatalytic
interface by surface-selective infrared (IR) and Raman spectroscopies while
simultaneously monitoring the reaction products evolving from the same interface
by differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS). Specifically, Dr.
Waegele and co-workers are elucidating how cations, co-adsorbates, interfacial
water, and the coverage, site-distribution, and dynamics of surface-adsorbed CO
(a key intermediate in carbon dioxide reduction) affect interfacial properties
and thereby impact catalytic selectivity. Dr. Waegele and his team are further
testing the utility of their interfacial property/reactivity relationships by
designing catalytic interfaces with high selectivities for hydrocarbon
evolution. Dr. Waegele is actively engaged in synergistic educational activities
to promote interest in how the chemical sciences contribute to the development
of sustainable energy sources. The educational programs, which include research
internships and workshops, target underrepresented undergraduates and non-
academic communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.