* 1847362
* CAREER: A new class of polar thermoplastics: Mechanistic investigations into the synthesis of isotactic poly(vinyl ethers)
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Frank Leibfarth, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 04/30/2024
* USD 597,181.00

Synthetic polymers protect people from extreme weather, enable prolonged food
storage, and help cure disease. While these versatile materials have enabled
population expansion and globalization, a new need has arisen: the capability to
make high-volume plastics with the functional properties needed for next-
generation challenges while simultaneously incorporating sustainability into the
material design. To tackle this challenge, the research team of Professor
Leibfarth of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill develops synthetic
methods to enable the precise control of the polymer structure and the use of
building blocks from biorenewable resources. Accomplishing the goals enumerated
in this project will make significant contributions to the scientific community
and the broader population, both in contributing new fundamental knowledge and
in introducing novel material solutions for contemporary societal challenges.
This fundamental research in polymer chemistry couples with an education program
that develops inquiry-guided scientific activities to educate and bring the joy
of discovery to children undergoing long-term hospitalization. This underserved
group ranges in age from K-12. These patients/students not get the same
interactive scientific experiences as their peers. Professor Leibfarth and his
group create structured modules that introduce inpatients to contemporary
aspects of polymer science through an interactive mix of hands-on and multimedia
activities. Six scalable modules that can be implemented across a range of
hospital settings are available at UNC Children's Hospital and will impact 50+
patients per year. Detailed instructions and multimedia resources are publicly
available online. In addition, graduate students receive formal training in
interacting with diverse patient populations and communicating science with the
public, building a sustainable group culture that values the importance of
diversity and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tacticity (stereochemistry) of
vinyl polymers is intimately linked to their resultant material properties.
Despite the well-developed stereoselective methods for the polymerization of
propylene and other nonpolar alpha-olefins, stereoselective polymerization of
polar vinyl monomers has proven more challenging. The Leibfarth group has
recently developed catalysts that systematically bias the chain-end
stereochemical environment during cationic polymerization and enable the
synthesis of isotactic poly(vinylether)s with unprecedented isotacticities. With
the support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry Program
of the NSF Division of Chemistry, the Leibfarth group seeks to gain a deeper
fundamental understanding of this polymerization method. The first objective of
this project is to examine the influence of monomer sterics and chirality on
reaction performance in order to understand the interactions that enable the
catalyst to direct stereoselective polymerization of these monomers. The second
objective seeks to expand the diversity of chemical functionality amenable to
stereoselective polymerization and explore strategies (e.g., continuous flow
methods) to control the molecular weight and molecular weight distribution of
the polymers. The third objective leverages the fundamental understanding gained
throughout the project to develop a new class of biorenewable vinyl ether
monomers that are amenable to stereoselective
polymerization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.