* 1847937
* CAREER: Probing Structure and Expanding Function with Genetically Encoded Non- Canonical Amino Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Christine Phillips-Piro, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 08/31/2024
* USD 515,000.00

Twenty amino acids naturally occur in living systems where they serve as
building blocks of proteins. These proteins, in turn, have key functions in
cells. With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Dr. Christine Phillips-Piro from Franklin and Marshall
College to use non-canonical amino acids (ncAAs), i.e., amino acids that do not
occur in living systems, to investigate the structure and to systematically
modify the function of proteins. The addition of new ncAAs results in unusual
proteins that have very different functions than those made with the natural
amino acids. The research project provides interdisciplinary training for
undergraduate researchers in chemistry, molecular biology, biochemistry, and
protein structure determination. Dr. Phillips-Piro's courses enable
undergraduate students to learns about current scientific research. She
integrates scientific literacy in two different courses - general chemistry and
a general education course. Her team also helps to organize and run a regional
chemistry conference for undergraduates (the Intercollegiate Student Chemists?
Convention (ISCC)). Professor Phillips-Piro is a member of the Advanced Photon
Source User Organization (APSUO) which seeks to broaden participation at Argonne
National Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research supported by this award
exploits a targeted collection of ncAAs being used to both study protein
structure and tune protein function. Local environments in a thermostable heme
nitric oxide and/or oxygen binding protein (H-NOX) are assessed by using the
ncAA vibrational reporter 4-cyano-L-phenylalanine in concert with temperature-
dependent infrared spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography. The systematic
modulation of the the oxygen binding affinity of the heme protein is achieved by
using tyrosine ncAAs with altered phenolic hydrogen acidity. These moieties
influence the strength of hydrogen bonding between a key amino acid residue
(Y140) distal to the heme and the small molecule bound to the heme. Metal-
binding ncAAs are used to generate a novel bimetallic enzyme based on the H-NOX
scaffold. The insights gained and tools developed by Dr. Phillips-Piro may
benefit other scientists who employ ncAAs to probe, modify, and/or engineer
biological systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.