* 1847861
* CAREER: Strongly correlated systems through the lens of topological phases
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Max Metlitski, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 01/31/2024
* USD 575,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research
and education towards investigating possible states of matter that can appear in
solid-state materials. One of the ultimate goals of condensed matter physics is
to theoretically understand and realize in the laboratory all possible phases of
matter. The traditional approach to distinguishing different phases of matter
from one another is based on ideas of symmetry. For instance, different solids
can be classified by the distinct crystal symmetries the atoms that form them
attain, e.g. cubic. A similar approach can also be applied to the many phases
interacting electrons can create in materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However,
that approach is essentially based on intuition from classical physics and is in
practice insufficient for describing a multitude of phases of matter enabled by
quantum mechanics. In fact, that approach does not even allow one to
theoretically distinguish a metal from an insulator. Even more surprising, there
exist distinct insulators with the same symmetry. The central goal of this
project is the study of these quantum insulators and the vast array of phenomena
they host, which include surfaces on which electric conduction protected from
the usually detrimental effects of material disorder exists. Such understanding
could lead to general conclusions about the complex behavior of electrons in
materials and could eventually provide material platforms for the building
blocks of quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its own field, this
project can have impact on several other areas of science, such as mathematics
and high-energy physics. In addition to the research, the project includes a
multipronged educational and outreach program targeting K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students. The K-12 community will be reached through participation in
the NSF-funded Theorynet program that brings theorists into classrooms, and
through co-organization of the Boston Physics Circle, which prepares high-school
students for physics competitions. The undergraduate community will be served by
direct involvement in research and by popular research presentations. A major
component of this project is the training of graduate students who will be
involved in all aspects of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education towards understanding fundamentals of strongly interacting electron
systems. In the last decade there has been an impressive progress in the
understanding of gapped phases of matter. Ideas of symmetry and topology play an
important role in the physics of such phases. Part of the progress has been
driven by the study of symmetry-protected topological (SPT) phases, which are
interacting generalizations of topological insulators.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Much of the interesting physics of an SPT occurs at its boundary,
which is guaranteed to carry nontrivial symmetry-protected edge modes.
Surprisingly, a full classification of SPT phases of bosons and, more recently,
fermions with arbitrary interactions has been proposed. However, the
understanding of surface states of such phases is still limited, particularly
for strongly interacting SPT phases of fermions. The study of boundaries of 2D
and 3D SPTs and the application of results to other problems is a major goal of
this project. In particular, the PI will investigate: i) Gapped symmetric
boundaries of 3D SPTs supporting anyon excitations, ii) 2D fermion SPTs and
their 1D CFT boundaries, iii) Application of SPTs to derive tight electron
filling constraints on the existence of (interacting) insulators in 3D, iv) SPT
surface states in the presence of quenched disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will significantly advance our understanding of strongly interacting
phases of matter (beyond just SPTs). In particular, it will deepen our
understanding of symmetry anomalies, which may lead to the conjecture of new
dualities between quantum field theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beyond its own
field, this project can have impact on several other areas of science, such as
mathematics and high-energy physics. In addition to the research, the project
includes a multipronged educational and outreach program targeting K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students. The K-12 community will be reached through
participation in the NSF-funded Theorynet program that brings theorists into
classrooms, and through co-organization of the Boston Physics Circle, which
prepares high-school students for physics competitions. The undergraduate
community will be served by direct involvement in research and by popular
research presentations. A major component of this project is the training of
graduate students who will be involved in all aspects of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.