* 1847237
* CAREER:A Comprehensive Assessment of the Reactive Oxygen Species Activity of Ambient Fine Particulate Matter and its association with the Chemical Composition
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Vishal Verma, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2024
* USD 501,438.00

Air pollution particles are complex mixtures of organic and inorganic
components. Due to their small size, particles smaller than 2.5 microns (called
PM2.5) can be inhaled deep into human lungs. Once there, PM2.5 can cause damage
to lung tissues by generating oxidants. PM2.5 levels are measured by mass
abundance, but this metric does not predict health risk because different
particles create different amounts of oxidants. The goal of this research is to
develop an automated instrument to measure the capability of PM2.5 to generate
oxidants. Particle constituents that generate oxidants will be quantified using
novel chemical characterization and modeling. Successful development of this
technology will transform our ability to rapidly measure health risk.
Interactive summer camps involving high school students and teachers will be
organized and an online module to assess PM2.5 exposure risk will be developed.
Societal benefits will result from increasing scientific literacy and broadening
participation of youth from diverse backgrounds in environmental engineering and
public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ambient PM2.5 is the fifth largest risk
factor contributing to global burden of disease. Despite the confirmed
association of PM2.5 mass concentrations with various human diseases, there is a
significant gap in our knowledge of how they PM2.5 causes adverse health
effects. The capability to generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) is an
important property of PM2.5 that may be the missing link between these
associations. There are two major challenges in the widespread adoption of ROS
as a measure of risk. First, ROS measurement is laborious and time-consuming in
comparison to easily measured bulk PM2.5 mass. Second, we lack a mechanistic
understanding of how particulate chemical components catalyze ROS generation.
This project will develop an automated instrument for measuring all biologically
plausible modes of ROS activity of ambient PM2.5. The instrument will be used to
analyze the ROS activity of ambient PM2.5 samples collected from six sites in
the Midwest US. The extensive dataset of ambient PM2.5 ROS activity will be
integrated with a detailed chemical characterization scheme to identify the
chemical components associated with different modes of ROS generation. The
contribution of each component to total ROS activity will be quantified by
applying regression-based modeling techniques. Successful development of a rapid
and accurate identification of ROS-active chemical constituents would transform
our ability to design effective particulate emission control strategies. Broader
impacts of this research will result from the reduction of the global burden of
the diseases associated with ambient PM. These results will be disseminated to a
broad audience of K-12 students and teachers through summer camps, as well as
the public through online risk prediction modules to increase the scientific
literacy of the Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.