* 1847436
* CAREER: Scalable Nano-integrated 3D Fibers for Multifunctional Neural Interfacing
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Xiaoting Jia, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/29/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Nearly one-sixth of the world's population suffer from neurological diseases,
including epilepsy, Parkinson's disease, autism, Alzheimer's disease,
depression, etc., and their life qualities are severely compromised. In order to
effectively treat these brain-related diseases with minimal side effects, we
need to fully understand the functional networks in the brain. However, this
endeavor has been largely hindered by the engineering challenges of making deep
brain interface devices that match the functional complexity and mechanical
compliance of the brain. There remains an urgent need to create a
multifunctional device that can seamlessly interface with the brain without
causing significant damage. This research program proposes to develop novel
neural interface devices which are highly flexible, biocompatible, scalable, and
clinically translatable, with multisite multifunctional capabilities. The
developed toolset will also be utilized to address some of the key challenges in
biological applications, with a focus on the seizure, tumor, and the visual
system. To achieve these goals, the proposed research program will build upon
the leading edge research across multiple fields, including nanomaterials,
optics, electronics, surface chemistry, microfabrication, and neuroscience, and
aims to significantly advance the fundamental understanding in these fields. The
proposed research offers many potential benefits to society, including the
possibility of improving the lives of patients with neurological disorders. The
research will be highly integrated with multilevel educational components
towards K12 students and teachers, undergraduate, and graduate students, with a
focus on underrepresented student groups. Examples include the Kindergarten-to-
College program targeting fifth graders from more than ten title I schools
across Virginia, and the Computers and Technology at Virginia Tech program
targeting high school girls from Virginia and out of state. The PI will also
actively participate in the National Science Foundation's Revolutionizing
Engineering Departments grant for transforming undergraduate education in the
Electrical and Computer Engineering department at Virginia Tech. &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of the proposed research program is to address a key challenge in
developing bio-friendly and multifunctional neural interfaces utilizing a non-
conventional fiber drawing and patterning platform. The methods to be employed
include nanomaterials processing and modeling, multimaterial multifunctional
fiber fabrication and patterning, electrochemical characterization and circuit
modeling, optical characterization and modeling, and in vitro and in vivo neural
stimulation and recording. This project will enable flexible and biocompatible,
nanoelectrodes-integrated, bidirectional, and multisite three-dimensional neural
interfaces. It can facilitate the understanding of complex brain functions as
well as the treatment of neurological diseases. The specific goals of this
program are (1) Scalable fabrication of nano-integrated electrodes. Fundamental
understanding of the material properties and charge transfer will be obtained
through thorough characterization as well as mechanical and electrical modeling.
(2) Multifunctional integration combined with modeling to understand the
material and structural limitations. (3) In vitro and in vivo neural stimulation
and recording for neuroscience applications including seizure, tumor treatment,
and visual circuitry. The intellectual merit of this proposed research includes
the understanding of (1) how nanomaterials interface with neurons at the
cellular or subcellular level; (2) the fundamental limitations to neural
electrode sizes and optical channels; (3) nanomaterials properties under extreme
physical conditions. Besides, this developed toolset will enable significant new
insights into various neuroscience applications through interdisciplinary
research across multiple fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.