* 1847277
* CAREER: Developing the next generation of Proterozoic paleogeographic models through integrated data development, synthesis and education
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Nicholas Swanson-Hysell, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 699,790.00

This project will focus on improving scientific and public understanding of the
geography of Earth's continents during the Proterozoic, a period of time that
spans a range from about 2.5 billion years ago to 542 million years ago. The
reconstruction of past continental positions derives from tectonic processes and
is central to research that seeks to understand how the Earth has changed
through time from its interior to its surface environment. The project will
involve studies of sedimentary rocks from the mid-continent of North and igneous
rocks from West Africa. Data from the project will be developed in conjunction
with an undergraduate research program that targets the participation of
underrepresented and first-generation students in an important STEM discipline.
The project will contribute to increased public scientific literacy by the
development of scientific content derived from the research that will be
included with an interactive global Science on a Sphere display system at the
University of California Berkeley Lawrence Hall of Science. This display shows
the changing position of the continents through geological time and will be
viewed by 250,000 members of the public every year. The content will also be
made available to 153 other science centers with the display system. In
conjunction with this dynamic content, a public program at the Lawrence Hall of
Science will be developed that illuminates the Earth science concepts behind the
projects outcomes that intended for informal science education aimed at a broad
audience. Undergraduate students mentored by the principal investigator and
museum staff will deliver the presentations. The project will provide training
opportunities for graduate students who will be involved in the research and
outreach efforts. Classroom visits and field trips for elementary school
students from low-income neighborhoods in Oakland will be run to the Lawrence
Hall of Science in each project year. These trips will utilize the Science on a
Sphere content and provide a hands-on educational experience for 560 Oakland
elementary school students over the course of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research will focus on developing and
synthesizing data to test hypotheses that are fundamental to Proterozoic
paleogeography and the configuration of the Nuna and Rodinia supercontinents.
Research in Laurentia will test a provocative hypothesis that translation within
the Grenvillian orogeny results in the Grenville Loop portion of Laurentia's
apparent polar wander path not being representative of the continent. This
apparent polar wander path central in efforts to reconstruct the assembly and
configuration of Rodinia. Chronostratigraphic constraints reveal that a missing
link in the path from the craton can be filled with paleomagnetic data to test
these hypotheses. Project research will seek to develop new constraints on
Proterozoic paleogeography from the West African craton; the position of which
is poorly known due to a lack of data. Recently dated Proterozoic dikes provide
an opportunity to test a hypothesized long-lived connection of West Africa to
Amazonia that is essential to reconstructing Nuna, Rodinia and the assembly of
Gondwana. New data developed through project research will be used in
conjunction with the global database to develop a paleogeographic model that
spans the Proterozoic and links up with Phanerozoic
reconstructions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.