* 1847356
* CAREER: Engineering Bacteria Swarming for Biotechnology
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Tal Danino, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2024
* USD 555,051.00

Synthetic biology is a tool for designing useful coordinated behaviors in
bacterial populations. To date, these efforts have focused on modifying E. coli.
Other bacteria exhibit more complex behavior than E. coli. One example of this
is swarming. E. coli is capable of localized swarming, similar to a flock of
birds all flying together in a particular direction. Other bacteria are capable
of forming more complex patterns. One example is the formation of periodic ring
patterns that can be easily observed visually. The basic idea behind the project
is both simple and powerful. If bacteria can be designed to swarm, forming rings
in response to a specific signal, the cells can act as a sensor that can be
observed easily. The signals could be viruses, toxic chemicals, or dangerous
pathogens. These bacteria could then provide a low cost, easily observed method
of detection that could be used around the world to help identify and avoid
diseases or other toxic agents. The project will also advance STEM education and
diversity at several levels. STEM + arts (STEAM) workshops will be developed and
run. Students will be recruited to participate in research. In addition,
biology-based artworks will be presented to the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to engineer
bacterial swarming to generate macroscopic patterns. We hope to create a
spatially-encoded biosensor. The first step will be to engineer E. coli gene
circuits to create synthetic swarming motility on solid agar. This will help us
understand how to control swarming behavior and pattern formation from the
bottom-up. A top-down effort will modulate natural swarming behavior in other
organ-isms. This will also create a synthetic biology toolkit for these
organisms. Finally, these organisms and E. coli will be engineered to record a
transient signal by permanently modulating pattern formation. These biosensors
will then be applied to the detection of parasites. The biosensor readout will
produce patterns at the scale of a Petri dish and easily detectable by eye.
Thus, this readout will be invaluable for use in low-resource settings. The
complementary bottom-up and top-down approaches will provide fundamental insight
into the use of microbial hosts and behaviors as
sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.