* 1847683
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2018 International Conference on Emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT)
* CSE,CNS
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Alberto Dainotti, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 11/30/2020
* USD 14,843.00

The 14th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies (CoNEXT) will take place from December 4 to December 7, 2018 in
Heraklion, Greece. This award assists 12 US-based graduate students to attend
this conference. Participation in conferences such as CoNEXT forms a central
part of the graduate school experience as it provides students with an
opportunity to interact with more senior researchers and exposes them to
leading-edge research in the field. ACM CoNEXT emphasizes interactions among
networking researchers at an international level, and attending CoNEXT presents
an excellent opportunity for US graduate students to connect with a thriving
international research community. As in past years, CoNEXT 2018 will include a
special student workshop that will enable students to present and obtain
feedback on their work in progress. This award enables students to attend the
main conference and associated CoNEXT 2018 workshops, which include the "First
International Workshop on Experimentation and Measurements in 5G (EM-5G)", and
the "Evolution, Performance, and Interoperability of QUIC (EPIQ) Workshop". This
program will expose students to new ideas, and allow them to interact with other
researchers. These students would otherwise be unable to attend the conference.
The travel grant chair is committed to the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates
research and education of students through exposure to a premier technical
meeting in computer networks and communications. Students will have the
opportunity to observe high-quality presentations and interact with senior
researchers in the field both in the main conference and the associated
workshops. In particular, the student workshop focuses on providing students an
opportunity to present their work in progress, receive feedback on their work,
and obtain valuable experience in writing and presenting technical papers thus
having a positive impact on the quality of their research. The CoNEXT conference
has developed into a top-tier international conference, presenting a tremendous
opportunity to students to expand their breadth of ideas, research skills, and
technical perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.