* 1847794
* CAREER: Modeling Mental Representation in Judgment
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Sudeep Bhatia, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 588,607.00

Recent advances in machine learning, combined with the increased availability of
large natural language online datasets, have opened up new opportunities for
understanding human behavior. With these new methods, it is now possible to
observe what people read and talk about, and thus think and feel about, a wide
range of common objects and events. The goal of this project is to study how
these novel methods and datasets can be combined with existing psychological
theory to predict and understand human judgment, with the primary application to
the domain of risk perception. The computational techniques proposed as part of
this project allow for the automatic, large-scale analysis of the perception of
naturalistic risks, and thus can be used to identify problems and develop
interventions involving risk communication and risk management. More generally,
by applying cutting edge methods in data science to the study of human behavior,
this project develops novel technologies for predicting and understanding
attitudes, beliefs, and preferences. By doing so, it facilitates a wide array of
policy and commercial applications not feasible using existing empirical
methodologies in the behavioral sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;How can we
uncover and quantify rich mental representations for all of the objects and
concepts that are the target of everyday judgment? How can we use these rich
representations to predict judgments and judgment errors, to study domain and
individual-level differences in judgment, and to characterize the complex web of
associations that underlie judgment? Finally, how can we study differences in
mental representations and judgments across cultures and time periods? This
project will use "semantic vectors" -- high dimensional representations for
words obtained from large-scale language data -- to address these questions.
Semantic vectors provide a good proxy for the structure of knowledge and
association in people's minds and can be combined with various machine learning
algorithms to predict judgments for naturalistic objects and concepts, such as
sources of risk. These vectors can also identify the key associates of
judgments, facilitating directed hypothesis tests for a diverse array of
psychological dimensions, including emotions, moral concepts, and personality.
Finally, when trained on different types of language datasets, semantic vectors
can shed light on the complex interaction between judgment and culture, history,
and society. Note that semantic vectors can be used in this manner for nearly
any judgment domain that involves common objects, individuals, and events. Thus
one key goal of this project is to evaluate the applicability of semantic
vectors for predicting and understanding the many different types of judgments
that that people make on a day-to-day basis (including not only risk judgment,
but also, for example, health judgment and consumer
judgment).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.