* 1847733
* CAREER: Ionic-Type Phononic Metamaterials: Physics and Acousto-Fluidic Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Ahmet Yanik, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 01/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

Cardiovascular diseases are the leading causes of death and disability in the
western world and are a great burden to modern society; an estimated 17.5
million people every year die from them. A number of recent studies have shown
that the levels of circulating endothelial progenitor cells in blood stream is
good predictor of the heart disease risk. However, current methods to detect
these rare circulating cells are only suitable for well-equipped research
laboratories. There remains an unmet medical need for development of point-of-
care biomedical technologies allowing rapid and reliable quantification of
endothelial progenitor cells directly from patient's blood. This research
program proposes to develop novel microfluidic technologies based on phononic
(acoustic) metamaterials (artificial materials) for high- efficiency size-based
enrichment, affinity-base isolation and label-free counting of endothelial
progenitor cells from blood samples. To achieve these goals, the proposed
research program aims to make a remarkable leap in understanding and use of
acoustic forces created on piezoelectric substrates. Similar to electronics, it
aims to introduce a complete set of acoustic-microfluidic components that can be
combined to provide full laboratory functions on a chip platform. In addition to
providing training opportunities for graduate students, the educational
component of this program incorporates unrepresented minorities from
undergraduate programs such as Multicultural Engineering Program and offers
mentored summer research experiences (internships) to local high school
students. Furthermore, the proposed program aims to contribute in outreach
activities through programs such as Girls in Engineering Program, a program
focused on middle school girls and to provide senior design project
opportunities to final year undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims to
introduce novel acousto-microfluidic devices with new functionalities using on
phononic bandgap structures. It focuses particularly on ionic-type phononic
metamaterials offering a monolithic integration capability to piezoelectric
substrates. This opens door to planar and scalable integration of phononic
bandgap structures with microfluidics and acoustic wave sources. Merging
phononic bandstructure engineering and microfluidics at a fundamental level
could lead to modular lab-on-chip technologies that can be programmed to do
different tasks in a compact and highly efficient way. The specific goals of
this program are (1) to advance of our understanding of two-dimensional phononic
metamaterials to guide, trap and focus acoustic phonons, (2) to merge these two-
dimensional phononic metamaterials with microfluidics, and (3) to demonstrate
practical uses of these novel acousto- microfluidic devices for sorting,
isolation and counting of endothelial progenitor cells for detection of hearth
diseases. The proposed research program involves theoretical analysis of
monolithic phononic metamaterials, acoustic radiation forces and dynamic
behavior of micro- bioparticles in acousto-microfluidic channels. The designed
phononic metamaterial devices will be fabricated using in-house fabrication
facilities and the powerful fabrication techniques recently developed in Yanik
lab. Acousto-microfluidic experiments will be conducted to test, refine and
advance theoretical models of these metamaterials and understanding of acoustic
radiation forces in solution environment. Yanik lab will also demonstrate
practical uses of phononic bandgap devices for size/affinity-based sorting,
manipulation and isolation of micro- bioparticles in microfluidic channels for
biomedical applications. The intellectual merit of the proposed research lies in
the fundamental knowledge of ways to manipulate surface acoustic waves by
phononic metamaterials to optimize their use in microfluidic systems.
Understanding advantages and technical issues associated with employing phononic
metamaterials will lead to a deeper insight into their unprecedented potential
for more involved schemes of acoustofluidic particle manipulation. This will be
accomplished by interdisciplinary research combining our expertise from physics,
electrical engineering and biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.