* 1847847
* CAREER: Understanding disorder, defects, and dielectric properties of entropy-stabilized oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* John Heron, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: The discovery and development of new materials
underlies technological revolutions in microelectronics. Recently, a new
materials field has emerged that harnesses large chemical and structural
disorder to its advantage. This project will use atomic-scale engineering of
structural and chemical disorder to discover and understand these new materials
to achieve unprecedented functionalities. This project aims to leverage state-
of-the-art film deposition with in-situ structural characterization and atomic-
to-micron scale imaging techniques to understand the stabilization of
structurally and chemically disordered multicomponent oxides, their complex
structure, and the ways disorder induces novel physical properties. The results
of this research are anticipated to provide new insights toward realizing new
oxide materials and disorder-property relationships. Students in this project
are receiving professional training in materials synthesis and the measurement
of structural and dielectric properties of materials. Upon graduation, students
are qualified for employment in academia and industrial fields - especially
those related to microelectronics. This research is integrated with educational
activities to engage pre-college students and establish a new pedagogy for
physical science classes taught at the high school level. Curriculum components
are being developed to introduce scientific practices and atomic-to-macroscopic
scale thinking into the high-school classroom using the dielectric properties
and applications of ceramics. The effort is bringing teachers together to
receive training to integrate these new components into their teaching. The
impact and merit of these activities is being assessed using biannual surveys
and in-person interviews. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS:
Functionalizing defects and disorder can unlock unprecedented properties in
ceramics. To facilitate this functionality, this project seeks to
comprehensively understand, characterize, control, and predict disorder across
length scales. In oxides, the magnetic and electronic properties are strongly
correlated to their stereochemistry and electronic structure. The introduction
of disorder, chemically or structurally, can lead to symmetry breaking, doping,
and frustrated bond and electronic configurations that have been associated with
emergent and colossal physical properties. The discovery of multicomponent
oxides stabilized by a large configurational disorder, so called entropy-
stabilized oxides, creates a unique state of matter where enhanced functional
properties stemming from the inherent chemical and structural disorder can be
realized. This project aims to: 1) utilize real-time characterization to resolve
adatom relaxation and evolution of crystal structure during deposition to
understand mechanisms of entropy stabilization in oxide thin films, 2) probe
disorder, defects, and charge and compositional non-uniformities from atomic- to
macro-scale using transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, and dielectric spectroscopy, and 3) understand
the microstructural mechanisms that give rise to the anomalous strain
relaxation, large structural changes, and colossal dielectric properties of
entropy-stabilized oxides. It is anticipated that results will elucidate new
scientific understanding of the thermodynamic and kinetic factors that drive
stabilization, evolution and disorder of the microstructure, defect formation,
and their consequences on dielectric properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.