* 1847029
* CAREER: Understanding Interfaces in Solid State Energy Storage Systems and Cross-Disciplinary Education
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Kelsey Hatzell, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 560,454.00

Advanced lithium-ion batteries for vehicle transport and renewable electricity
grid storage applications could improve domestic energy security but performance
gaps in cost and battery lifetime limit use. The main cause of battery failure
is undesirable chemical side reactions within the device that are difficult to
quantify and to understand. Because of the lack of fundamental understanding,
engineers are less able to design materials and devices that can last the
expected lifetimes. This CAREER project will conduct fundamental research on
advanced solid-state hybrid electrolytes that have the potential for greater
energy density while retaining a safe operating environment. These hybrid
electrolytes could replace currently used liquid organic electrolytes that have
had issues with long cycle life. The active material's (lithium ion) transport
within the electrolyte and to the electrode is not fully understood in these
hybrids. This project will address fundamental knowledge of the underlying
physics and chemical transformations that support understanding of ionic
transport in the hybrid electrolytes. This knowledge will also have far-reaching
applications of chemical sensors, fuel cells, and other battery chemistries. The
educational plan intends to integrate the research findings directly into the
Nashville community through outreach programs run through the Vanderbilt
Institute for Nanoscience Engineering, Vanderbilt Engineering Ambassadors, and a
research internship program with Harpeth Hall School for Girls. All outreach
activities seek to expand scientific and engineering opportunities to
underrepresented communities in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
examine ionic transport pathways in a family of solid ion hybrid conductors.
These electrolytes are composed of two different types of ion conductors: (1)
polymers and (2) ceramics. Currently, it is unknown how ionic transport occurs
between these two materials within the electrolyte. In order to achieve
batteries that can be charged quickly and last a long time, it is necessary to
control ion transport between these two materials. The research objective of
this CAREER project is to understand ionic transport by focusing on the
characterization of ion transport at the interfaces within the electrolyte.
There are two types of interfaces that can form in a solid electrolyte:
intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic interfaces occur in hybrid electrolytes
between inorganic and organic constituents, and also occur in ceramic ion
conductors at grain boundaries. These are examples of interfaces where an ion
moves between ion conductors. Extrinsic interfaces are interfaces that emerge
during device integration (electrode|electrolyte) and can affect performance.
These interfaces involve transport between an ion conductor and a mixed ion and
electron conductor. Establishing the role interfaces have on ionic transport
will enable pathways toward achieving the competitive performance and
functionality. This project will use a multi-modal approach which couples
physics-based modeling with electrochemical, spectroscopy, x-ray, and neutron
experiments to describe transport mechanisms in hybrid solid
electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.