* 1847742
* CAREER: Gulf of Maine Temperature Trends and Variability from the early Holocene to the Present
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Katherine Allen, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2024
* USD 584,107.00

The Gulf of Maine supports a highly productive marine ecosystem extending from
Cape Cod to Nova Scotia. Ocean temperatures in this region are sensitive to
changes in the relative influx of colder currents from the north and warmer
currents from the south, which are ultimately linked to the greater regional and
global ocean-atmosphere circulation. From 2004 to 2013, the Gulf of Maine warmed
faster than 99% of the world's oceans, but the processes driving recent
temperature change here are not fully understood. A deeper understanding of
oceanographic trends on time scales beyond instrumental records (older than ~100
years) can elucidate the causes of change, determine whether abrupt changes have
happened in the past, and shed light on environmental impacts on past coastal
communities. This project brings together a multi-disciplinary team of
researchers and Native American students in New England, who will conduct a
10-day research expedition in the Gulf and delve into the region's past using
geochemical evidence buried in ancient marine sediments. Results and research
experiences of students will be shared with the broader community via
development of an innovative multi-media online storytelling environment and
through partnership with local schools. The project has the potential to enhance
long-term environmental prediction and planning in an area where human
populations and ocean ecosystems have been interlinked for
millennia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Long-term records of ocean temperature and
seawater oxygen isotope composition (d18O) will be reconstructed from the
magnesium to calcium ratio (Mg/Ca) and d18O of fossil foraminiferal calcite
derived from a suite of sediment cores from the Gulf of Maine and Scotian Shelf
and Slope. High-resolution (~100 to 200-year interval) records will extend from
the start of the Holocene ~11,600 years ago to the present, providing insight
into long-term temperature trends as well as any abrupt changes. In addition to
traditional whole-shell geochemical analysis, micro-analysis of individual
foraminiferal specimens will be conducted to provide complementary data for
assessing environmental variability. A research cruise in the Gulf of Maine will
provide sediment-core and plankton-tow material as well as hydrographic data for
refinement and regional calibration of the geochemical proxies. One key goal is
to test and extend the Mg/Ca-temperature calibration for a common high-latitude
foraminifer species, Neogloboquadrina incompta. In parallel with
paleoceanographic research, artifacts from coastal archaeological sites will be
radiocarbon-dated to refine the chronology of fishing practices in the region.
In particular, the beginning and end of intensive sword-fishing in coastal
communities will be re-dated and reassessed in light of new paleotemperature
data. All work will be carried out by a team of high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students who will gain both technical and communications training in
partnership with the Wabanaki Center and the New Media and Internet Technologies
Lab at the University of Maine. In addition to developing online narratives that
can be widely shared, high school students will practice presenting their
research verbally to different groups, including at national meetings. A diverse
team of women and men, including a member of the Penobscot Nation, will
collaborate to guide and mentor students through the scientific process and to
help them develop a voice that can effectively reach diverse
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.