* 1847971
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biological normalcy, social stigma, and allostatic load in US adolescents
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2019,11/30/2020
* Andrea Wiley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2020
* USD 12,285.00

This doctoral dissertation project will use comparative and biocultural
approaches to better understand how body phenotypes are understood in the US
cultural context, and how these cultural understandings may contribute to
biological disparities among adolescents. The investigators will measure
allostatic load (a measure of low-level chronic stress) in two groups of
adolescents to assess biological impacts of psychosocial stress from perceived
weight stigma in various epidemiological contexts. The work will address complex
relationships among phenotypic norms, social stigma, and co-morbidities of
obesity in a vulnerable section of the US population, at a time when there is a
high prevalence of obesity, perceived weight stigma, and weight discrimination.
Research findings will be shared with study participants as well as curriculum
specialists to develop new learning modules. The project supports graduate
training for a female, first-generation college student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research employs a mixed-methods, sequential
explanatory strategy, using questionnaires, biomarkers, and ethnographic
interviews to compare two populations varying in prevalence of obesity: Lawrence
County, Indiana (38%) and Monroe County, Indiana (22%). The project is framed
around the concept of biological normalcy, which refers to the ways in which
human societies develop understandings of what a "normal" human body is - normal
referring to normative ideas about what bodies "should" be as well as
statistical distributions of different phenotypic traits. The researchers use
this concept to address: 1) how cultural beliefs about what constitutes a
"normal" or healthy body are related to statistical biological norms (i.e.
obesity prevalence) within a population, and 2) how these normative beliefs
influence the statistical distribution of biological traits (i.e. allostatic
load) in a population. It is hypothesized that variation in obesity prevalence
observed between the two field sites in Indiana will be associated with
differences in perceived weight stigma, with those reporting higher perceived
stigma also having higher allostatic load, and that this relationship will be
moderated by several social and behavioral factors and coping
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.