* 1847684
* CAREER:Fractured Shales as Portals into Cryptic Carbon and Nitrogen Cycling in the Deep Biosphere
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Michael Wilkins, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 02/29/2024
* USD 557,226.00

Microbial communities in terrestrial environments catalyze myriad biogeochemical
cycles with global implications. However, in many ecosystems the combination of
biological and chemical complexity can preclude a true mechanistic understanding
of how microorganisms interact, are affected by viruses, and exchange
metabolites. These kinds of insights are critical for our ability to manipulate
microbiomes for beneficial outcomes, and better predict how biogeochemical
cycles might change under varying environmental conditions. Deep fractured
shales host more constrained microbial consortia that are more amenable to
interrogation, and offer opportunities for new scientific insights and
development of tools that can be applied to increasingly complex systems.
Indeed, the investigator has previously revealed that the cycling of
methylamines--simple carbon and nitrogen compounds--is a conserved metabolic
strategy that fuels methylotrophic methanogenesis in deep shale formations
across the Appalachian Basin. Work outlined in this proposal will determine the
extent of functional conservation across geographically distinct shales, and use
an extensive library of deep biosphere microbial isolates to investigate
microbial metabolic interdependencies that enable persistence of life in these
extreme environments. The role of viruses in driving microbial community
dynamics and metabolite cycling will also be investigated. Finally, novel tools
and insights developed in the shale ecosystem will be applied to a more complex
wetland system to further illuminate the extent of methylamine metabolism in
terrestrial environments. This project will train a graduate student and offer
opportunities to undergraduate researchers. The involvement of industrial
partners will enable internship placements for graduate students, and contribute
to curriculum materials aimed at informing students of diverse career
opportunities in subsurface science. Given the level of public interest in
hydraulic fracturing and deep biosphere topics, a series of outreach events at
local organizations are also planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genome-resolved
metagenomic and metabolomic analyses, coupled with laboratory experimentation,
has revealed that methylamine cycling in deep terrestrial shales is a conserved
functional process across the Appalachian Basin that enables microbial
communities to persist for many hundreds of days. Using multiomic approaches,
this work will expand investigations into western US shale plays, and determine
how functional traits are altered under varying salinity and temperature
conditions. Genomic insights into metabolite exchange and methane isotope
fractionation in these systems will be tested in the laboratory using
environmental isolates and high-pressure incubation apparatus that enables in
situ conditions (e.g., pressure, temperature, salinity) to be recreated. Novel
analytical tools including high-pressure real-time NMR will be used to track the
cycling of substrates at high temporal resolution. The ability of novel and
abundant viral populations to mediate carbon and nitrogen cycling in the deep
biosphere will also be investigated using a combination of bioinformatic tools
and laboratory experimentation. Data resulting from these studies will offer
unique insights into the functioning of microbial and viral populations, and the
impact of microbial metabolism on poorly-resolved carbon and nitrogen cycles in
the deep terrestrial subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.