* 1847630
* CAREER: Understanding of Diffusion and Deformation Mechanisms in Multi-Principal Element Alloy Interlayers for Manufacturing of Multi-Material Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Zhenzhen Yu, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2024
* USD 527,682.00

In almost every manufacturing sector, challenges exist in joining dissimilar
materials due to the mismatches in their thermal, physical, and chemical
properties. These challenges are exacerbated as component and system designs
demand ever-increasing performance, and as interest in additive manufacturing of
advanced multi-material structures continues to grow. A promising approach to
prevent detrimental reactions at joint interfaces is to place an interlayer
between the two metals, which can be used to improve ductility and prevent
chemical diffusion of the base materials. This Faculty Early Career Development
Program (CAREER) award supports research to establish a computational design
methodology to accelerate the interlayer alloy design, providing new fundamental
knowledge of the mechanisms that control diffusion and mechanical performance in
these joints. This has the potential to enable joining of dissimilar and
previously incompatible materials while optimizing performance for a wide range
of applications in the automotive, aerospace and power generation industries.
This project will also provide a platform for the education of the next
generation of scientists and engineers in the field of joining and advanced
manufacturing, with a focus on fundamental scientific knowledge, advanced
computational skills, hands-on research experiences, and strong industrial
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-principal element alloys have been
reported to exhibit excellent mechanical properties. This work will provide
critical insights to the thermodynamics, kinetics, and mechanics of multi-
principal element alloys. The research program will investigate the
relationships between diffusion behavior and composition, phase stability, and
mechanical performance. Complex deformation mechanisms in multi-principal
element alloys with a primary FCC phase will be investigated, using multiscale
physics-based models and in-situ advanced characterization methods to reveal the
underlying mechanisms, quantify the key parameters, and challenge existing
theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.