* 1848644
* I-Corps: Multifunctional Systems for Transforming Strength, Durability, and Energy Efficiency of Concrete Materials
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Behrouz Shafei, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project stems from
introducing agricultural-based phase change materials (PCMs) tailored through a
bottom-up approach for transforming the strength, durability, and energy
efficiency of concrete structures. Considering the volume of concrete used for
civil infrastructure applications every year, development of a multifunctional,
low-cost, energy-efficient concrete will have a significant impact on
transforming the sustainability of the built environment in the United States
and potentially worldwide. Since the proposed PCMs will be produced with
organic, bio-based polymers, new business and market opportunities are
anticipated to be created, especially in the states with a strong agricultural
basis. This will not only offer a viable alternative to the current petroleum-
based, paraffinic PCMs, but will also have a meaningful contribution to
improving the social and economic well-being of communities in both urban and
rural areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will investigate the
market potential of concrete materials transformed with (1) agricultural-based
PCMs tailored to deliver a high capacity for energy storage and (2) porous
lightweight aggregates selected to act as a container for PCMs. One of the
distinct features of the proposed PCMs is an adjustable melting temperature,
which helps target a range of comfort temperatures and climate zones. Further to
performance considerations, the encapsulation method to incorporate PCMs into
building envelope components will be one of the main focuses of this project. A
number of macro- and micro-encapsulation methods have been developed to date for
the use of PCMs in the building sector. Although the micro-encapsulation methods
are proven to deliver an acceptable long-term performance, the estimated cost of
them is in the range of 45%-65% of the total cost of the system. Exploiting the
porous structure of lightweight aggregates commonly used in concrete is expected
to eliminate the need to resort to costly encapsulation methods, while
contributing to the rapidity and flexibility of construction, depending on
customer-specific needs and preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.