* 1848137
* Broadening Participation of Underrepresented Minority Undergraduates in International Research
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Heidi Taboada, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 09/30/2020
* USD 95,400.00

To succeed and prosper in a global economy and interconnected world, university
graduates need international knowledge, intercultural communication skills, and
global perspectives. However, students who are members of underrepresented
groups are often the least likely to have an international research experience.
This award provides support for a two-day workshop that is will bring together
Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) experts who are involved
in providing underrepresented minority students with international research
experiences. At the workshop these experts will identify the main barriers to
underrepresented group participation in international research, develop a set of
best practices for increasing inclusion, explore methods for project evaluation,
and discuss the types of institutional support needed to establish, maintain and
promote such experiences to a more diverse set of American undergraduate
students. This workshop aims to assemble a network of experts to explore the
dynamics of international engagement by minority students, distill their
findings into a report, and disseminate effective practices to various groups,
including higher education institutions, professional societies, NGOs, and the
private sector, that can broaden participation and enable a more diverse set of
undergraduate students to undertake research abroad opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This two-day workshop will bring together a set of STEM
faculty that have been successful in developing sustainable research abroad
programs with a focus on recruiting underrepresented undergraduate students. The
workshop will explore how to increase the number of URMs undertaking
international STEM research opportunities, recognizing the complexity of this
effort. A more diverse set of U.S. students doing international research will
result when we successfully navigate complex interactions between, for example,
the educational and cultural perspectives of different U.S. minority groups, the
ways that different scientific disciplines engage internationally, the variation
in support structures for diversity and international engagement across
different educational institutions, and the cultural and scientific landscapes
of the many countries where the students might conduct research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials produced by the workshop will be broadly
disseminated through various means such as academic networks, professional
societies, and networks and PI meetings of various NSF programs focused on
diversity and international research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop has the
potential to deliver many positive outcomes, including 1) increased awareness of
the national need both for U.S. STEM students to be globally engaged, and for
greater diversity in that population of students; 2) increased opportunities for
URM students to participate in research abroad; 3) enhanced ability both of
minority-serving institutions to participate in STEM research abroad programs,
as well as of majority institutions to diversify the range of students who
participate in STEM research abroad; and 4) strengthened relationships among a
broad range of organizations that can help implement such programs, e.g.,
scientific societies, educational organizations, funding agencies, and
international counterpart organizations of all of these
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.