* 1848261
* CAREER: Investigation of Environmentally-Sensitive Photoreactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Brett VanVeller, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2024
* USD 698,010.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Brett VanVeller of the
Department of Chemistry at Iowa State University is developing new classes of
molecules that can be manipulated with light. The goal of this research is to
use light-sensitive dye molecules to turn chemical reactions on and off. The
systems under development are useful for making functional materials
(lithography), synthesizing pharmaceuticals, and understanding biological
systems. The education objectives engage public school students in order to
cultivate a greater appreciation for how the properties and functions of
molecules influence their world. This goal is achieved by developing kits that
are distributed at teach the teacher seminars at the local science center.
Facilitating teacher training allows the VanVellar team to broaden the impact of
their educational efforts by reaching a broader student audience.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is to study the effect that
environmentally-sensitive excited states have on controlling the efficiency of
photo-deprotection reactions. The hypothesis is that environmentally sensitive
deactivation of the molecular excited state can be used to selectively turn the
photo-deprotection reaction on and off. The specific objectives of this project
include identifying the factors that control solvent-dependent photocleavage as
well as identifying the structure-property relationships and excited state
dynamics that control oxygen-dependent photocleavage. The research team also
looks for alternative approaches for environmentally-controlled photo-
deprotection. Moreover, the research activities are applied to two different
classes of photocleavable protection groups, each with a distinct mechanism of
photocleavage. The outcomes of this work may expand both the knowledge of
environmentally-controlled photo reactions and their applications in advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.