* 1848596
* EAGER: Adaptive Sampling of Massive Graph Streams
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Nicholas Duffield, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wei Ding
* 08/31/2022
* USD 200,488.00

The electronic services that underpin daily life---such as the internet, social
networks, banking systems, and online retailers---continuously generate vast
amounts of data concerning their operation and usage. A key analytical task for
service providers is to understand the commonality between different data
points, e.g. to provide friend recommendations based on patterns of social
interaction, or to understand how a set of related transactions may collectively
signify a bank fraud. The volume at which such data is generated presents
challenges for its storage and processing. On the other hand, sampling and other
data reduction techniques hinder the ability to discern patterns for forensics
and other retrospective analysis. While previous work has proposed solutions in
specific instances, there is currently little general understanding of how to
optimize the choice of sampling algorithm to best match the requirement of data
analysis under operational resource constraints. Furthermore, while existing
solutions have been tuned by their expert designers, in the absence of a general
framework it is challenging for researchers in application domains to adapt
these to their problems. To meet these gaps, this project establishes a new
general framework for optimal sampling of streaming graph data. It will use this
framework to implement a map between problem specifications and sampling
algorithms in order to streamline the generation of working code for
applications. The project will also develop educational materials on data stream
sampling and outreach to researchers in application domains to promote
applicability and usage of the results developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will develop a transformative framework for graph stream sampling and its
applications that address outstanding gaps in knowledge and practice. First,
while current methods frequently focus on computation of global graph
properties, applications often require a representative sample for rapid or
retrospective analysis without having to reprocess the entire stream, even if
available. Second, current methods are typically optimized for specific subgraph
targets and problems without a general ability to optimize for analysis accuracy
and resource requirements. Third, it is challenging for domain researchers to
generalize these results beyond the original problem because of the expert
tuning required for their creation. In response, this project will develop a
framework graph data stream sampling that is applicable to a wide class of
application problems and settings, allows tunable trade-off between accuracy and
space and time computational resources, and is implementable as a mapping
between problem specification and working application code. Specifically, the
work will use a novel form of weighted reservoir priority sampling to adapt the
sampling and retention of edges to their evolving role in the sampled graph and
with respect to analysis goals. The framework will enable time-decayed clustered
subgraph sampling, and multigraph sampling to support estimation from streams of
repeated edges. Analysis and evaluation in a representative variety of
applications will be used to optimize computational strategies allowing flexible
trade-off between accuracy and resource consumption. These results will
transform usage of sampling methods by realizing the framework as a mapping
between problem specification and working application code that enables domain
researchers to rapidly incorporate the results of this work within their own
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.