* 1848499
* CAREER: Predicting Nanocrystal Superlattices Based on Ligand Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Michael Gruenwald, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2024
* USD 498,138.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research and education on fundamental questions in
nanoparticle self-assembly. Nanoparticles are tiny pieces of matter, consisting
of only a few hundred to thousands of atoms, and can have extraordinary
properties. When large numbers of nanoparticles are arranged in ordered
patterns, called "superlattices", they can act as highly efficient solar cells,
can function as new types of sensors in medicine and technology, and can be used
as filters to purify water and air. Because of their small size arranging
nanoparticles into superlattices cannot be performed particle by particle.
Instead, researchers utilize "self-assembly", a process inspired by nature;
self-assembly builds bio-molecular structures like biological cell. In self-
assembly, nanoparticles are subjected to conditions that favor automatic
formation of ordered patterns. Ideally, nanoparticles arrange themselves into
the targeted superlattice due to mutually attractive forces. However, the forces
between these tiny particles are not well understood and self-assembly often
results in disordered structures or in patterns that are different from the
desired one.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important forces between
nanoparticles during self-assembly do not come from the particles themselves,
but from so-called ligands, short chains of atoms that form a soft protective
layer on the surface of nanoparticles. During self-assembly, ligands on nearby
nanoparticles interact with each other in complicated ways that are difficult to
probe in experiments. In this project, the PI and his team will develop new
theoretical models and computer simulation methods that will increase
understanding of ligand interactions. Computer simulations will be used to
reveal how the length and number of ligands, as well as their interactions with
the nanoparticles, determine what superlattice will form during self-assembly.
To this end, new computational methods will be developed that allow the
simulation of the self-assembly of large numbers nanoparticles and their
ligands. The results of this research will provide a reference for future
experiments and will help pave the way for more targeted self-assembly of
nanoparticle superlattices; it will contribute to broad efforts to engineer
improved devices based on nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;Educational activities of
this award focus on improving student success in an undergraduate Physical
Chemistry class at the University of Utah. Research has shown that many students
struggle with the abstract concepts and advanced mathematics of Physical
Chemistry courses. The PI will address these challenges by developing a set of
computer simulation exercises that are designed to illustrate key concepts of
molecular fluctuations and help student build accurate mental models and
reliable intuition for the behavior of atoms and molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research and education that
uses molecular models and computer simulations to predict the self-assembly of
nanocrystals and to improve student success in an undergraduate physical
chemistry course at the University of Utah. Research activities will focus on
predicting ordered superstructures that form during the self-assembly of
nanocrystals. Gaining precise experimental control over the spatial organization
of nanocrystals is paramount for tuning the properties of nanomaterials.
Interactions between nanocrystals during self-assembly are determined by organic
ligands that cover the surface of nanocrystals. To reveal the complex role of
ligands in the self-assembly of superlattices, the research team will develop
computationally efficient molecular models of nanocrystals and ligands. With
these models, the research team will determine the thermodynamics and kinetics
of superlattice formation, using molecular dynamics simulation, free energy
calculations, and Monte Carlo sampling. The specific aims of the project
are:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop coarse-grained computational models of alkyl ligands
that capture effects of different solvent environments through many-body
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;2. Compute phase diagrams for nanocrystal superlattices
as a function of nanocrystal shape, ligand length and coverage, and solvent
quality and content. Determine kinetic accessibility of superlattices by
molecular dynamics simulations of self-assembly and superlattice
transformations. &lt;br/&gt;3. Sample equilibrium distributions of ligands on
nanocrystal surfaces, as a function of surface binding energies and solvent
conditions. Determine effects of ligand rearrangements on self-assembly
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed to answer fundamental questions
concerning the structure and spatial distribution of ligands and their
interactions during self-assembly and reveal the relative importance of
experimental parameters including nanocrystal size and shape, ligand parameters,
and self-assembly methods. &lt;br/&gt;Educational activities supported under
this award include introducing sophisticated molecular computer simulations,
performed and analyzed by undergraduate students, as a main teaching tool in the
physical chemistry course CHEM 3070 at the University of Utah. A major challenge
for students in physical chemistry is to connect unfamiliar molecular
fluctuations with abstract concepts like entropy. To address this problem, the
PI will design several comprehensive simulation activities that elucidate
microscopic fluctuations and illustrate key concepts of physical chemistry. In
these activities, students will perform, analyze, and visualize sophisticated
computer experiments. Discussion of concepts in class will be based on student-
generated simulation results. Furthermore, students will use computer
simulations as research and discovery tools, and these activities will be
tightly integrated with research activities on nanocrystal self-assembly.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Chemistry contribute funds to this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.