* 1848371
* CAREER: Integrated X-ray Ptychography and Optical Luminescence to Understand the Interplay between Local Structural Dynamics and Optoelectronic States
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* David Fenning, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 549,308.00

Nontechnical description: Large scale deployment of solar cells and low-cost
light emitting diodes (LEDs) present an enormous opportunity to reduce the
environmental impact of today's energy technologies. The halide perovskites
offer a potentially disruptive lower-cost alternative to existing traditional
semiconductors used in solar cells and LEDs now. This project develops new
nanoscale characterization approaches to better understand how these emerging
halide perovskite materials grow and help eliminate defects in the resulting
crystals. Understanding crystallization and degradation pathways to synthesize
high-quality, robust halide perovskite thin films can facilitate their
deployment to achieve society-wide impacts on the energy footprint. As part of
this effort, a systematic approach to broadening participation of
underrepresented minorities in STEM with a focus on photovoltaics and
nanoscience education is incorporated in this project. Educational activities
engage students at the high school, undergraduate, and graduate levels,
including establishing a Solar Summer Bootcamp, where local high school students
fabricate and test solar cells, building an appreciation for the science behind
modern solar cell materials and enabling students hands-on experience at the
frontiers of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: This project
investigates how the nanoscale variations in chemistry and structure in complex
halide perovskites determines their stability. To do so, this project adds a new
dimension to X-ray characterization at the nanoscale, providing insight into
optoelectronic material properties by measuring light given off by
optoelectronic materials under X-ray irradiation, i.e. X-ray excited optical
luminescence. The project team develops the application of X-ray excited optical
luminescence and ptychography techniques to the halide perovskites at
synchrotron-based nanoprobe X-ray beamlines. Using this suite of nanoscale
characterization techniques, the research team quantifies the relationship
between local composition, structure, and electronic states with state-of-the-
art spatial resolution. In a cycle of iterative feedback to improve perovskite
crystal quality and stability, the project examines the crystallization and
degradation reaction mechanisms in the halide perovskite materials using in situ
experiments. The flexibility and wide applicability of the tools developed in
this project creates a powerful experimental platform for achieving synchronous
insight into the relationship between the electronic, chemical, and structural
properties that determine functional performance in optoelectronic
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.