* 1848304
* CAREER: New Algorithms to Simulate Ultracold Matter Out of Equilibrium and Redefine the Low-Temperature Frontier
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Kaden Hazzard, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 468,920.00

Understanding and controlling the dynamics of quantum systems which are out of
equilibrium is a fundamental challenge for science in the 21st century. Systems
which are not in equilibrium display phenomena that "break the rules" that
govern equilibrium phases. Such phenomena are intrinsically interesting and
potentially useful for applications. Gases that have been cooled to nano-Kelvin
temperatures provide an exciting new platform for the study of non-equilibrium
systems. Experiments with ultracold gases flexibly manipulate and image matter
using unique and precise tools provided by optics. While such experiments are
rapidly advancing, new theoretical techniques are also needed to aid the
investigations. This project will develop numerical algorithms to solve a range
of previously intractable, experimentally important problems. The new algorithms
will be used to design experimental schemes to cool ultracold matter to even
lower temperatures (a grand challenge of the field), thereby redefining the low-
temperature frontier. This would realize long-sought and previously inaccessible
phases of matter, including phases which simulate high-temperature
superconductivity. The project will train graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students in the use of the new algorithms, facilitating their future use
in other areas of non-equilibrium physics. In addition, publicly accessible
educational materials will be developed which unify concepts in non-equilibrium
dynamics that are used regularly by physicists, but which are taught only
inexplicitly, if at all, in typical physics curricula. These lessons will
include videos, reading, and exercises that can be used for self-study or in a
classroom, and will include multiple versions, each designed for students of
different levels of expertise, from non-physicists to practicing
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop two algorithms, a
dynamical numerical linked cluster expansion (NLCE) and a cluster truncated
Wigner approximation (cl-TWA), which potentially can accurately calculate
important ultracold dynamics in minutes on a laptop for cases that are currently
inaccessible to even the largest supercomputers. The algorithms achieve their
accuracy by recognizing and exploiting special physical structures that underlie
many ultracold dynamics experiments. The project will focus on applying these
new algorithms to design and optimize new protocols for cooling ultracold matter
that fall into three categories: entropy management, adiabatic preparation, and
engineered dissipation. It will also partner with experiments to address
fundamental questions of nonequilibrium physics, selected to align the strengths
of the algorithms with emerging experimental
directions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.