* 1848247
* CAREER: Symmetry and Geometry in Biological Active Matter
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Nikta Fakhri, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2024
* USD 570,204.00

The fundamental questions that the PI aims to address in this CAREER project
are: What are the principles underlying the formation of spatio-temporal
patterns of Rho GTPases, and what is their functional role in regulating the
mechanics of the cell cortex and cell deformation? What is the feedback between
cell shape changes and cytoplasmic flow induced by mechanical (dynamic)
deformation of the cell cortex and the chemical pattern of Rho GTPases? To
address these questions, the PI will combine experiment and theory to identify
the fundamental principles underlying this interplay between chemical patterns
and mechanical cell deformations and thereby to lay the foundation for a
comprehensive understanding of the dynamics of mechano-chemical patterns in
animal cells. Uncovering the principles of mechano-chemical structure formation
in biological systems will also facilitate new smart materials and soft robotics
technology. The proposed research activities will be closely integrated with
teaching activities at the interface of physics and biology. (i) The PI will
continue to mentor high school students through the Research Science Institute
at MIT. (ii) As a faculty mentor for the MIT Summer Research Program (MSRP)
General, the PI will continue to mentor and to attract underrepresented students
(minorities, women in STEM, or students with low socioeconomic status) to MIT to
gain significant research experience and explore the possibility of doctoral
education at MIT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will combine novel
experimental techniques, theory and mathematical modeling to elucidate how
active mechanics and cell geometry, when coupled to chemical reactions, give
rise to robust mechano-chemical patterns. Important life processes common to all
animal cells such as cytokinesis and cellular migration require the interplay
and coordination between chemical protein patterns and mechanical deformation of
the cell shape. At the heart of both are active processes, driven and regulated
by the highly conserved Rho family of GTPases and the action of myosin motors
consuming ATP. Over the course of this project, the PI will construct, implement
and experimentally validate a comprehensive theoretical model to quantify and to
understand the mechanisms of mechano-chemical coupling between chemical patterns
of Rho GTPases, mechanical cell deformations, and cytoplasmic flow. Starfish
oocytes will be used as a biological model system to study mechano-chemical
patterns during development in vivo, as they are a well-established system with
a high degree of experimental accessibility. A novel imaging platform based on
near-IR fluorescent single-walled carbon nanotubes will be developed to generate
high resolution maps of cortex dynamics and mechanics during development. It
will be combined with in vivo imaging of signaling protein localization, as well
as biochemical, biophysical and optogenetic manipulations. As Rho GTPases are
ubiquitous and in particular associated to the dynamic spatial structuring of
cells, the investigations should reveal universal principles for the interplay
of mechanical deformations and biochemical pattern
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by the
Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the Cellular
Dynammics and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.