* 1848993
* Collaborative research:An Experimental Investigation of Morphodynamic Coupling between River Deltas and Marshes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* John Shaw, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/29/2024
* USD 281,542.00

Experimental Investigation of Morphodynamic Coupling between River Deltas and
Marshes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;River deltas are important to society as population
centers and infrastructure hubs for hundreds of millions of people. Most river
deltas host vast marshes that are biodiversity hotspots, productive fisheries,
effective storm protection, and that capture and store significant amounts of
carbon. The processes by which river deltas and marshes grow and collapse as a
function of rising sea level and sediment input are well known in isolation.
However, there is a fundamental lack of understanding of how marshes and deltas
interact. Do feedbacks between marsh and delta dynamics fundamentally influence
the behavior of both? The researchers will build laboratory scale deltas subject
to controlled environmental conditions that will interact with a newly developed
marsh proxy that mimics key marsh properties at a reduced scale. These
experiments will help reveal how river deltas and marshes interact over hundred
to thousand year timescales under simple conditions, and provide insight into
the land loss and subsidence problems that are currently affecting the
Mississippi and other global river deltas. The project will broadcast
experiments into K-12 classrooms in Louisiana, train a diverse group of
researchers at University of Arkansas and Tulane University, and translate
results into articles designed for public consumption through social media
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will study how river deltas and
marshes interact using physical laboratory experiments that will incorporate a
novel marsh proxy. This marsh proxy will be added to deltaic experiments
following a rule-based model of sedimentation based on the local elevation of
the evolving deposit. For the first time, this will allow them to document how
the internal dynamics of deltas are augmented by marshes that cover vast swaths
of many delta plains. Through comparison to prior experiments that evolved in
the absence of marshes, they will isolate surface dynamics, compactional
subsidence patterns, and stratigraphic products of marsh-delta coupling.
Quantitative theory developed in this study will aid prediction of marsh and
deltas sustainability in the coming decades and enhance ability to interpret
their strata for paleo-environmental records. Research will be conducted by a
diverse team (in gender, ethnicity, and career stage) including undergraduate
and graduate students, and outreach to K-12 students. This project is jointly
funded by the Geomorphology and Land-Use Dynamics Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.