* 1848065
* Convergence:  RAISE  Dynamic Touch-based Bacteria-Device Two-Way Communication
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* M Siegrist, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 09/30/2024
* USD 974,999.00

Biological cells interact with their surroundings by sensing and responding to a
range of stimuli and cues. In the tissues of higher organisms, cells communicate
with each other, leading to collective functions. Research on electrical and
mechanical communication of mammalian cells has led to progress in tissue
engineering and to an understanding of the workings of nerve and muscle.
Eventually, this understanding might translate into devices that could restore
sight or motor activity. This research project will study how bacterial cells
interact mechanically and electrically with the surface of an electronic device,
how cell-cell interactions produce a response at the device surface, and how
signals from a device can be transmitted by bacterial cells to other bacterial
cells. The outcomes of these experiments could further knowledge about how
touch-based bacterial communication can be utilized to engineer functional
device-integrated communities of bacteria. These research efforts could nucleate
a new discipline at the intersection of microbiology, biomaterials, and
nanoelectronics. The creation of new devices that integrate bacteria could
benefit society through advancing the manufacture of pharmaceuticals and
specialty chemicals, smart logic-gated sensors, and bio-based filters for
chemical remediation, energy conversion, and water purification. The research
activities will add a new facet to workforce development and will foster a
diverse community of scientists, internal and external to UMass, through team-
based research, targeted workshops, and educational programs. The research team
is committed to inspiring diverse K-12 students through the development of
interdisciplinary teaching modules and weekend programs for high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project targets an understanding
of how signals from a device or material are transmitted to and processed by
bacteria, how intercellular communications can be intercepted and re-coded by
devices, and how bacterial mechanotransduction and voltage responses play out at
material interfaces. The program builds from a focus on device interactions with
isolated cells to an understanding of how groups of cells interact with a
device. Ultimately, the research will progress to a comprehension of the device
interactions with an entire bacterial community. The project investigators will
quantify timescales, length scales, and signal magnitudes relevant to mechanical
and electrical interactions, targeting the basic principles of rapid bacterial-
device communication. They will also address important issues in microbiology,
including identifying changes in gene expression associated with the initial
response to a given stimulus and in downstream single cell and group behaviors.
This research project integrates cutting edge methods in microbiology,
biomaterials, and nanoelectronics to target guiding scientific principles for
engineering functional, device-integrated communities of bacteria. This research
project also will impact the creation of new microscopy, prototype devices, and
cellular reporters of gene activity that will more broadly advance
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.