* 1848653
* EAGER: CNS: Misdirection in Robot Teams: Exploiting Organizational Principles for Operational Advantage
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Ronald Arkin, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2021
* USD 271,867.00

Trust, dependability, cohesion, and capability are integral to an effective
team. These attributes are the same for teams of collaborating robots and humans
as well as all-robot teams. For a team to remain effective in the presence of
faults, failures, and errors from nature or intent, team members must have
sufficient perception and understanding of the problem and possible solutions to
make appropriate adjustments in their operations. When multiple teams with
competing incentives are tasked, a strategy, if available, may be to weaken,
influence or sway the attributes of other teams and limit their understanding of
their full range of options. Such strategies are widely found, for example, in
nature, sporting contests, and military operations, where strategies such as
feints and misdirection often appear. This project focuses on one class of
higher-level strategies for multi-robots: namely, to misdirect and where
feasible to counter misdirection. As multi-robot systems become more autonomous,
distributed, networked, numerous, and with more capability to make critical
decisions, the prospect for intentional and unintentional misdirection must be
anticipated. This project will support robust multi-robotic operations in
important strategic domains such as security and military operations.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project studies strategies to enable co-robots, multi-robots and
teams of multi-robots to model, generate, and cope with misdirection in various
situations. This research direction in robotic control offers a novel approach
to resilience in and among these teams to these forms of possible disruption.
Computational models, drawn particularly from studies of human endeavors and
group behaviors, provide a general framework for understanding, producing, and
countering misdirection in robotic systems. A framework of computational models
will be designed using recursive schema-theoretic models of behaviors at the
individual and team levels, building on decentralized methods of control and
communication, to provide robustness in the presence of noisy and chaotic
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.