* 1848076
* CAREER: Development of catalytic enantioselective hydrofunctionalizations of alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Sergey Pronin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 03/31/2024
* USD 675,000.00

With this CAREER Award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry is supporting the research of Professor Sergey V. Pronin of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of California Irvine. Professor Pronin
and his students are developing new methods for the direct conversion of
compounds that contain a double bond between two carbon atoms (i.e., alkenes) to
compounds that contain nitrogen (amines), a oxygen-hydrogen groups (alcohols),
and their derivatives. The reaction conditions are mild and use environmentally-
abundant materials, making the new synthetic routes attractive for conserving
both energy and critical elements. These new molecules are valuable chemicals
used extensively in industry, especially the pharmaceutical industry. The
chemical transformations being studied are a long-standing challenge in the
field of organic chemistry. This research is taking advantage of underexplored
patterns of chemical reactivity and producing new and general solutions to these
problems. Professor Pronin's laboratory host ?Day at College? events as a part
of the Laboratory Experiments and Activities in the Physical Sciences (LEAPS)
program at UCI, which is aimed at educating middle school students about the
opportunities that exist for them in the physical sciences. In collaboration
with other faculty at UCI, the research team recruit and host students from a
local community college with a large population of underrepresented minority
students, Santiago Canyon College, for ten weeks during the summer to provide
research experiences in the field of synthetic organic chemistry. This program
is expected to increase awareness of minority students for STEM research and job
opportunities. The research is also providing a rich training ground for the
next generation of chemists, generating opportunities for students from
community colleges with limited engagement in chemistry
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is leveraging radical-polar
crossover reactivity and developing new enantioselective methods for the
hydrofunctionalization of alkenes via earth-abundant cobalt species. These
transformations combine facile hydrogen atom transfer events with oxidation of
the resulting alkyl radicals and related intermediates to the corresponding
carbocations or their synthetic equivalents. These species can then undergo
reactions with nucleophiles to generate new functional groups. The combined
process serves as an equivalent of Bronsted acid-catalyzed
hydrofunctionalizations but proceeds in the absence of an acid. The
exceptionally mild conditions of these reactions accommodate a broad substrate
scope and facilitate development of the corresponding enantioselective
reactions. Overall, this research is providing direct and general access to
valuable scalemic building blocks from readily available starting materials and
producing new knowledge of the fundamental reactivity of carbocations and
related electrophilic intermediates. The research is also providing a rich
training ground for the next generation of chemists, generating opportunities
for students from community colleges with limited engagement in chemistry
research, and increasing awareness of middle school students to future career
options in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.