* 1848899
* Workshop: Developing standards and digital infrastructure for structural geology and experimental deformation
* GEO,ICER
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Basil Tikoff, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2020
* USD 49,286.00

This workshop will occur prior to the 2018 AGU Fall meeting, and will engage
researchers active in the fields of natural and experimental deformation and
microstructural analysis to provide input on developing data policies and data
standards to improve the availability and access of research data. Participants
will identify gaps in current capabilities for the community to store and
discover scientific results, and ensure that standards are aligned across the
field and experimental scientific communities. The workshop will bring together
a diverse range of scientists from different scientific fields and from under-
represented groups in STEM. A postdoctoral fellow will lead the organization of
this community meeting.

This workshop is conducted to meet the goals of the EarthCube program. In
addition it moves a long-tail scientific community towards Public Access of
research outcomes. This work will incorporate an analysis of gaps in
infrastructure for integrating microstructural data from two related (but
currently largely disparate) communities, those studying naturally deformed
rocks and those conducting experiments to produce deformed materials in the lab.
This analysis will be focused on understanding what current data resources are
currently available within each community, where the fundamental gaps are in
terms data availability/discoverability in each community, and how the existing
StraboSpot data system might work to provide a unified approach to data storage
and discovery that can effectively serve both communities. The workshop adds
value to an investment in cyberinfrastructure for a long-tail science community.
The workshop will bring together a diverse community to make decisions on
standards to directly improve data availability and access. The project
coordinates with The European Plate Observatory System.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.