* 1848841
* Rational Design and Engineering of Graphene-Based Functional Nanocomposites as Effective Antimicrobial Reagents
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Shaowei Chen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 03/31/2023
* USD 419,999.00

The rise and prevalence of antibiotic-resistant bacteria have significantly
increased the costs of treatment and, more seriously, death rates. Thus, it is
imperative that as these antibiotic-resistant bacteria evolve, so must the
medicines that are utilized to treat them. In this research project, Professor
Shaowei Chen from the University of California Santa Cruz proposes to use
composite materials based on graphene oxide and metal/metal oxide nanoparticles
as next-generation, low-cost, potent antimicrobial reagents. This is to take
advantage of their synergistic interactions in the bactericidal actions, where
the antimicrobial activity of the composites is markedly enhanced as compared to
those of the individual components. The success of the proposed research will
help establish a unique platform for the development of high-performance
antimicrobial reagents. Additionally, the proposed research will offer an
educational framework within which student researchers will acquire many complex
skills by undertaking an interdisciplinary effort. Also, part of the research
activities will be closely integrated with several outreach programs targeting
minority, women, and disadvantaged undergraduate students and qualified high-
school students. The students will acquire skills that are unattainable in a
conventional classroom setting. The hands-on experience and intense training in
laboratory research are anticipated to instill a strong sense of self-confidence
and good work ethics in their future careers as part of the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the proposed
research is to advance our understanding of the mechanistic origin of graphene-
based nanocomposites in antimicrobial applications and to develop a fundamental
framework for the rational design and engineering of nanocomposites based on
metal (oxide) nanoparticles and graphene derivatives as low-cost, high-
efficiency antimicrobial reagents. There are three specific tasks: (a) design
and engineering of graphene nanosheets, where the graphene structures (e.g.,
size, morphology, surface functionalization) will be systematically manipulated
and the impacts on the antimicrobial activity will be carefully examined, (b)
preparation of functional nanocomposites based on metal (oxide) nanoparticles
deposited on graphene nanosheets, where the nanocomposite photo reactivity will
be exploited as a powerful variable in the further manipulation and optimization
of the antimicrobial activity, and (c) establishment of a structure-activity
correlation by combining (nano)materials and molecular biology approaches, with
a focus on unravelling the fundamental mechanisms in the bactericidal process.
The proposed research is built upon recent progress in Professor Chen's
laboratory where apparent antimicrobial activity was observed with transition-
metal nanoparticles as well as graphene quantum dots, with the production of
reactive oxygen species identified as the leading mechanism of action. A wide
range of experimental tools will be employed in the research activities. For
materials characterizations, these include transmission electron microscopy,
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, nuclear magnetic resonance,
electron paramagnetic resonance, UV-visible, Raman, infrared, and
photoluminescence spectroscopy. Using Escherichia coli as the illustrating
example, the antimicrobial activity towards the inhibition of bacterial growth
will be quantitatively assessed by UV-visible spectroscopic and fluorescence
microscopic measurements, and the biochemical origins will be examined by RNA
sequencing, within the context of reactive oxygen species generation and
bacteria cell membrane damages. A direct, intimate correlation between these two
efforts is anticipated to shed light on the mechanisms of action and lead to the
establishment of a fundamental framework within which rational design and
engineering of graphene-based nanocomposites can be achieved for optimal
antimicrobial performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.