* 1848036
* CAREER: Empirical Studies of Cities' and Neighborhoods' Influence on Income and Consumption Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2025
* Rebecca Diamond, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2025
* USD 467,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PI Last Name: Diamond&lt;br/&gt;Title: CAREER:
Empirical Studies of Cities' and Neighborhoods' Influence on Income and
Consumption Inequality&lt;br/&gt;Proposal ID: 848036 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
geographic location of one's place of residence and place of work plays a strong
role in economic well-being and inequality. While households are free to migrate
away from declining areas, towards prospering ones, many reasons mitigate
mobility, leaving residents exposed to local economic conditions. This CAREER
agenda proposes a line of projects to examine the causes and consequences of
limited mobility, how it varies across the income levels, and ultimately
contributes to well-being or inequality. The first line of research will focus
on the consumption patterns across US cities and income levels. The second line
will investigate the benefits of living nearby one's family members. The third
line of work will look at the consequences of financial instability and housing
foreclosure on homeowners, renters, and
landlords.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate the geography of
consumption inequality, the investigator will use a new dataset of linked bank
account and credit card micro data covering 5 percent of the US. This analysis
will shed light on whether consumption bundles vary mostly based on one's income
or whether one's place of residence influences one's consumption bundle. The
second line of work will shed light on why low skill workers appear less willing
to migrate between cities. A likely mechanism contributing to limited migration
is low skill workers' desire to live near their families. While geographic
proximity to one's family may be beneficial in many ways, the research will
investigate its labor market value using administrative data. The third line of
work will analyze the costs and consequences of losing access to one's home and
neighborhood through foreclosure. The project will separately study impacts on
homeowner occupants, renters, and landlords to decompose the financial versus
eviction effects of foreclosure. Heterogeneity in the impacts of foreclosure
across high and low-income neighborhoods will provide additional evidence on
whether foreclosure is a regressive or progressive
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.