* 1848583
* CAREER: Quantifying How Peptoids Interact with Lipid Membranes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Grace Stokes, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2024
* USD 475,000.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms-B Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Grace Stokes of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Santa Clara University is
investigating interactions between peptoids (a peptide-mimicking class of
molecules with potential therapeutic and antibacterial properties) and cellular
membranes. Information obtained from this research may be useful in assessing
and predicting the potential health effects of peptoids. The results could lead
to applications of peptoids in medical technologies, either as drugs or as
components of biosensors or medical devices. The research is performed at a
primarily undergraduate institution, where exposure of undergraduate students to
authentic research experiences both in teaching and research labs engages a
diverse cross-section of students, including women and underrepresented
minorities. The research aims are integrated with undergraduate education
activities, for example, students in a second-term organic chemistry teaching
lab synthesize the library of water-soluble peptoids. Educational exercises
utilizing research-derived data is developed to improve quantitative skills of
first-generation college (FGC) students in general chemistry. Undergraduate
research students are selected from the FGC student cohort in Professor Stokes'
general chemistry course to work in her research lab. Through the research and
educational activities, FGC students gain experience using modern laser
spectroscopy methods and computational tools, which better prepares them for
graduate school and future careers. Protocols and principles used to train
undergraduate students to conduct nonlinear optical experiments and
computational-guided inquiry exercises are broadly disseminated through
workshops, websites, presentations, and publications to increase the
participation of underrepresented minorities in the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate models to predict membrane penetration by and
accumulation of small organic molecules inform rational drug design. These
models require a quantitative understanding of the thermodynamic forces which
control interactions between lipid (fatty) membranes and molecules with varying
hydrophobicity, charge, polarizability and 3-D structure. In this study, a
diverse library of systematically-varied peptoids (N-substituted glycine
oligomers) is synthesized. The impact of lipid composition on peptoid-lipid
interactions is also probed using artificial plasma membranes. High-throughput
experiments are conducted using nonlinear optical imaging and spectroscopy
methods to determine how peptoid sequence and membrane composition impact the
orientation and number of adsorbed peptoids. The thermodynamic dataset provides
quantitative structure-function relationships which relate peptoid structure and
lipid composition to free energies of adsorption. Complementary education
activities integrate computational guided inquiry modules into general chemistry
courses to improve quantitative skills and increase retention of first-
generation college students in gateway courses for STEM
majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.