* 1848257
* CAREER: Bridging Synthesis and Computational Chemistry to Parameterize Noncovalent Interactions in Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Julie Pigza, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 626,780.00

The Division of Chemistry Chemical Catalysis Program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) jointly support the research program
of Professor Julie A. Pigza at the University of Southern Mississippi (USM). The
Pigza research group is investigating new catalysts to transform petroleum and
biomass feedstocks into important chemicals used in society. The improved
catalysts meet the broader societal needs for important chemical building blocks
while reducing environmental waste. The investigation is using computational
methods to understand how the catalysts work to enable their improvement and
usefulness. To accomplish these goals, graduate and undergraduate students are
carrying out the synthetic, mechanistic, and computational aspects of this
project. This is enriching interdisciplinary research training in the state of
Mississippi. This research introduces two educational strategies to recruit and
retain underrepresented groups into STEM research. The first is a Community
College Bridge Program that is supporting STEM transfer student majors in their
transition to USM through an authentic research experience, professional
development workshops, and peer mentoring relationships. The second mechanism is
a computational chemistry mini-course with a focus on catalysis utilizing an
existing NSF-funded supercomputing facility at USM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
formation of carbon-carbon or carbon-heteroatom bonds with bifunctional hydrogen
bond donor and acceptor organocatalysts has emerged as a viable alternative to
transition metal catalysis. A key benefit to these organocatalysts is the
exploitation of the innate reactivity of existing functional groups. This
research investigates the ensemble of noncovalent interactions between a
catalyst and substrate by combining chemical synthesis and computational quantum
chemistry. The goal of this research is a deeper fundamental understanding of
small molecule catalophore design mimicking those found in biological systems.
Specifically, the systematic investigation of aromatic pi-pi stabilizing
interactions between the catalyst and substrate is pursued using density
functional theory to parameterize and rank the importance of these subtle non-
covalent interactions. The specific aims probe underexplored bond
transformations such as: (i) a transition metal-free asymmetric allylic
alkylation, (ii) the generation of chiral, acyclic ethers, and (iii) the
formation of ambiphilic methine nucleophiles and their addition to pi-bonds. The
integrated educational and research components serve to train a diverse STEM
workforce of high school, undergraduate, and graduate students within the Gulf
South region with a focus on those students traditionally not exposed to
research including community college students. This work also takes advantage of
an existing NSF-funded supercomputing facility within the
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.