* 1848058
* CAREER: Automorphic Forms and the Langlands Program
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Baiying Liu, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 08/31/2024
* USD 316,464.00

This research project concerns certain problems within the Langlands Program, a
program proposed by Robert Langlands in 1960s. The Langlands program is a web of
far-reaching and influential conjectures that predicts surprising connections
between arithmetic (e.g., properties of integer solutions to polynomial
equations) and analysis (e.g., automorphic forms, which are highly symmetric
solutions to certain differential equations on symmetric manifolds). The
celebrated proof of Fermat's Last Theorem by A. Wiles, for instance, uses early
results in the Langlands program proved by Langlands and Tunnell. In another
direction, automorphic forms have deep connections with the string theory and
the study of black holes in physics. In this project the PI will investigate
analytic properties of automorphic forms and their number-theoretic consequences
in the Langlands program. The project also integrates educational opportunities,
including public outreach lectures, undergraduate and graduate research
activities, cross-disciplinary training and research, and graduate curriculum
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A main theme in the theory of automorphic
forms is to study the discrete spectrum of a connected reductive algebraic group
defined over a number field. By the pioneering work of Arthur, followed by many
others, the discrete spectrum of a classical group has been classified into so-
called Arthur packets, which are parametrized by Arthur parameters. The first
part of this project is to analyze the finer structure of Arthur packets,
including: concrete constructions of modules in each Arthur packet; Fourier
coefficients of automorphic representations in each Arthur packet, including
Jiang's conjecture; cuspidality of each Arthur packet; and relations among
Arthur packets of different but closely related groups (via automorphic
descent). The PI will also work on establishing Langlands functorial descent for
exceptional groups, towards studying the Langlands functoriality and the
discrete spectra of exceptional groups. The second part of the project is about
converse problems. Converse problems aim to recover modular/automorphic forms
from their Fourier coefficients. For example, the famous converse theorems of
Hecke and Weil give sufficient conditions for a Dirichlet series to be the
Mellin transform of a modular form. It is known that converse theorems play an
important role in the establishment of Langlands functoriality. In this part of
the project the PI will develop approaches to several conjectures, including
Jacquet's conjecture and Cogdell-Piatetski-Shapiro conjecture, in order to prove
optimal local and global converse theorems, as well as converse problems for
exceptional groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.