* 1848683
* Convergence: RAISE: Systems Approaches for Vulnerability Evaluation and Urban Resilience
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Marcelo Garcia, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 1,162,931.00

The inability to assess and predict the extent and impact of extreme weather
conditions within cities is a critical vulnerability. Urban floods come from
overflowing rivers and streams as well as insufficient drainage from impervious
surface structures. The lack of neighborhood-scale forecasts for flooding
hampers social and public health intervention efforts. Similar limitations exist
for air quality and heat island/temperature impacts. This research project will
combine perspectives from natural, social, data and engineering sciences to
improve the prediction of weather patterns, air quality, flooding, and social
and economic impacts at the neighborhood scale. Sensor installations and model
simulations will be used to examine the potential for green infrastructure to
reduce flooding, moderate heat waves, and improve air quality locally and across
the region. Models that integrate across rainfall, topography, urban
infrastructure and impervious surfaces are not currently viable or available.
This research project will enable the integration of water routing mechanisms
that were previous treated separately and can now be considered as portions of a
larger more complex problem. Project results will be directly used for
vulnerability assessment and infrastructure design in Chicago
neighborhoods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This convergence project will catalyze new
multi-level urban assessment and prediction capabilities; yield new capacity for
city-scale simulations of links between weather, infrastructure, and population
vulnerability; and demonstrate the application of this new systems-level
prediction framework to adaptive green infrastructure design. The principle
components of the project include (1) installation and utilization of remote and
distributed sensing to measure impacts; (2) high-resolution
infrastructure/environmental models that elucidate links between severe weather,
urban infrastructure, and vulnerability; and (3) an assessment of co-occurring
social and economic impacts as a result of extreme weather, infrastructure and
urban topography. Many graduate students and postdocs will be directly engaged
in the project. The project will contribute vulnerability maps to local
jurisdictions and will encourage government and public/private discourse on
urban vulnerability to extreme weather as well as potential resilience
strategies. Project data will be publicly available through the Chicago Data
Portal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.