* 1848444
* CAREER: Ribosome-inspired Synthesis of Precision Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Severin Schneebeli, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2023
* USD 678,647.00

Nature builds very large molecules (so called polymers) with molecular assembly
lines. Crucial for life, these assembly lines add building blocks to growing
polymer chains one after another in a specific order. This is how DNA and RNA
are formed. In this project, Dr. Schneebeli is imitating the natural assembly-
line approach to create well-defined polymeric materials. While this research
focuses on enabling and understanding artificial molecular assembly lines, the
well-defined polymers created may ultimately be useful materials for a variety
of important applications. The artificial molecular assembly lines are created
by connecting a catalyst to the polymers with rings that slide along the growing
chains. This catalyst adds individual building blocks to the growing polymers
one by one. In addition, Dr. Schneebeli is engaging the public in polymer
chemistry through K-12 outreach at a local science museum (ECHO Lake Aquarium
and Science Center in Burlington, VT) and at local high schools. For this
outreach, Dr. Schneebeli is inventing interactive dynamic models. These models
lead K-12 students to discover key aspects of polymer growth independently and
foster independent creative thinking within the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support from the Chemical
Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Schneebeli of the University of
Vermont is learning how to enable new polymerization mechanisms that could
ultimately result in molecular assembly lines for sequence-defined, pi-
conjugated polymers. Inspired by how Nature creates sequence-defined, functional
macromolecules, Dr. Schneebeli is creating special interlocked catalysts, which
can transform difficult-to-control step polymerizations into robust living
chain-growth processes. While efficient chain-growth processes exist for
numerous conjugated, cyclic, and hyperbranching monomers, this research explores
a universal chain-growth strategy for general monomers, many of which cannot yet
be polymerized in a controlled manner. Dr. Schneebeli's design prevents the
catalysts from falling off the polymers, thus rendering this new living
polymerization methodology fully chain-transfer free. Dr. Schneebeli is
utilizing this new polymerization technique to enable the enzyme-free
translation of DNA templates into diverse, pi-conjugated precision polymers, in
a manner analogous to how the ribosome builds proteins. In support of the
broader impacts of the project, Dr. Schneebeli is actively engaged in K-12
outreach with special macroscopic dynamic models. These models are devised to
lead K-12 students to discover qualitative and quantitative aspects of different
polymerization mechanisms to foster discovery-based reasoning and creative
thinking among the future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.