* 1848372
* CAREER: Chemistry-Climate Interactions and Feedbacks through Coupled Atmosphere-Biosphere Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Christopher Holmes, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2024
* USD 524,615.00

This project will develop a large dataset to improve understanding and model
representation of interactions between the Earth's atmosphere and its
ecosystems. The work focuses on how ozone in the atmosphere impacts the exchange
of carbon, water, and heat by combining a series of measurements from multiple
locations. The resulting model and dataset will be used to predict how future
climate conditions may affect ozone concentrations and the atmosphere-ecosystem
interactions. This work will strengthen understanding of the connections between
gas concentrations in the atmosphere and within the plants and solid materials
on the surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the following science
questions will be addressed: 1) Does the observed relationship between O3 flux
and fluxes of carbon and water at eddy-covariance flux towers agree with results
from single-species studies? 2) How well do current climate and air quality
models predict O3 deposition, deposition velocity, and stomatal uptake? 3) What
effect does O3-biosphere coupling through water-use efficiency (WUE) have on
biosphere resiliency and atmospheric chemistry in the face of global change? 4)
Do other phytotoxic air pollutants, such as sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides
affect carbon and water fluxes and present-day levels, either individually or
through synergistic multi-pollutant effects?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
also includes a range of educational and outreach activities to strengthen and
diversify the scientific workforce including collaborating with a nearby
historically black university (Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University),
training undergraduates to participate in the research effort, and, expanding
model applications in graduate level courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.