* 1848240
* Upgrade of an ICP-Optical Emission Spectrometer for use in Undergraduate Research in Geosciences at the University of Houston-Downtown
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Kenneth Johnson, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2022
* USD 104,884.00

Funds from this grant will be used to upgrade the existing inductively coupled
plasma-optical emission spectrometer facilities at the University of Houston-
Downtown (UHD). The instrument will be used for chemical analysis of rock, soil
and water. Research projects are planned or currently underway at UHD that will
use data obtained with this instrument. A related goal of this project is to
provide research experiences to community college and UHD students focused on
volcanic rocks from west Texas. This portion of the project is intended to ease
the transition from community college to a four-year university by providing
meaningful mentorship to improve retention and graduation rates in the
geosciences. This project will produce well-educated graduates ready to enter
the geosciences workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds from this
grant will be used to upgrade the existing inductively coupled plasma-optical
emission spectrometer (ICP-OES) facilities in the Department of Natural Sciences
at the University of Houston-Downtown (UHD). The ICP-OES will be used for the
quantitative determination of major and trace element concentrations in rock,
soil, and aqueous samples in a wide array of faculty and undergraduate student
research projects. In addition, the ICP-OES will be an important instructional
tool in several upper level geology and chemistry courses taught at UHD.
Upgrading the ICP-OES facilities is crucial for satisfying the research and
instructional needs of geology faculty and students in the Department of Natural
Sciences. Additional funding from this grant will be used to Support Outreach
and/or Broadening Participation. These funds will support a three year project
that will serve as a bridging mechanism for students, particularly those First
Time in College students, making the transition from community college to a four
year university. The project will focus on the examination of alkaline volcanic
rocks in the Trans Pecos Volcanic Province of west Texas, with the goal of
better understanding the transition from a compressional, subduction-related
tectonic environment to an extensional, rift-related one. Community college
students will be mentored in the field and in the ICP-OES laboratory by UHD
junior- and senior-level students, along with the PI. The objectives of this
project are to: 1) alleviate some of the difficulties commonly experienced by
students making the transition from community college to university ("transfer
shock"), 2) make community college students recruited into UHD's new B.S. in
Geosciences degree program aware of graduate school and career opportunities in
the Earth Sciences, 3) provide undergraduate students a high-impact educational
experience in conducting research using state-of-the-art analytical
instrumentation, and 4) contribute to our knowledge of magmatic and tectonic
processes in the Trans Pecos region of west Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.