* 1848004
* CAREER: Effects of Institutionalization on Inflammation and Brain Development
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jennifer Silvers, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 06/30/2024
* USD 661,952.00

The goal of this study is to examine whether alterations to the immune system,
specifically inflammatory processes, explain how exposure to early life
stressors continue to impact adolescent brain development after the stressors
have subsided. Children's early experiences lay the groundwork for long-term
brain development. This is particularly clear in the context of early life
stress (ELS), which alters neural circuits involved in learning and self-
regulation during adolescence. Identifying biological sequelae that follow ELS
exposure and contribute to neurodevelopmental outcomes is a pressing scientific
priority given that ELS exposure poses significant risks to cognitive and
emotional development. The immune system presents itself as a promising
biological mechanism by which ELS impacts long-term neurodevelopment because it
is highly sensitive to early experiences and has strong bidirectional
connections with the brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Psychoneuroimmunological
Effects of Early Life Stress Study will test for links between ELS exposure,
inflammatory processes, and neurodevelopment across a 2-year period in
adolescence. This project will use blood samples to assess pro-inflammatory gene
expression. It will employ functional magnetic resonance imaging to evaluate the
development of two distinct prefrontal-subcortical circuits involved in learning
about threats and self-regulation. Longitudinal data will be collected from a
group of adopted adolescents who experienced institutional orphanage care as
infants--a severe form of ELS--as well as a group of never-institutionalized
adolescents. The researcher will test the hypothesis that inflammatory processes
promote brain development relevant for learning about threats and disrupt brain
development relevant for regulating emotional responses to threats in ELS-
exposed adolescents. Pro-inflammatory gene expression will be tested as a
mediator between ELS and (a) increased prefrontal-subcortical connectivity
during threat learning, and (b) diminished prefrontal-subcortical connectivity
during self-regulation. Establishing this stress-immune-brain chain will inform
basic models of neurodevelopment and may help explain why ELS deleteriously
affects psychosocial and cognitive outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.