* 1848857
* Risk Markets Imbalances and Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Ricardo Caballero, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 07/31/2024
* USD 265,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores how changes in the demand
and supply for risky assets and the imbalance between them (risk-market
imbalances) affect macroeconomic outcomes. The research then considers efficient
macroeconomic policy from this perspective. This research is highly relevant in
the recent low interest rate environment, as monetary policy has historically
been the most direct tool to prevent severe risk-markets shocks from spilling
over to the real economy. When interest rates are low, traditional policies are
ineffective. Furthermore, a low interest rate environment encourages speculative
bubbles and high yield investment patterns that make the economy more
vulnerable. These phenomena and policy responses to them impact the global
economy and require an internationally coordinated response. This research will
generate new analytical tools to integrate financial and macroeconomic analysis.
It will also explore optimal policy responses to macroeconomic outcomes by
considering the impact of risk-market imbalances on the real economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines the interactions between risk-shocks
and constraints on monetary policy in generating economic fluctuations, the role
of financial speculation and its drivers in exacerbating the severity of these
fluctuations, and the optimal joint monetary, fiscal, and macroprudential policy
framework for this environment. Specifically, the research examines risk-off
episodes with a zero-lower bound (ZLB) on interest rates that incorporates a
broader set of constraints, including political economy concerns. The research
will also explore, both theoretically and empirically, the role of leverage and
how it responds to different policy frameworks. The project further incorporates
speculative bubbles and behavioral elements in this framework. On the
international front, the research will develop and test models of gross capital
flows and exchange rate movements during both global and local risk-off
episodes. The project will then explore optimal international coordination
mechanisms to deal with global cycles in a low interest rate
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.