* 1848210
* CAREER: UAS-Based Radar Suite for Sounding and Mapping Glaciers
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Emily Arnold, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 609,816.00

The ice sheet mass loss being observed in Greenland and Antarctica directly
contributes to global Sea Level Rise (SLR). By the end of this century,
scientists predict that changes in the polar ice sheets could contribute
anywhere from tens of centimeters to almost two meters in SLR. This large
uncertainty in future SLR predictions is due, in part, to insufficient
measurements of bedrock topography and surface crevasses in the most critical
regions of the ice sheets. These measurements are used by scientists in ice
sheet models to predict contributions to SLR. The observational gaps in bedrock
topography and surface crevasses limit scientists? abilities to accurately model
changes in the dynamic ice sheets. This project addresses this data need by
equipping a small drone helicopter with a radar suite to produce fine-grid
measurements of ice thickness, bed topography, and crevasses in critical regions
of the ice sheet. Rising seas will have huge social and economic impacts on the
entire global population ? especially to the estimated 150 million people living
in coastal regions at elevations within 1 m of current sea level. The
uncertainties in SLR predictions greatly inhibit our ability to properly plan
for and adapt to our changing climate. The broader impacts of this work are not
limited to reducing uncertainty in SLR predictions. This project also involves
the training of post-secondary students in developing next-generation remote
sensing technologies to better prepare them for 21st century careers. By
integrating research and education, post-secondary students will gain practical
experience via classroom design, build, and test projects. Through these
projects, students will be exposed to the environmental and social issues that
are driving the need for this new technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merits of this work encompass both the technological development of
the new sensor-platform and the glaciological studies this tool will enable. The
primary technological research goal is to extend the application of drones in
environmental remote sensing by: 1) using a novel approach for antenna
integration and multi-pass distributed array processing that overcomes major
payload limitations of small drones, and 2) demonstrating an autonomous platform
that is easier to operate yet has sufficient payload capabilities and is robust
enough to conduct measurements in polar environments. The vehicle?s flight
capabilities will enable crevasse mapping and bed topography data collection
with a combined spatial extent and resolution that will allow scientists to
study: 1) the effects of measurement resolution on modeling ice sheet dynamic
processes; 2) the significance of bed topography on glacial behavior at multiple
time scales; and, 3) crevassing mechanisms and correlating crevasse attributes
to calving events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.