* 1848026
* CAREER: Investigating the impact of learning new skills on cognitive development and motivation for functional independence in older adulthood
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Rachel Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 08/31/2024
* USD 782,202.00

Learning to adapt to a changing environment, especially due to technological
advances, is important, yet understudied. Learning to adapt is especially
important for older adults, as it allows them to maintain functional
independence (i.e., live independently). For example, as healthcare providers
move towards only accessing patients' medical records online, learning to use
new online portals would allow an older adult to avoid needing someone else to
access personal medical records. The proposed studies with older adults leverage
learning theories from infant and child development, when cognitive growth is
typical, in contrast to older adulthood, when cognitive growth is thought to be
limited. The proposed research tests whether providing older adults with an
informative, rich, and encouraging learning environment leads to learning what
to learn, and how to learn in new situations (i.e., transfer of learning). This
transfer of learning is hypothesized to trigger a cascading effect of new skill
learning in daily life to increase cognitive abilities and maintain functional
independence. The broader impacts of the research are twofold. First, this
project addresses an urgent need for learning research in older adulthood.
According to the US Census Bureau, by 2035 there will be more older adults over
age 65 than children under 18 in the US. Most research-based recommendations to
maintain cognitive abilities and functional independence primarily include
activities that do not prioritize learning explicitly (e.g., physical exercise,
healthy diet), despite the need to adapt to a constantly changing environment.
The findings from this project could lead to more effective interventions for
cognitive and functional gains in adulthood. Second, research-education
activities will be undertaken to educate the general public on aging research.
In addition to public writing, talks, and video tutorials on aging research, a
public symposium will bring together researchers and service providers to
enhance communication of research and its application. Mentored research
opportunities for older adults, undergraduates, and graduate students, including
low-income, first-generation, and underrepresented students at UC Riverside, a
Minority and Hispanic Serving Institution will be made encouraged.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research specifically tests the role of
frequent and varied (vs. frequent or varied) skill learning in older adults.
Research with infants, children, and young adults suggest that frequency and
variability may have both unique and combined contributions on learning. In a
12-week pilot intervention, older adults, who engaged in frequent and varied
skill learning, similar to an undergraduate course load, increased their
cognitive abilities (working memory, cognitive control) to levels similar to
those of middle-aged adults, 30 years younger. A no-contact control group
exhibited no gains. The proposed research includes a 2-year longitudinal study
comparing 12-week frequent AND varied versus frequent OR varied skill learning
conditions with follow-up assessments. Analyses will (1) compare the immediate
and long-term impact of cognitive abilities, motivation, and learning activities
on functional independence and (2) evaluate individual differences in pre-test
cognitive abilities and motivation on intervention outcomes. The research-
education efforts will open communication channels between older adult
communities and researchers and create research opportunities for
undergraduates, graduate students, and older adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.