* 1848840
* Conference on Cognitive Computational Neuroscience (CCN): September 2018, Philadelphia, PA
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Alyson Fletcher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 08/31/2021
* USD 50,000.00

This project will provide three-years of support for the Conference on Cognitive
Computational Neuroscience (CCN). This conference provides an annual scientific
meeting for neuroscientists whose goal is to develop computationally defined
models of brain information processing that explain rich measurements of brain
activity and behavior. Historically, different disciplines have met subsets of
these goals: Cognitive science has developed computational models at the
cognitive level; computational neuroscience has developed neurobiologically
plausible computational models at lower levels; cognitive neuroscience has
mapped processes onto brain regions; and artificial intelligence has developed
synthetic systems. CCN is unique in its focus on the intersection between these
fields. In addition to advancing research, CCN seeks to contribute to the
growing commercial use of biologically inspired hardware and software in
Artificial Intelligence as well as being a vehicle for broadly impacting
education and society. One particular focus of CCN is increasing the visibility
of women and scientists from underrepresented populations via speaking
opportunities. This award will partially support travel grants for this purpose.
The conference will also include hands-on tutorials, and materials from these
will propagate to various university curricula. The award will support video
recordings of the tutorials and talks. These recordings will be made publicly
available on the website to increase the broader impact of the conference to the
wider community and those unable to attend. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central goal
of neuroscience is to understand how vast populations of neurons give rise to
complex behavior. Today, advances in various domains offer tangible
possibilities to make fundamental conceptual breakthroughs. Modern neural
recording technologies now provide opportunities to observe neural activity at
unprecedented resolution and scale. At the same time, research in cognitive
science has become increasingly sophisticated in identifying computational
principles that may serve as the basis for human cognition, and machine learning
and artificial intelligence have made great strides in building models to
autonomously solve complex cognitive tasks. However, interactions among these
distinct disciplines remain rare. This new conference may stimulate unifying
frameworks that fully realize the cross-disciplinary potential of these
individual advances. Concretely, the goal of CCN is to create and foster a
community that will develop models of brain information processing with several
key features. These models should (1) be fully computationally defined and
implemented in computer simulations; (2) be neurobiologically plausible; (3)
explain measurements of brain activity (and continue to do so as spatiotemporal
resolution and scale improve); (4) explain behavior in the context of
naturalistic stimuli and tasks; and (5) perform feats of intelligence such as
recognition, internal modelling and representation of the environment, decision-
making, planning, action, and motor control. Such models currently do not exist
and are unlikely to emerge without greatly improved cross-disciplinary
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.