* 1848641
* EAGER:Experimental Deployment of the ARTEMIS BGP Hijacking Detection Prototype in Research and Educational Networks
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Alistair King, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 08/31/2019
* USD 184,985.00

The Internet suffers from a design flaw affecting the security of global
routing, exposing it to a class of large-scale attacks that can cause
significant portions of network traffic to be diverted across the globe. The
potential impact of these attacks - known as BGP hijacking - can range from
massive eavesdropping to identity spoofing or selective content modification. In
addition, executing such attacks does not require access or proximity to the
affected links and networks, posing increasing risks to national security.
Recently, researchers at CAIDA, UC San Diego, proposed a novel methodology
(called ARTEMIS) to detect and mitigate BGP hijacking attacks that is radically
different from the state of the art but that network operators find promising
and more in line with their needs. In this project, researchers carry out a
first experimental assisted deployment of ARTEMIS in few selected operator
networks supporting education, research and other no-profit activities in the
US. This project significantly contributes to transitioning from a prototype
mainly based on theoretical foundations and controlled experiments into a real
platform that can be practically used by operators to secure their networks. The
project also contributes to improving the security of networks participating in
the project, with an immediate positive effect on the security of infrastructure
critical to our society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration
among researchers and selected research and education network operators to carry
out an experimental deployment of ARTEMIS detection and mitigation techniques in
their networks. The main goals of such experimentation are: i) to evaluate the
ARTEMIS methods and their implementation in real operational scenarios; ii) to
learn and address real deployment technical issues; iii) to train operators in
the use of the tool and contribute to improve the security of their
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.