* 1848302
* CAREER: Using the Rattlesnake Ridge landslide as a natural laboratory to study repeating earthquake evolution and development of operational repeating signal detectors
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Amanda Thomas, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2024
* USD 641,242.00

Landslides are a significant natural hazard that threaten both human safety and
infrastructure. They can cause billions of dollars of damage and thousands of
deaths and injuries annually. To reduce the impact of landslides on people and
infrastructure it is important to improve our understanding of landslide
dynamics and the processes controlling this diversity of behaviors. This CAREER
project leverages a unique seismic dataset collected along an active landslide
near Yakima in Washington State, the Rattlesnake Ridge landslide. The project
will detect and analyze small earthquakes that occurred as the landslide
developed and use these to better understand how the landslide evolves and what
drives its failure. Because the landslide occurred on land from the Yakama
Nation, the project will work closely to inform the Tribal Council and others
about results from this research. The project will conduct field trips for
students at Heritage University and the Tribal School to understand landslides
in the region. The project also supports a graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Rattlesnake Ridge landslide is a hillslope located in
Union Gap, WA that has rapidly destabilized over the last few months. Cracks in
the ridge were first identified in late October of 2017 and over a two month
period the 3 million cubic meter mass detached from the adjacent hillside and
began accelerating downhill. The future behavior of the slide is still uncertain
and concerning. This project will perform a comprehensive seismic analysis of
data collected from this event. The dataset is rich in small magnitude
seismicity. The research plan consists of earthquake detection, location, cross-
correlation to determine which events repeat, comparison of the spatiotemporal
distribution of seismicity with geodetic data recording slide motion, and local
precipitation. The results of this analysis will be synthesized estimate the
stresses acting on the slide body and address why the Rattlesnake Ridge
landslide is slowing down while other nearly-identical slides in the region have
failed catastrophically. Behavior of seismicity at the slide will provide
insight into how repeating earthquake sequences on tectonic faults evolve over
large displacements, a proxy for long timescales. The results of the analysis
will constitute a unique case study that will provide insight into landslide
character and failure mechanisms helping to evaluate underlying
hazard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is supported by the Geophysics
program, The Tribal Colleges and Universities Program and the Prediction of and
Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.