* 1848576
* Convergence: RAISE: Linking the adaptive dynamics of plankton with emergent global ocean biogeochemistry
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Simon Levin, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,038.00

Due to their sheer abundance and high activity, microorganisms have the
potential to greatly influence how ecosystems are affected by changes in their
environment. However, descriptions of microbial physiology and diversity are
local and highly complex and thus rarely considered in Earth System Models.
Thus, the researchers focus on a convergence research framework that can
qualitatively and quantitatively integrate eco-evolutionary changes in
microorganisms with global biogeochemistry. Here, the investigators will develop
an approach that integrates the knowledge and tools of biologists,
mathematicians, engineers, and geoscientists to understand the link between the
ocean nutrient and carbon cycles. The integration of data and knowledge from
diverse fields will provide a robust, biologically rich, and computationally
efficient prediction for the variation in plankton resource requirements and the
biogeochemical implications, addressing a fundamental challenge in ocean
science. In addition, the project can serve as a road map for many other
research groups facing a similar lack of convergence between biology and
geoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, the cellular elemental ratios of
Carbon, Nitrogen, and Phosphorus (C:N:P) of marine communities have been
considered static at Redfield proportions but recent studies have demonstrated
strong latitudinal variation. Such regional variation may have large - but
poorly constrained - implications for marine biodiversity, biogeochemical
functioning, and atmospheric carbon dioxide levels. As such, variations in ocean
community C:N:P may represent an important biological feedback. Here, the
investigators propose a convergence research framework integrating cellular and
ecological processes controlling microbial resource allocations with an Earth
System model. The approach combines culture experiments and omics measurements
to provide a molecular understanding of cellular resource allocations. Using a
mathematical framework of increasing complexity describing communicating, moving
demes, the team will quantify the extent to which local mixing, environmental
heterogeneity and evolution lead to systematic deviations in plankton resource
allocations and C:N:P. Optimization tools from engineering science will be used
to facilitate the quantitative integration of models and observations across a
range of scales and complexity levels. Finally, global ocean modeling will
enable understanding of how plankton resource use impacts Earth System
processes. By integrating data and knowledge across fields, scales and
complexity, the investigators will develop a robust link between variation in
plankton C:N:P and global biogeochemical cycles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.