* 1848702
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Examining Perceptions and Spatial Interactions Between Children and Law Enforcement
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2020
* Anna Secor, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Scott Freundschuh
* 10/31/2020
* USD 17,950.00

This doctoral dissertation research examines the spatial interactions between
police and children from minority groups, and the impacts of those encounters on
children's perceptions and experiences. Police departments rely increasingly on
various policing technologies, including the use of biometric and spatial
profiling data. Yet there is little research on the interplay of these policing
technologies and their social and geographic impacts on local communities,
particularly communities of color. Understanding how these technologies impact
children's perceptions of policing, identity, place, and personal security have
the potential of improving law enforcement and public well-being. As a Doctoral
Dissertation Research Improvement award, this project will provide support to
enable a promising young scholar to establish an independent research career.

The doctoral student will examine perceptions and spatial interactions between
police and children from minority groups. Specifically, this research asks, what
are the spatial interactions between law-enforcement and children from minority
communities, and what are the impacts on children's well-being of those
interactions. The doctoral student will use a mixed-method approach to collect
data through interviews, focus groups, and participant observation. Children's
perceptions and spatial interactions will be understood via the production of
visual interpretive materials such as drawings, comics, and mental maps.
Findings will be presented in community workshops, community-council meetings
and police-community meetings in ways designed to open dialog regarding police
policies, practices, and community impacts. This research will provide an
analysis of the social and geographic impacts of policing technologies on
children from minority groups with implications for informing police, child, and
community interactions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.