* 1848511
* CAREER: Bioinspired Shape-Morphing 3D Materials with Programmed Morphologies and Motions
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Kyungsuk Yum, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 505,600.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Living organisms use spatially controlled
expansion and contraction of soft tissues to achieve complex three-dimensional
(3D) shapes and movements and thereby functions. However, reproducing such
features in man-made materials presents scientific challenges. This CAREER award
aims to design and develop bioinspired 3D materials with programmed shapes and
motions. Stimuli-responsive, synthetic and biological cell-encapsulating
hydrogel sheets (2D materials) will be encoded with spatially controlled
expansion and contraction to transform the 2D materials into programmed 3D
shapes through controlled deformation. Biological organisms use such approaches
for fundamental biological processes, including complex growth, movement, and
adaptation to environments. The proposed research thus has potential for
fabricating bioinspired 3D materials that can change their 3D shapes in response
to external signals, such as temperature, electric field, and light. Such shape-
changing 3D materials could find applications in various areas, including soft
robotics, artificial muscles, biomedical devices, and tissue engineering.
Furthermore, this project will develop museum and summer camp outreach programs
based on soft robotics activities to promote the interest of K-12 students in
science and engineering. The integrated research and educational activities will
enhance research-oriented multidisciplinary education and develop the next
generation of researchers in bioinspired soft materials and engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER
award is to design and develop bioinspired shape-morphing 3D materials with
programmed morphologies and motions. In pursuit of this goal, this project will
(1) design and prepare stimuli-responsive, programmable synthetic and cell-laden
hydrogel sheets (2D hydrogels) and (2) develop a method to encode the 2D
hydrogels with spatially controlled in-plane growth (expansion and contraction)
using digital light projection lithography. This approach will transform the 2D
hydrogels into programmed 3D structures via out-of-plane bending deformation.
The resulting 3D structures will be able to reversibly transform between
programmed 3D shapes in response to external stimuli, such as temperature, ion,
electric field, and light. This research will establish an integrated
theoretical and experimental framework to design and create bioinspired 3D
materials and program their 3D morphologies and motions, including how to encode
cell-laden hydrogels with spatially controlled contraction to create shape-
morphing 3D tissues with programmed motions. Such capability will benefit many
areas, including bioinspired soft robotics, artificial muscles, programmable
matter, biomedical devices, dynamic 3D tissue models, tissue engineering, and
biomimetic 3D manufacturing. This project will integrate research and
educational activities to (1) promote the interest of K-12 students in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields using hands-on soft
robotics activities through museum and summer camp outreach programs, (2)
enhance research-oriented multidisciplinary education, and (3) develop the next
generation of researchers in bioinspired soft materials, bioinspired
engineering, and biomimetic 3D manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.