* 1848181
* Society for the Neuroscience of Creativity Conference and Workshop
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2019
* David Beversdorf, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2019
* USD 45,280.00

Creativity in STEM is the difference between basic competency and innovative
advancement. To foster continued innovation, it is essential that we develop new
methods to foster students' creative thinking skills in STEM. However, many
issues regarding creativity remain unresolved. For example, we know little about
how creativity develops, how the brain gives rise to creativity, and what sorts
of educational experiences can make a student more creative over time. Indeed,
even determining how to accurately measure creativity is a source of debate.
This conference of the recently founded Society for the Neuroscience of
Creativity (SfNC) establishes an inclusive community of scholars and educators
seeking to understand and actively leverage the neural mechanisms that support
creative thinking, teaching, and learning. Its specific goals are to 1)
establish a reciprocally informative platform to keep researchers updated on the
priorities of educators, and keep educators updated on relevant advances in
creativity research, and 2) lay out a roadmap for creativity research. This
project exemplifies the Education and Human Resources Core Research program's
commitment to fundamental research on learning in STEM that combines theory,
techniques, and perspectives from a wide range of disciplines and
contexts.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;By supporting collaboration and reciprocal
learning between researchers with related interests, this meeting will
streamline and catalyze progress in the neuroscience of creativity. Specific
scientific priorities identified as critical for the productive development of
the neuroscience of creativity include the development of measurement tools and
the fostering of creativity through educational experiences. This meeting will
also highlight work that advances these priorities and will actively encourage
collaboration on these priorities. To foster a meaningful dialogue among
researchers and educators, the meeting is targeted at an accessible size of
100-200 attendees. Further, the meeting is scheduled to immediately precede the
larger Cognitive Neuroscience Society annual meeting so that attendees of that
meeting can participate in the event as a preconference experience. A major goal
of the SfNC is the involvement of women and members of underrepresented minority
groups. This goal is reflected in the establishment of travel funds that support
the participation of underrepresented minority students and teachers of
underserved minority students. To further increase the meeting's broader
impacts, the participation of local community partners including teachers,
administrators, and program developers focused on STEM and music education is
also a priority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.