* 1848717
* Workshop on Evolutions in Urban Chemistry: Growing Influence of Non-Traditional Emission Sources Workshop; Boulder, Colorado; Fall of 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Joost de Gouw, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 08/31/2021
* USD 24,261.00

This project supports a workshop, "Evolutions in Urban Chemistry: Growing
Influence of Non-Traditional Emissions Sources" to be held in Boulder, Colorado
for two days in the Fall of 2018. The goal of the workshop is to bring together
experts to advance scientific understanding of air pollutant emissions from
"non-traditional" man-made sources including cooking, building exhaust, and
volatile chemical products (VCPs), such as personal care products. This workshop
will bring together experts to develop a roadmap for future research to advance
the fundamental understanding of chemical species emitted from these non-
traditional sources, how these emissions change chemically over time in the
atmosphere, and the effects they have on the urban air pollution mixture.
Historically, urban atmospheric chemistry has been driven by emissions from
"traditional" anthropogenic volatile organic compounds (VOCs) resulting from
transportation and energy production. However, in recent years, as emissions
from vehicles have decreased, other sources of VOCs have begun to play a
significant role in the urban air pollution mixture. These non-traditional
anthropogenic emissions include petroleum based VCPs, cooking emissions, and
building exhaust, which often contain functional groups like alcohols,
aldehydes, esters, and ketones. In contrast, the traditional anthropogenic VOC
emissions are composed of species such as alkanes, alkenes, and aromatics. As a
result, a different set of chemical reactions may be important. Workshop
discussions will focus on the following areas: 1) laboratory studies of the
transformations of oxygenated VOCs from VCPs either in chambers or aqueous
solution; 2) field work to characterize emissions and chemical transitions of
VCPs in the urban atmosphere; 3) modeling of VCP emissions and their chemical
transformations impacting ozone and aerosol concentrations; and 4) development
of instrumentation to accurately measure these species and their reaction
products at concentrations found in the urban atmosphere. A report synthesizing
the discussion will be produced and available broadly.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.