* 1848018
* CAREER: Predicting Climate Impacts on Irrigated Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Winter, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2024
* USD 498,879.00

This project will assess the effects of climate and water supply on future
irrigated agricultural production. Increasing agricultural production through
irrigation is an essential part of the complex solution to global hunger.
Irrigation can make marginal land suitable for agriculture and existing
croplands more productive. However, irrigation is limited by its massive use of
water. Determining the potential of irrigation to reduce global hunger requires
a thorough understanding of multiple factors such as climate, agricultural water
supply, and crop production. This project will improve predictions of climate
impacts on irrigated croplands by advancing the understanding of key constraints
on irrigated agricultural productivity. As a result, it will develop strategies
for enhancing future irrigation management. Knowledge, data, and models will be
widely disseminated both directly and through collaborations with the
Agricultural Model Intercomparison and Improvement Project and Kansas Geological
Survey. This project will also increase knowledge of physical geography, climate
science, numerical modeling, and data analysis for students at critical STEM
stages. Additionally, the investigator will create a teaching model that enables
high-school students to explore the impacts of climate and water resources on
crop production, develop an educator professional development course for the
teaching model, and provide research experiences for diverse graduate and
undergraduate students intending to major in a STEM
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Irrigated agricultural projections that directly
simulate the impacts of water supply on yield are few, and typically have
simplistic representations of crop growth and irrigation. This project will
address this key deficiency through four main efforts: (1) Construct a modeling
framework that connects climate and hydrologic data with a crop model capable of
simulating limited automatic irrigation; (2) Evaluate and improve the modeling
framework using reported yields and satellite-derived evapotranspiration, soil
moisture, and vegetation index data; (3) Force the modeling framework with
climate and water supply scenarios; and (4) Explore crop water use and
production across irrigation scenarios and modeling assumptions. These efforts
will provide answers to three important questions at the interface of climate,
water, and agriculture: (1) What are the effects of water supply shortages on
irrigated agricultural production?currently and in the future? (2) Which
irrigation management practices can reduce water use without harming yields, and
ultimately decrease the impacts of water scarcity on irrigated crop production?
(3) How can satellite data improve crop model simulations of irrigated
agricultural production? This project will focus on irrigated corn, soybean,
rice, and wheat in the United States, where irrigation is responsible for
approximately 90% of consumptive water use and $120 billion of agricultural
production. However, datasets, models, and methods developed by this project
will provide opportunities to improve projections of irrigated agriculture
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.