* 1848369
* CAREER: Spectroscopy of Metals from Ab Initio Quantum Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Timothy Berkelbach, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 02/29/2024
* USD 506,122.00

Dr. Timothy Berkelbach of Columbia University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry and the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in the Division
of Materials Research. Dr. Berkelbach develops and applies new computational
tools to predict the electronic properties of metals and other materials used in
batteries, solar cells and catalysts for the chemical industry. He and his
coworkers adapt accurate tools developed for small molecules to use on large-
scale problems such as solid-state and nanoscale materials. These tools are
designed to be systematically improvable and to exhibit predictive power. All
methods developed by the Berkelbach group are implemented in the free and open-
source PySCF software package. The Berkelbach group's enthusiasm for working at
the interface between chemistry, physics, and materials science is shared with
nearby high-school students from underrepresented and low-income communities,
through a series of hands-on colloquia called "Modern Material Technologies."
Topics of the course include superconductivity, LEDs and energy-efficient
displays, and electric cars. The Berkelbach group also develops online
educational materials that mix exposition, mathematical equations, and computer
code in order to educate the next generation of computational chemists,
physicists, and materials scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Berkelbach is
extending and applying tools from quantum chemistry, especially those based on
coupled-cluster theory, in order to simulate, understand, and predict the
electronic properties of metals, in the solid-state and nanoscale regimes. This
research brings the systematic improvability of wavefunction-based quantum
chemistry into condensed-phase materials science. The metal-based materials
being targeted by Dr. Berkelbach have technological applications with societal
benefits, including batteries, solar cells, and catalysts. By providing tools
that can reproduce or predict high-precision spectroscopies in a parameter-free
manner, Dr. Berkelbach and his group are providing microscopic interpretations
and concomitant chemical intuition. Through this research program, Dr.
Berkelbach trains and mentors PhD students and postdoctoral scientists to
contribute to the interface of chemistry, physics, and materials science. He and
his research group are engaged in local outreach efforts that use hands-on
demonstrations in order to highlight how everyday technologies are enabled by
fundamental science. These outreach efforts primarily target underrepresented
and low-income communities. New computational methods are implemented in a
freely available, open-source computer program, which is also used for the
development of online educational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.