* 1848451
* CAREER: Advancing Latent Variable Statistical Modeling for the Analysis of Big and Complex Longitudinal Data to Promote Personalized Learning
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Xiaojing Wang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2024
* USD 331,803.00

This research project will advance statistical modeling for latent variables in
big and complex longitudinal data, with a focus on personalized education. Given
the increasingly complex structures of computerized tests and online surveys,
education is getting ever closer to a time when personalization will become
possible. Work in this area is hampered, however, by a lack of state-of-the-art
statistical techniques to analyze the data. This project will contribute a set
of statistical models and inference methods to stimulate more longitudinal
studies and applications in latent trait analysis. The research will be
integrated within K-12 education through the application of the developed
methods to a personalized learning platform. This platform is widely used by
students from Grade 2 to 12 throughout the United States. The investigator also
will apply the new methods to data sets from other disciplines, including
psychology, ecology, and engineering. Graduate students will be actively engaged
in this research project. Results from this research will be incorporated into
an undergraduate seminar, an open online course, and professional development
and training courses. The results also will be disseminated through conference
presentations and journal publications. All computational algorithms with
scalability for big data will be distributed as user-friendly and open-source
software packages to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will
focus on learning the dynamic changes of latent trajectories from big and
complex longitudinal testing data. The investigator will develop both parametric
and nonparametric statistical models and inference methods, especially for
dichotomous and categorical data. First, the project will build up a new class
of hierarchical dynamic models. These models will provide more accurate
estimates for latent ability (traits), including for real time data. Model
criteria will be proposed to assess this improvement. The results will allow
educators to design better educational strategies and computerized tests
according to students' respective abilities. Second, the project will develop
nonparametric modeling to flexibly capture the varying dependence and nonlinear
effects of the latent trajectories. The developed methods will be useful for
explaining, predicting, and grouping changes in latent ability, which is vital
in personalized learning. Scalability strategies will be developed to make
computation feasible for the developed statistical models. This last step is
critical to ensure wide impact of the project results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.