* 1848608
* EAGER: Automatic Identification of Bug Description Elements
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Andrian Marcus, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2020
* USD 200,000.00

When an application does not behave the way it is meant to or as expected by the
users, they often communicate the problem via a bug-report, which is then used
by developers to identify the problem and fix it. To submit a bug-report, users
utilize issue-trackers, which allows them to write in natural language a
description of the problem they encountered. One problem in bug reporting is the
perception gap that exists between bug reporters and developers. Those who
report a bug typically only have functional knowledge of an application, even if
they have development experience themselves, whereas the software developers
have intimate code-level knowledge. Consequently, information in bug-reports are
often incomplete, potentially incorrect, or hard to comprehend, which leads to
excessive manual effort spent by developers in trying to identify the real
source of the problem. This project aims to automatically analyzing bug
descriptions in natural language and identifying parts that correspond to the
observed behavior of the application, the expected behavior, and the steps that
describe what the user did when encountering the problem. The ability to
automatically identify these parts of a bug description is important as it
allows further analysis which will determine the quality of the reported
information and supports developers in solving the problem. In the long run,
this award will lead to a new type of bug reporting system that is able to
automatically enable users to better describe the problem behaviors that they
notice, and in turn, help developers address software problems more
productively. The project will also support defining best practices in bug
reporting, to be used by software users across the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines well-established and highly
innovative research solutions from natural language processing, automated
discourse analysis, and machine learning. Specifically, the project addresses
discourse semantics at statement level, rather than bug report level, and solves
the difficult challenge of bug content disambiguation. In addition, it also
addresses the problem of identifying relationships between bug description
elements, which is essential in supporting future work on automated bug
reproduction. The main solution relies on the use of neural networks, which
require a substantial amount of manual coding of bug reports. The resulting set
of annotated bug reports could be used to support research beyond this project,
such as, the translation of natural language test sequences or scenarios into
fully automated test cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.