* 1848269
* CAREER: Engineering artificial oxide layers with hidden spin symmetry for drivable 2D quantum magnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Jian Liu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 06/30/2024
* USD 708,299.00

Nontechnical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials have been known and
exploited for applications since the ancient times of human history. While their
advanced use in modern days can be commonly found in computers and electronics,
new magnetic materials are necessary for developing a next generation of
processors, memories, and sensors with better security, faster speed, and
smaller size. Two-dimensional quantum antiferromagnet holds such promise because
of its high scalability in the form of atomic layers. However, antiferromagnets,
unlike ferromagnets, intrinsically resist control with a magnetic field.
Moreover, realizing two-dimensional magnets is highly challenging because real
materials are three dimensional. To overcome these difficulties, it is necessary
to develop the capability of material synthesis by design with atomic precision.
This research focuses on atomic layering of oxide materials to achieve quantum
antiferromagnets that are not only two-dimensional but also externally
controllable. Specifically, iridium-based oxides are used to realize a design
where the antiferromagnet retains its internal magnetic structure and yet
responds to magnetic field in a way similar to a ferromagnet. The project
involves a revamp of undergraduate physics course materials, along with an
outreach component that specifically targets underrepresented minorities and the
general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Achieving
control of two-dimensional quantum Heisenberg antiferromagnets is not only
advancing our understanding of quantum many-body physics but also enables
exploitation of quantum effects for new technologies. Realizing efficient
external control is however highly challenging because of no direct linear
coupling of an external magnetic field to the antiferromagnetic order. Moreover,
internal spin anisotropy and three-dimensional coupling are always present in
real materials, suppressing the two-dimensional critical fluctuations. While
these barriers are difficult to overcome in bulk materials, the principle
investigator plans to employ in-situ-monitored pulsed-laser deposition growth to
construct a variety of atomically thin epitaxial oxide layers with strong spin-
orbit coupling that creates large anisotropic exchange interactions and spin
canting but preserves the spin rotational symmetry. The resulting two-
dimensional quantum antiferromagnetic lattices is expected to be in close
proximity to the spin isotropic limit and exhibits iant responses to applied
external fields. This unique mechanism can be implemented by engineering the
thicknesses, structural distortions, composition, and strain state of the oxide
layers through epitaxial growth. An important goal is to unveil the two-
dimensional critical fluctuations near quantum phase transitions, and to
establish external controls of the antiferromagnetic order parameter via a suite
of characterization techniques, including advanced synchrotron x-ray scattering
and spectroscopy. The results are expected to facilitate the development of
functional two-dimensional quantum antiferromagnets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.