* 1848057
* CAREER: Coordinating Diverse Physical Mechanisms for Intracellular Transport
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Elena Koslover, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2024
* USD 654,721.00

This research represents a fundamental study of the physics of intracellular
transport, bringing new quantitative approaches to bear on the recent explosion
of dynamic imaging data from living cells. By taking into account features
unique to the intracellular environment, this work will make it possible to
connect molecular-scale in vitro measurements of motor-cargo complexes with
their behavior inside living cells. Furthermore, by analyzing in vivo imaging
data in the context of quantitative transport models, the group will be able to
identify the contributions of different transport modalities and pinpoint the
key factors that control the balance between them. The development of predictive
models for the effect of physical parameters on cell-scale transport is crucial
to understanding how cells regulate organelle localization, to unraveling the
mechanisms and biological consequences of transport defects, and to enabling
experimental control of intracellular organization. The project is integrated
with a complementary educational program that will provide opportunities for a
diverse group of students (ranging from K-12 to graduate students) to explore
scientific inquiry at the interface between physics and biology. Outreach
efforts include the development of hands-on exploratory activities implemented
in a "Young Scientists' Club" through partnership with a local elementary school
and a module of the Tech Trek summer camp for middle school girls. These
outreach efforts aim to broaden young students' conception of what a scientist
does, while providing an early introduction to key practices of scientific
research and basic concepts in the physical sciences. Research opportunities in
the PI's lab are provided each summer to high school and undergraduate students
to experience first-hand the nature of theoretical research at the nexus between
physics and biology. Additionally, the PI is involved in teaching a summer
bootcamp course to provide life sciences graduate students selected from around
the world with a strong foundation of quantitative modeling
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological processes ranging from metabolism to
cell signaling to endocytosis require efficient movement and sorting of
organelles and molecular complexes through a dynamic yet structured
intracellular environment. The major modes of transport for cytoplasmic
particles include diffusion, motor-driven transport along cytoskeletal
filaments, and advective flow of the cytoplasm itself. A wealth of in vivo data
on intracellular dynamics has become available in recent years. However, the
fundamental physical mechanisms dictating this motion and the extent to which a
cell can control and harness cytoplasmic dynamics for biological function remain
poorly understood. In this project the PI employs theoretical and computational
approaches, coupled with analysis of live cell imaging data, to explore the
multi-faceted physics of intracellular transport, focusing on (1) the interplay
between different transport modes, (2) the mechanics of motor-driven transport,
and (3) the role of hydrodynamics in the cytoplasm. This approach brings
together new results in statistical physics and soft matter mechanics with
imaging data generated by collaborating cell biology groups. The PI will develop
analytical results backed by stochastic simulations for delineating how the
parameters of multi-modal transport and the arrangement of microtubule tracks
control the dispersion and localization of organelles throughout the cytoplasm.
The general mathematical model will be tested against observed organelle
trajectories in tubular cell projections, including the motion of peroxisomes in
fungal hyphae and mitochondria in neuronal axons. A major focus of this work
will be on the mechanical and hydrodynamic aspects of active transport in
eukaryotic cells. Leveraging results from polymer physics, the group will
develop a physical model for transport in the presence of obstacles and through
permeating cytoskeletal networks. The PI will also explore the mechanics of
hitchhiking, a newly discovered form of directed transport. By bringing together
approaches from soft matter physics with coarse-grained simulation techniques
and data on the motion of key cytoplasmic components, this work will shed new
light on the mechanisms by which cells control the distribution and delivery of
their organelles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported
by the Physics of Living Systems program in the Division of Physics and the
Cellular Dynammics and Function Cluster in the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.