* 1848465
* CAREER: Characterizing mechanisms of navigation and memory using direct human brain recording and stimulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Joshua Jacobs, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 629,581.00

The goal of this project is to explain how the human brain supports spatial
navigation and memory. To examine this issue, we will directly record brain
activity from subjects performing spatial navigation and memory tasks. We will
measure how the brain supports different aspects of spatial memory by having
people perform several different types of navigation paradigms using virtual
reality on a laptop computer. Our participants are neurosurgical patients who
have electrodes surgically implanted as part of treatment for their epilepsy.
These patients volunteer to participate in our experiments, thus providing rare
direct human brain data on the neural basis of behavior. We will analyze the
patterns of brain activity to understand how spatial and memory information is
represented across the brain, including both local neural signals in individual
regions as well as interactions between brain structures. Further, in addition
to recording brain activity, we will also apply targeted (and safe) patterns of
electrical stimulation to brains during certain parts of these tasks, allowing
us to test how behavior varies when selected brain regions are stimulated. The
findings from our research will help us to understand fundamental types of brain
signals that support spatial navigation and to compare how these signals differ
across brain structures. This project also has a substantial educational
component with the development of educational and outreach programs to advance
neuroscience education and research at both the K-12 and University levels. We
will deploy new curricula on the neuroscience of navigation and memory at New
York City schools. To support this outreach, we will develop novel and engaging
augmented reality spatial navigation protocols, enabling the students to study
spatial memory in their everyday life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
characterize the distinct neural mechanisms underlying spatial navigation and
memory in the human brain, with emphasis on the medial temporal lobe (MTL). We
approach this goal with four key elements: direct brain recordings from
neurosurgical patients, custom-designed spatial memory tasks using virtual
reality, novel computational methods for analyzing local and distributed neural
signals related to spatial behavior, and direct brain stimulation for testing
the causality of these signals. The subjects in our study are neurosurgical
patients who will perform customized spatial memory tasks that are designed to
distinguish neural signals corresponding to spatial and non-spatial memory at
different scales. Our data analyses will identify patterns of brain activity
underlying specific memory processes in the MTL as well as various brain regions
using both single-neuron spiking and network oscillations. All experimental
designs are grounded in our preliminary data, in which we show that the nature
of neural responses to spatial vs. non-spatial memory tasks varies fundamentally
across hemisphere, with the right MTL supporting navigation and left MTL
supporting memory. Furthermore, to identify how information propagates across
this network, we will characterize the functional role of a new phenomenon we
recently identified, cortical traveling waves, in which oscillations propagate
across the brain to coordinate inter-region communication. Finally, we will use
electrical stimulation to causally validate our findings. By combining data
across these methods, we will obtain a comprehensive view of how spatial
memories are represented in various brain areas and distinguish the large-scale
brain networks where information propagates to support spatial memory and
navigation. The results of these experiments have the potential for evaluating
the key theoretical question of whether a single electrophysiological process in
the medial temporal lobe supports both spatial and episodic memory or,
alternatively, whether separate neural processes and sub-regions in the MTL
support distinct aspects of multi-scale navigation and memory behaviors. THis
approach involving direct human brain recordings and stimulation is qualified to
address this question because the data we will acquire overcomes limitations of
both animal electrophysiology and noninvasive
neuroimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.