* 1848669
* Assessing International Collaboration Opportunities for Science and Technology Innovation: Methods and Approaches
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2022
* James Lambert, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Anne Emig
* 03/31/2022
* USD 99,355.00

In many research sectors, the United States is losing its leadership role as a
top developer and innovator in lieu of rising successes in other countries and
regions. It is critical to continuously perform an analysis of the global
science landscape to identify specific countries, including "newcomers" in
certain science and technology fields, which represent
opportunities&lt;br/&gt;for the United States to remain engaged with the cusp of
scientific development and innovation to ensure that no fruitful opportunities
are lost in development areas ranging from medicine to industry to
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary proposed workshop
seeks to develop novel approaches and methodologies to identify innovation
partnerships and collaboration opportunities with international partners that
are mutually beneficial and contribute to national science, technology, and
economic development goals. Among the goals of the proposed workshop are
discussions of novel and proven methodologies for such an analysis, and sources
of available data. This workshop is expected to yield state-of-the-science
reports that will be instrumental to our knowledge of comparative innovation
engagement strategies, comprising efforts from senior scholars in academia,
practitioners in industry, and decision makers in
government.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is imperative to actively seek opportunities
to partner with other countries that have complementary innovation capabilities
and facilitate the transfer of knowledge and technology. As the pace of
innovation continues to grow, so too does our need to identify potential working
partners well before their proficiency is internationally established and
recognized. A predictive model that identifies "up-and coming" players for
various fields of scientific innovation, based on a set of measurable and
defensible&lt;br/&gt;indicators, will allow the US to better leverage current
research relationships and forge new ones. This knowledge will grant the US
better access to and knowledge of various emerging technologies, ensure domestic
competitiveness with international markets, advance the opportunities for
science diplomacy beyond the US's traditional allies, and support our national
security interests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.