* 1848508
* CAREER: Optimal Approximation Algorithms in High Dimensions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Akil Narayan, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 07/31/2024
* USD 315,774.00

The increasing power of modern computational hardware has enabled computer-based
simulation of sophisticated mathematical models that resolve important physical
phenomena in great detail. With the advent of these computational abilities has
come an increased demand to include more complex physical interactions in the
models, and thus an increased strain on computational resources. Modern
engineering design utilizes such models, and these design problems typically
involve (1) numerous tunable parameters that affect reliability, cost, and
failure, (2) uncertainty about external influences manifesting as randomness in
the model, and (3) epistemic ignorance involving model form uncertainty. In
realistic applications, the collection of these effects leads to predictions
that depend on a cumulatively high-dimensional parameter. This project focuses
on development and deployment of novel, near-optimal experimental design and
sampling algorithms for the accurate and efficient simulation of physical models
parameterized by high-dimensional inputs. The work of this project involves the
application of recently developed approximation theory results in the
computational arena, targeted advances that extend theoretical mathematics for
computational purposes, and the development and implementation of algorithms for
large-scale computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aspects of this
project are designed to provide feasible computational algorithms and concrete
mathematical guarantees for tasks in high-dimensional approximation. The three
major core components for the completion of this task involve the design,
implementation, and analysis of algorithms that leverage optimality
characteristics of (1) random and deterministic experimental and sampling
design, (2) computational algorithms for identifying efficient sampling schemes,
and (3) strategies and techniques for emerging approximation paradigms such as
sparse approximation and dimension reduction. A crosscutting theme is
application of these methods to problems of modern interest in scientific
computing. This project involves fundamental contributions to the fields of
applied approximation theory and computational approximation methods through the
development of applications-oriented sampling designs with provable near-
optimality. Theoretical investigations of this project connect classical
techniques in approximation and linear algebra with emerging algorithms in data
reduction and reduced order modeling. The implementation of these algorithms
will significantly enhance theoretical understanding and computational
feasibility for goal-oriented design, parameter study and reduction, sparse and
compressive representations, model verification and calibration, and data-driven
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.