* 1848377
* I-Corps: Natural Sounds and Audio Digital Network
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Bryan Pijanowski, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 02/28/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide a
means to deliver highly original natural sounds recordings to over 3000 science,
technology and nature centers in the United States that are moving to sonify
their exhibit spaces. Exhibit spaces are now rapidly becoming electronic and
interactive and they require audiovisual materials. The advances in audio
focusing speaker technologies are making it possible to concentrate sound into a
small space for single or small group experiences and touchscreens are now
emerging in public spaces. Our customer discovery activities will determine how
a nature ounds exhibit can serve the needs of this very large informal STEM
learning community as they become digital. The products will 1) provide an
extension of a natural setting in an accessible space for people, 2) introduce
visually impaired people to STEM concepts using tactile methods, 3) utilize
science standards in curriculum for camps/classrooms with authentic scientific
equipment, 4) build knowledge about concepts such as biodiversity and
preservation of habitats, and 4) impact how people are introduced to STEM
concepts. These products have the potential to recruit individuals from an
underrepresented community to STEM.

This I-Corps project will lead to significant understanding of market size and
commercial potential for nature exhibit products. This audio collection
represents the culmination of global fieldwork at over 50 terrestrial and marine
study sites representing nine of the twelve major biomes. Over 5,000,000 natural
sound recordings from nearly every major terrestrial and marine biome are now
available along with rich information on scientific research projects being
conducted to study important environmental issues such as biodiversity,
wildfire, invasive species, over grazing, toxic substances and climate
variability. These audio files and scientific projects have been organized into
learning modules that are interactive, informative and inspiring forming a
flexible set of tools for building digital exhibits. Interactive kiosks have
been developed and tested in several informal learning venues with considerable
success. Finally, the outcome from the informal learning curriculum and complete
studies from Borneo, Mongolia, Patagonia, and Tanzania, have been published in a
wide range of peer-review journals which provides the validity to the scientific
interpretation of the role that sounds play in nature.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.