* 1848306
* CAREER:Design Principles for Self-Assembly and Organization in Non-Equilibrium Conditions.
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Suriyanarayanan Vaikuntanathan, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 499,888.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports a theoretical and
computational research program that will develop principles for designing
materials utilizing spontaneous self-assembly of microscopic building blocks in
a way that is far from the steady state of equilibrium to make materials that
can perform specific functions. Biological systems constantly assemble
microscopic materials such as polymers that have a variety of novel properties
such as the ability to sense forces and geometry, the ability to adaptively tune
structure in response to external stimuli and finally in the case of molecular
motors, transmit forces and perform work. Discovering the design principles used
by nature to make biological systems and using them in materials synthesis can
lead to a new class of materials that are inspired by biology and can sense and
adapt to stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;The rules governing material properties on the
microscopic scale can however be dramatically different from those on the
macroscopic scale because of random fluctuations coming from the thermal
environment. Further, biological materials are built and operate under
conditions where large amounts of energy are continually released through
chemical bond breaking events which leads to the modification of material
properties at the microscopic scale in many ways that are not intuitive and
important. Many of the novel properties of biological materials are sustained by
such energy flows. The presence of large energy fluxes and thermal fluctuations
makes it particularly challenging to develop an understanding of how functional
materials inspired by biology can be self-assembled and maintained. In this
project, the PI will develop new general theoretical and computational
frameworks that will elucidate how materials can be assembled from their
constituent building blocks even in the presence of large energy fluxes. The
research has the potential to elucidate how a variety of phenomena that occur in
biological systems, such as the ability to adaptively change material
morphologies and structure as external forcing is modified, can be achieved in
synthetic materials systems. &lt;br/&gt;The educational component of the
activity will develop computational modules that can illustrate everyday science
and mathematical concepts and show how they find applications in current
problems of practical importance. In collaboration with programs run by centers
at the University of Chicago which provide opportunities to engage with teachers
and students from the neighboring Chicago public schools, the PI will develop
computational modules that can communicate the importance of science,
particularly to populations underrepresented in STEM. Using these modules as a
basis, the PI will also modernize the curriculum of undergraduate and graduate
courses in statistical mechanics and thermodynamics. Finally, the PI and his
group will continue to provide research opportunities for high school and
undergraduate researchers and train the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research to develop
thermodynamic design principles for modulating self-assembly and material
properties using nonequilibrium forces. Nonequilibrium forces can drive specific
and novel pathways to modulate self-assembly and organization. Understanding and
controlling self-assembly in nonequilibrium conditions is one of the most
important problems in statistical mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;The close connection
between energy dissipation and organization becomes evident in biological
systems and materials. In contrast to the well-understood behavior and
characteristics of equilibrium systems where no energy is dissipated, general
principles governing fluctuations about a steady state or cases where the steady
state itself is far-from-equilibrium are just being discovered. While the field
of nonequilibrium statistical mechanics has seen tremendous progress over the
last few years with the discovery of nonequilibrium fluctuation theorems, and
development of thermodynamics for microscopic systems or stochastic
thermodynamics, applications of these advances towards developing design
principles for control of many body nonequilibrium systems remains lacking.
&lt;br/&gt;In this project the PI and his group will develop theoretical and
computational techniques that will enable control of compositions, phase
transition behavior, and morphology in many-body systems as they are assembled
and maintained in nonequilibrium conditions. Building on these advances, this
project will introduce two new and distinct thermodynamic frameworks that will,
for the first time, reveal the molecular tradeoffs between energy consumption,
speed of assembly, and organization as soft materials are assembled or grown in
nonequilibrium conditions. Together, these predictive thermodynamic theoretical
frameworks can potentially identify a broad set of design principles for self
-assembly and material properties far from equilibrium, a crucial prerequisite
for the development of next generation adaptable (bio-inspired) materials using
nonequilibrium fluxes.&lt;br/&gt;This research project is also aimed to aid in
the design of protocols for generating a new class of nanoscale materials with
novel functional properties. Applied in the context of the self-assembly of
terminal nanostructures, this work can potentially provide intuition for how
complex nonequilibrium self-assembly of functional nanostructures can be
achieved. In biophysical settings, the research can provide frameworks to reveal
the tradeoffs among energy, speed, and accuracy that are made in complex
biophysical processes such as endocytosis and cell shape control. &lt;br/&gt;The
educational component of the activity will develop computational modules that
can illustrate everyday science and mathematical concepts and show how they find
applications in current research problems, such as understanding how biological
systems keep track of time and transmit forces. In collaboration with
established programs run by centers at the University of Chicago which will
allow the PI and his group to engage with public school teachers and high school
students in the local community, the PI will utilize such computational modules
and engage in outreach activities that communicate the importance of science and
computer literacy, particularly to populations underrepresented in STEM. Using
these modules as a basis, the PI will also modernize the curriculum of
undergraduate and graduate courses in statistical mechanics and thermodynamics.
Finally, the PI and his group will continue to provide research opportunities
for high school and undergraduate researchers and train the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the
Division of Chemistry contribute funds to this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.