* 1848434
* BTT EAGER: Clean genome editing through the use of nonintegrating T-DNA technology
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2022
* Stanton Gelvin, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 01/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Genetic modification of crop species is the key to both food security and
sustainable agriculture. The advent of CRISPR/Cas technology has provided a
great advance in our ability to engineer genomes, but barriers remain to the
routine employment of these methods in the most important agricultural species.
This project, in collaboration with Dr. Christopher West, University of Leeds,
UK, addresses the most significant problem in engineering crop plants, that
genome modification is associated with untargeted and potentially mutagenic
integration of the machinery used to edit the genome. This is problematic
because of the increased screening required to identify targeted transformants
against the high background of random integrations. In addition, for commercial
use the synthetic constructs must be eliminated from the genome in a process
that can be lengthy and expensive for many crops, especially those with long
generation times (such as tree species) and those propagated vegetatively (such
as potato, sweet potato, banana, etc.). This project, informed by the
applicants' considerable experience in plant transformation and DNA
recombination mechanisms, will develop a clean genetic engineering methodology
based on the suppression of random transgene integration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most current plant genome engineering technology platforms
require, or have as an unintended consequence, the integration of introduced
genome engineering reagents into the host chromosomes. The technology that will
be tested in this project builds on the identification of a DNA Polymerase Theta
(PolQ)-mediated pathway that is responsible for the majority of Agrobacterium-
mediated transgene integration events. Suppression of this pathway, using
dominant negative fragments of DNA polymerase theta introduced into the plant
either as expressible T-DNA-encoded genes or directly as peptides, will mitigate
T-DNA integration into the host genome. Inhibition of ectopic T-DNA integration
will enhance the ability to detect gene targeting events mediated by homology-
dependent repair. Proof of principle will be provided in Arabidopsis through
targeted mutation of the ABI1 gene through homology-directed repair, resulting
in the production of a dominant mutation that allows germination in the presence
of abscisic acid. This work will be extended to Brassica to demonstrate the
application of this technology to crop species. This project will significantly
advance our ability to engineer crop genomes using a knowledge-based
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.