* 1848580
* CAREER: Development of Efficient Spin Projection Models for Applications to Transition Metal Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Hrant Hratchian, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2024
* USD 625,000.00

Hrant P. Hratchian, of the University of California Merced, is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new theoretical models to study transition
metal compounds. Transition metals include commonly known metals such as iron,
gold, copper, titanium, and platinum. The transition metal compounds used in
this project are useful for increasing the speed of chemical reactions (chemical
catalysts). Modeling chemical catalysis and the experiments that demonstrate
their properties is challenging due to the complexity of their electronic
structure. Professor Hratchian's research is focused on designing and applying
new predictive models, which can be translated into useful software to address
this complexity. These models inform and guide the rational design of next-
generation catalysts used in energy research and pharmaceutical production.
&lt;br/&gt;Strong collaborations with experimental groups enhance the impact and
scope of this project. Professor Hratchian develops new educational programs at
UC Merced to improve student success. The outreach and education goals address
needs at both graduate and undergraduate levels. At the graduate level,
Professor Hratchian is expanding a program introducing students to leaders in
quantum chemistry using an informal journal club setting. At the undergraduate
level, new computational and simulation modules enhancing learning are being
developed and implemented in the curriculum. Professor Hratchian also engages in
outreach with local school districts and works with K-8 educators to develop new
visualization tools for immersive learning with students in the Merced City
School District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three main scientific
objectives to assess currently available approximate spin projection models, to
develop and implement new models that address electronic structures posing
challenges for current models and to explore metal oxide and metal sulfide
chemistry using these new models. The project builds on recent work from the
Professor Hratchian's research group developing a hierarchy of affordable and
predictive models for studies involving metal oxides, metal sulfides, and other
systems suffering from spin contamination. This work is of critical importance
in the field as spin contamination limits the expected accuracy of affordable
mean-field models. Professor Hratchian also engages in educational activities
aimed at students at all levels. These educational activities include the
development of new computational modules to enhance learning in undergraduate
courses, the expansion of a graduate level training activity, and collaboration
with a local K-8 school district to build visualization models as engaging
vehicles for immersive learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.