* 1848069
* CAREER: Soft Light-Harvesting Systems Based on inter-Conjugated Polyelectrolyte Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Alexander Ayzner, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 674,999.00

Natural photosynthetic organisms use highly specialized super-structures that
house many molecular components. These components work in concert to efficiently
convert sunlight to chemical fuel for the cell. The components are arranged so
that when sunlight is absorbed by the pigments (color-containing compounds), the
energy can move quickly from one component to the next before the energy is
lost. Nature accomplishes energy transfer with remarkable efficiency using
light-harvesting organelles. Mimicking such a complex structure artificially
could lead to formation of light-weight materials, whose photosynthetic function
could be exquisitely controlled. However, making artificial photosynthetic
systems remains a major challenge. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the NSF Division of Chemistry,
Professor Ayzner at the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) and his
students are building artificial light-harvesting organelles based on soft
molecular materials, such as polymers. These polymers can self-assemble into
larger structures that can rapidly transport excited states through space, thus
mimicking the fundamental aspects of photosynthetic organelles. The project is
providing training opportunities for graduate students. Professor Ayzner is
using the topic of energy harvesting as the vehicle to teach advanced chemical
problem-solving skills to transfer students, thereby helping to prepare them for
sustained success in the chemical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accomplishing
the formation of an artificial light-harvesting organelle first requires laying
a foundation for assembling and interfacing an efficient electronic energy
transfer (EET) relay with a larger structural scaffold. To this end, Professor
Ayzner is synthesizing and assembling conjugated polyelectrolytes (CPE) into
donor/acceptor complexes, whose structure and thermodynamics can be controlled
via the coupling between electronic and ionic degrees of freedom. This project
elucidates how the backbone of a CPE influences the EET efficiency within the
complex by systematically tuning the mean polyelectrolyte length and chemical
structure. The phase separation behavior and EET in co-existing phases of inter-
CPE complexes is then characterized to elucidate the influence of excess ions on
light-harvesting. Complexes are then interfaced with self-assembled vesicle-type
compartments to form the foundation of a soft light-harvesting super-structure.
Characterization of resulting assemblies involves combining time-resolved
electronic spectroscopy, photon scattering, microscopy and rheological
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.