* 1848713
* (HBCU) Geosciences Workshop: Maximizing Geosciences Opportunities Through Interdisciplinary Engagement and Outreach: September 26-28, 2018 - Hampton, VA
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,01/31/2020
* Ambrose Jearld, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 01/31/2020
* USD 49,897.00

The underrepresentation of minorities in STEM fields, and geosciences in
particular, can be addressed through concerted and sustained efforts to broaden
participation of these groups. With an eye towards understanding why so few
minority students choose to go into this interdisciplinary field and subsequent
careers (NSF Strategic Plan for Fiscal Years 2018-2022; NSF Advisory Committee
for Geosciences, December 2014), efforts are needed to both galvanize critical
stakeholders and create connection points for students and faculty to on-ramp to
the geosciences. The need to prepare and support faculty to teach geosciences
courses and to support institutions in creating pathways and programs to broaden
participation in the geoscience workforce is more critical now than ever.
Institutional and professional capacity to serve students from underrepresented
groups is critical to the nation's economic competitiveness, especially as job
growth of up to 10% is expected for the geosciences by 2024 (Wilson, 2016). This
Maximizing Geosciences Opportunities Through Interdisciplinary Engagement and
Outreach workshop recognizes that challenges and opportunities to broadening
participation of HBCU institutions in geosciences exist at all educational
levels, and therefore the goal will be to leverage participants thought
leadership and expertise to develop and launch a HBCU Geosciences Action
Plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grand challenges and opportunities of 21st
century geosciences require transdisciplinary, integrative and collaborative
approaches. The National Technical Association, partnering with the HBCU-
Geoscience Working Group, is able to broaden its reach and develop keener
insight to support the untapped resources of HBCUs. Some key goals for this
workshop are to 1) develop and present an HBCU Geosciences Action Plan
Framework, 2) forge an official collaborative partnership between the National
Technical Association and the HBCU Geosciences Working Group, and 3) produce an
outline for an HBCU Geosciences Workshop Series Synthesis Report. Potential
outcomes of the workshop include: a) promotion of interdisciplinary, culturally
relevant and intergenerational perspectives that help build and sustain HBCU
institutional geoscience teaching, research, community engagement, public policy
and workforce development capacities, and b) encourage a greater commitment to
building opportunities for strategic and integrated geoscience initiatives at
the faculty, undergraduate and graduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.