* 1848824
* Rheology and microstructural evolution of serpentine
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Philip Skemer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 311,367.00

Serpentine is a group of hydrous minerals that is commonly formed along faults
and other interfaces in Earth where water is able to react with other anhydrous
minerals. Because serpentine has a number of unusual physical properties, it is
hypothesized that serpentine-group minerals play an essential role in the
dynamics of boundaries between tectonic plates. Furthermore, serpentine may
control where earthquakes can or cannot occur. However, serpentine is only
stable through a narrow range of pressure and temperature conditions, which has
hindered experimental efforts to unravel its behavior. This study will involve
two sets of novel experiments to elucidate how serpentine changes shape or
structure when Earth-like deformation conditions are applied. Broader Impacts
include training of a graduate student, development of educational and outreach
modules in a visualization laboratory, and cross-disciplinary science
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to clarify further
the rheology and associated deformation microstructures of antigorite, the high
pressure and temperature phase of serpentine. Two sets of experiments are
proposed. The first set of experiments will investigate microstructural
evolution of polycrystalline serpentine as a function of strain, using the Large
Volume Torsion (LVT) apparatus at Washington University in St. Louis. The
purpose of these experiments is to characterize the crystallographic preferred
orientation (CPO) generated by deformation and determine the conditions at which
steady-state microstructures are produced. The data that will be obtained on the
transient evolution of antigorite CPO are needed to interpret seismic wave-
speeds and seismic anisotropy in regions where serpentine is inferred to be
present. The second set of experiments will use micromechanical methods,
including nanoindentation and micropillar compression testing, to measure
precisely the plastic rheology of antigorite up to 600 degrees C. These data
will be used to constrain flow-laws for antigorite at conditions relevant to
subduction zones, and may be used in future efforts to model deformation at the
slab interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.