* 1848878
* New Insights from Legacy Archaeology Collections
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Kent Lightfoot, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2022
* USD 141,213.00

Researchers from the University of California, Berkeley and San Francisco State
University will undertake the study of impressive mounds constructed of shell
and other materials by people worldwide in many riverine and coastal places. For
more than 5000 years, indigenous groups created coastal landscapes dominated by
such artificial hills built from many tons of shellfish that left a legacy from
which to study social and environmental change over millennia. Archaeology can
provide new insights about how and why people built these mounded landscapes
where shell was used to build architectural features (pyramids, ridges,
walkways, plazas), to create mortuary mounds, and to construct elevated
villages. A major challenge in the study of shell mounds is that many have been
heavily damaged by the rapid development of coastal areas worldwide. This
project will develop and implement new and innovative methods for working with
"legacy" museum collections recovered from sites before they were destroyed.
Researchers will generate new insights about the nature of shell mounds, provide
training for undergraduate and graduate students in archaeological and museum
methods, and contribute to a public outreach program highlighting the
significant cultural heritage of these places. A centerpiece of this project
will be the development of a public outreach program about shell mounds in
collaboration with local tribes, community members, museums, and city
governments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Members of the research team will engender a
better understanding of the people who built mounded landscapes using new
techniques to highlight their economies, social organizations, and
mortuary/ceremonial practices. The research will involve the fine-grained
reanalysis of museum collections recovered from sites now destroyed employing
new methods for recovering botanical remains and starch grains, identifying
small animal bones using molecular fingerprinting, investigating "micro"
artifacts, dating materials using state-of-the art techniques, and employing
computer-generated mapping approaches. Research will focus on the shell mounds
in the greater San Francisco Bay Area (northern California) where hundreds of
sites once dotted the shoreline before their destruction by urban development.
The West Berkeley shell mound, one of the largest and oldest of these mounds,
will serve as a test case. Archaeological materials from the 1950s excavation
(before its destruction) now curated in the Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of
Anthropology provide an exceptional opportunity for implementing new analytical
approaches for the study of museum objects and soils, for training students, and
for evaluating the history of this important place over more than 4000
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.