* 1848668
* Nanoscale Energy and Interfacial Transport Research Based Mentoring Program to increase Underrepresented Minority Students in STEM
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Damena Agonafer, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 12/31/2022
* USD 198,999.00

This proposal explores how to motivate students from the Saint Louis area, and
in particular underrepresented minorities, to pursue careers in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields. A series of integrated
education activities are being established based on research conducted in the
Nanoscale Energy and Interfacial Transport (NEIT) laboratory. This outreach will
enrich the STEM learning experience for the next generation of students, invoke
their engineering interest, and quantitatively assess the factors that impede
and motivate students to pursue STEM majors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
supports the integration of undergraduate design projects, student talent
pipeline programs, and partnerships with high-tech industrial companies. To
support broadening participation, the science identity summer workshops provide
education and evaluation of the potential social psychological recognition of
the value of engineering among minority students. The study seeks to understand
how underrepresented minorities can perceive the value of being identified as an
engineer as an achievable aspiration. Moreover, this research explores factors
that influence underrepresented students? perceptions about science and
engineering at a critical developmental stage in which they may deem the
workload or value associated with becoming an engineering as not worthwhile in
comparison to non-STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.