* 1848835
* I-Corps Team Proposal "Mini Signal"
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,09/30/2019
* Min Wu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 09/30/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project lies in three
aspects: through a systematic customer discovery process, it enhances the
R&amp;D community's understanding of the potentially broad needs and application
spaces of the contact-less physiological monitoring. For the robust heart-rate
tracking technologies that this I-Corps project is based on, the potential
commercial impact includes monitoring drivers' conditions to enhance driving
safety, supporting safe and effective athletic/fitness training, offering
additional analytics from surveillance video for public safety, and more. The
outcome of the I-Corps customer discovery will provide real-world requirements
and data to a new round of R&amp;D and enhance the R&amp;D community's
scientific and technological understanding. The I-Corps training and experience
will prepare the Team to identify and pave a way to the most effective customer-
technology path for commercialization, which will lead to an economic and
societal impact. The training would also provide valuable insights to the
Technical Lead and Co-Lead, who as faculty members can potentially incorporate
the Lean Startup and entrepreneurial thinking into their future education and
mentoring activities. This would extend the benefits to many students in the
years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project builds on the research
advances of contact-free sensings, such as through video, to capture the very
small color changes of a person's face as his/her heart pumps blood to reach the
whole body. The team has developed a strong expertise to harvest such micro
signals under a number of scenarios and motivating applications. From the
patent-pending research on which this I-Corps project is based, accurate heart
rate detection and tracking have been achieved even under significant motion as
users move and lighting conditions change, which is common in real-world use.
The synergy of multiple traditionally separate fields, including image/video
processing, computer vision, statistical signal processing and estimation, paved
a foundation to address the R&amp;D challenges. The methodologies learned from
the I-Corps program serve as a bridge between the theory and practice of micro
signal analytics in the important emerging area of health
analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.