* 1848363
* CAREER: Improving Convective-Scale Weather Prediction through Advanced Bayesian Filtering, Verification, and Uncertainty Quantification
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jonathan Poterjoy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2024
* USD 548,220.00

This research project is motivated by the large impact severe convective storms,
hurricanes, and flooding have on life and property each year in the United
States. The research will address fundamental limitations in current data
assimilation (DA) and uncertainty quantification for weather models. The outcome
from the research will have a tremendous impact on multi-disciplinary efforts
that focus on these weather hazards, which will lead to sustained long-term
reductions in forecast errors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual
Merit:&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on 1) the development and testing of an
advanced DA framework designed to eliminate specific assumptions currently used
in practice; 2) the adoption of sophisticated uncertainty visualization schemes
for exploring probabilistic information estimated from ensembles; and 3) the
development of a DA research and educational module for class curriculum at the
University of Maryland and external summer schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will adopt new Bayesian filtering techniques based on "particle
filters". The method uses samples of model simulations to represent
probabilistic properties of model state variables conditioned on current and
past observations. In addition to providing the most thorough investigation of
particle filters for weather prediction, the research will apply the method for
isolating sources of bias in models and observing systems. Another unique aspect
of this work is its use of novel visualization techniques developed by
statisticians and computer scientists. These techniques form a set of analysis
tools based on "data depth," which allows for an insightful look at multivariate
ensemble output via contour and curve boxplots. They also provide a means of
verifying probabilistic quantities from ensembles with no assumptions for the
underlying error distribution, thus aiding in the verification of non-parametric
DA techniques, like particle filters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts:&lt;br/&gt;This research is motivated directly by hazardous weather
events that affect the well-being of individuals in the United States and around
the world. In addition to advancing predictive skill in numerical predictions, a
portion of this work focuses on uncertainty quantification and visualization of
ensemble datasets, which aims to improve the communication of severe weather
risk to the public. DA advancements made during this work will be committed to
the National Center for Atmospheric Research's Data Assimilation Research
Testbed, a community software infrastructure for linking DA research to
geoscientists. The project also includes a detailed strategy for developing an
educational DA module for geoscience students and researchers. The module will
evolve with the work plan and result in a valuable learning tool for class
exercises and summer school activities used to promote diversity in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.