* 1848054
* CAREER: Synthetic mucus gels with tunable glycosylation, composition, and physical properties
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jessica Kramer, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 03/31/2024
* USD 548,919.00

Project Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;With this award, the Biomaterials
Program in the Division of Materials Research is funding Dr. Jessica R. Kramer
from The University of Utah to develop polymers to mimic natural human mucus.
Mucus is essential for life but remains challenging to study due to a lack of
access to reproducible and homogeneous samples. This award funds development of
new methods to synthesize the protein component of mucus and to study how these
proteins interact with each other and with salts, DNA, and bacteria to form
mucus. These materials have broad implications for probing interactions at cell-
surfaces such as nutrient absorption, fertilization, and immunity and could be
used in cellular models to reduce the need for animal testing. This pursuit
allows undergraduate and graduate students to acquire specialized training in
polymer science, microbiology, and glycobiology. This project also integrates
into several outreach programs that support glycoscience education and females
in the pursuit of STEM careers, and targets students from 4th grade to the
graduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This
research project undertakes development of a multi-block self-assembling
glycopolypeptides that mimic the properties of multi-domain mucin glycoproteins.
Mucins are the major protein component of mucus hydrogels that coat epithelial
tissues, and are essential for life. Yet, mucins remain challenging to study due
to a lack of tools to analyze and manipulate protein glycoforms. Lack of
reproducible access to sufficient quantities of homogeneous mucins has hindered
research in many areas of science and medicine. Mucin-mimicking multi-domain
polypeptides with precise glycosylation patterns and tunable domain are
chemically synthesized by sequential polymerization of amino acid
N-carboxyanhydrides. The glycopolypeptides are assembled into hydrogels
containing varied compositions of salts, lipids, and DNA to investigate factors
responsible for mucus' bulk physical properties. The contributions of glycan-
binding bacteria and galectins to the stiffness or degradation of mucus will
also be explored. Overall, this study provides new materials for the study of
mucus at the molecular level. This research also integrates into several
outreach programs that support glycoscience education and females in the pursuit
of STEM careers, and targets students from 4th grade to the graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.