* 1848281
* CAREER: Quantum Transport and Optoelectronics with Helical Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Hugh Churchill, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2024
* USD 545,241.00

Nontechnical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The physical properties of materials, and
consequently how those materials may be put to work for the benefit of society,
is dictated by which elements compose the material and how each element is
arranged within the structure of the material. When the elements selenium or
tellurium bond together to form a crystal, the arrangement of the elements is
rather unique: the atoms form tiny spiraling chains running in the same
direction with many parallel chains weakly bonded together to create the
crystal. Given this unusual structure, it is not surprising that many new
physical properties could arise. The research team synthesizes these materials
and incorporates them into electronic devices that create, control and probe the
unusual properties. For example, as electrons travel along the spiraling chains,
they are expected to generate a large magnetic field that could be useful for
information storage and processing. As another example, stretching the spirals
is expected to transform these materials from a semiconductor into a special
type of metal in which new and useful quantum mechanical properties emerge. This
activity is integrated into a broad scope of educational and community-building
efforts aimed at training students to enter the quantum science and technology
workforce, communicating physics to the general public, and inspiring young
students, particularly those from underrepresented groups, to choose careers in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Topological band theory has revolutionized the understanding
of what kinds of quantum states are possible in condensed matter settings, and
this understanding has led to the experimental realization of many of these
states, including various types of topological insulators and Dirac, Weyl, and
Majorana fermions. While these quantum states have been investigated with
increasing vigor over many years, the development of devices based on quantum
materials remains in its infancy, particularly for Weyl and Majorana systems.
Such devices could control, optimize, utilize, and further probe some of these
states, as well as create new ones. This project converges materials synthesis,
two-dimensional material heterostructures, and quantum device
fabrication/measurement to revisit two materials, elemental selenium and
tellurium, and probe them in a new light as quantum materials. The objective is
to experimentally answer fundamental questions about the properties and
capabilities of these materials spanning a broad range of topics: the kinetic
magneto-electric effect; Fermi energy tuning, strain modification, and
confinement of gapped Weyl materials; and heterostructures of tellurium and
layered superconductors as a potential Majorana platform. Answers to these
questions have the potential to establish trigonal Se and Te as premier quantum
materials impacting a wide range of fundamental and applied topics including
spintronics, valleytronics, topological (semi)metals, solar energy harvesting,
and (topological) quantum information processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.