* 1848562
* CAREER: Model Theory and Homogeneous Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2026
* Thomas Scanlon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 235,948.00

Model theory is a branch of mathematical logic that studies combinatorial
properties of mathematical structures (that is, sets equipped with certain
operations). Since most mathematical objects can be represented as a structure,
its subject matter is very broad and it interacts with several areas of
mathematics. However, whereas other fields of mathematics are interested in
specific structures, or classes of structures (for instance arithmetic studies
the structure of the integers with addition and multiplication), model theory
takes a step back and studies structures in general, looking for dividing lines
and common properties. It singles out large classes of structures defined by
combinatorial tameness conditions (which imply that the structure is in some
sense not too complicated) and then attempts to understand the structures in
those classes. One such class is that of NIP structures, which can be thought of
as structures that have a geometric flavor. This class has received a lot of
attention in the past decade. Another class is that of homogeneous structures,
which are structures that have a lot of symmetries. Those are objects that
belong to combinatorics and have been largely studied outside, or at the border
of model theory. The main goal of this project is the investigation of new
model-theoretic tools to understand homogeneous structures and in particular
those that are NIP. There are few general theorems on homogeneous structures and
at the same time no evidence that there cannot be any: we do not know how
complicated homogeneous structures can be and this project hopes to shed light
on this.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The starting point of this project is the
classification of the primitive rank 1 NIP homogeneous structures obtained by
the PI. One goal is naturally to generalize this result to all finite rank NIP
homogeneous structures. A more long-term goal is the classification of all NIP
homogeneous structures. This would require understanding omega-categorical
linear orders, which is an interesting project in its own right. A more general
goal of the project is the development of model-theoretic tools to study
homogeneous structures. This will build on the work mentioned above as well as
on a previous work with Itay Kaplan on finitely generated dense subgroups of
automorphism groups. Projects include finding model-theoretic consequences of
the Ramsey property and clarifying its link with distality, finding necessary
and sufficient conditions for admitting homogeneous expansions with nice
properties (including having a stationary or canonical independence relation,
being linearly ordered, Ramsey etc.). Finally, a more speculative project is the
understanding of random-like behaviors in homogeneous structures and finding
ways to measure the complexity of homogeneous structures, in particular those
that lie outside the usual model-theoretic tame
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.