* 1848435
* CAREER: A New Platform for Quantum Science with Laser Cooled Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Daniel McCarron, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 645,000.00

This CAREER award supports the development of techniques to trap large samples
of molecules and cool them to temperatures near absolute zero. The complex
nature of molecules, due to the fact that they can vibrate and rotate, combined
with the exquisite control possible at low temperatures, provides access to new
research directions in science and technology. Potential applications include
tests of chemistry at extremely low temperatures, simulations of complex
strongly interacting systems, and quantum computers that can leverage the laws
of quantum mechanics to outperform classical computers. Almost all of these
applications require controlled interactions between neighboring molecules and
demand sample densities beyond the reach of current molecular cooling and
trapping techniques. The research objectives of this program aim to trap many
more molecules in a given volume relative to current cooling and trapping
techniques and to readily detect and manipulate these interactions. These
advances promise to accelerate both the development of low temperature molecules
as a resource for quantum science and the emergence of new quantum technologies.
In parallel to these research objectives, this CAREER award supports an
educational effort designed to introduce key elements of quantum mechanics to
high school students and the local community in Willimantic, CT. This "Quantum
Workshop" will allow participants to demonstrate the wave- and particle-like
nature of light for themselves through hands-on demonstrations and will expose
users to the research performed within the Principal Investigator's lab. Each
summer high school teachers will perform research within the Principal
Investigator's group and then present their experiences to their students the
following academic year. These activities are expected to increase both local
interest in science and the number of students pursuing careers or a college
education in physics and other STEM disciplines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser
cooling and trapping are central to modern atomic physics. The extension of
these techniques to molecules opens a wide range of research directions beyond
the reach of atomic experiments. Examples of applications include time-resolved
quantum simulations, ultracold organic chemistry, and new platforms for quantum
computation and improved precision measurements. However, current limitations
prevent the detection and manipulation of molecule-molecule interactions in
laser-cooled samples, which are necessary for a growing list of applications.
The key barrier is inefficient trap loading, which limits the densities achieved
in molecular magneto-optical traps (MOTs). This program plans to remove this
barrier and realize large, dense samples of ultracold molecules in two steps.
The first step will substantially increase the number of trappable molecules
produced in the MOT region. The second step will increase the MOT confining
forces before cooling the trapped molecules to temperatures near 1K. In parallel
to this research, the proposed work will develop an outreach program to partner
with high schools and the local community in Willimantic, CT. This "Quantum
Workshop" will leverage the research performed within the Principal
Investigator's lab to present the world of quantum mechanics and wave-particle
duality to high school students. As a part of this outreach effort, high school
teachers will join the Principal Investigator's lab as summer technicians to
broaden their scientific disciplinary knowledge and enhance the research
performed within this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.