* 1848872
* EAGER Collaborative: &amp;gt;100 GHz Optical Clocking using Self-Modulation of Co-Tunneling Light Emitters
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Paul Berger, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 08/31/2022
* USD 90,000.00

The goal of this project is to explore a new class of ultra-fast optical
emitters. Those optical emitters will provide (i) for the significant
advancement of direct modulation optical emitters, and (ii) creation of a wholly
new optical emission pathway which is expected to exceed previous designs, while
mitigating efficiency losses. Applications of such devices include fast clocks,
and systems such as optical communication and LIDAR.&lt;br/&gt;Through a
collaboration between the Ohio State University and the Wright State University,
a significant exposure to research, particularly under-represented groups, will
help to advance the field of RTD-based emitters while providing for a haven of
educational nurturing. The team will also focus appropriate results of this the
research output towards strategic commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative
team will explore this new class of resonant-tunneling-diode (RTD)-based
emitters as a source of ultra-fast direct modulation emitters. It is believed
that, since the slow holes are generated without highly resistive p-type doping
and are created by Zener tunneling exactly at the point of carrier recombination
and optical emission, these optical emitters will bypass many of the slow
mechanisms that have prohibited fast direct optical emitters in the past. A key
focus of this project is working on cavity design, balancing of hole and
electron currents using the PIs own hybrid combined analytical-numerical physics
models, design and modeling of thermal management and heat extraction,
fabrication and testing of ultra-fast direct modulation light emitters. The aim
is to achieve the first demonstration of ultra-fast direct modulation using
quantum co-tunneling. The expected impact of the research includes: 1) Low-cost,
ultra-fast optical sources, and (2) self-clocking optical emitters for compact
clock signal generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.