* 1848912
* I-Corps: Wheelchair Mounted Robotic Assistive Arm
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Mohammad Rahman, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to identify
the customer needs and develop a minimum viable robotic assistive device that
will enable disabled individuals to care for themselves, improve their mobility,
independence and quality of life while reducing the burden on their families and
communities. There is opportunity for launching a homecare equipment market
through the adaptive sports clubs and the clinical facilities. The elderly and
disabled assistive devices global market was valued at $14 billion in 2015 and
is expected to surpass $26 billion by 2024. The outcome of the project will
further help researchers, educators, and clinicians to discover new
approaches/technology to satisfy unmet needs of customers. This I-Corps project
will provide hands on training and experience for an engineering undergraduate
student (co-entrepreneurial lead) and graduate student (entrepreneurial lead) on
the customer discovery process. The PI will also gain exposure to the customer
discovery process, and will incorporate the learnings from this course in
ongoing and future projects within his research lab and engineering senior
design classes. The project activities are intimately linked to educational
activities that will teach students at various levels about the customer
discovery process, entrepreneurship, hypothesis testing, etc.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will advance understanding of the
problems and needs of disabled individuals with upper/lower extremity
impairments from different conditions. The intellectual merit of the project
lies in the development of a sustainable business model canvas around the
proposed technology and in the novel design and development of the proposed
robotic assistive arm (R2A). The R2A that we envision is a 7 degrees of freedom
anthropomorphic robotic hand that can be mounted on a wheelchair or any mobile
platform. It can be controlled either by hand/foot/mouth control depending on
the patient?s needs. This will allow the patient, regardless of the disability,
to control the robot. The fundamental research conducted so far includes
development of an upper-extremity robotic exoskeleton to provide arm movement
therapy. This I-Corps project will find the gaps between the customer unmet
needs and the approaches/technology currently being used to satisfy their needs.
The project activities will unite different customers? problems, needs, and
existing solutions; and form a symbiotic relationship to overcome the critical
barrier to advancing the field of assistive robotics. Overall, the proposed
project will significantly advance the knowledge of how robotic devices can
meaningfully and effectively be used in caregiving and
rehabilitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.