* 1848074
* CAREER: Material Design Using Motifs Present in the Electron's Wavefunction
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Sinisa Coh, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2023
* USD 532,698.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education towards developing a new framework for the computational design of
functional materials by harnessing vast amounts of data that have not been
examined systematically. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most properties of matter are
ultimately governed by complex patterns of quantum mechanical motion of
electrons in a material. At the present time, researchers can accurately model
this complex motion of electrons by numerically solving a well-defined set of
mathematical equations on a modern computer. In many cases, the only input
information one needs to solve these equations are the approximate locations of
the atomic nuclei in the material. However, such modeling produces as an end
result a massive amount of information, most of which remains unexplored in
practice. The PI and his team will examine these large amounts of data to search
and discover the most essential bits of information that govern the behavior of
matter. In the next stage of the project, the team will use this distilled
information to establish an innovative and systematic strategy for designing and
discovering novel materials. The software developed as part of the project will
be made available to the community as open source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will be closely integrated with educational and outreach efforts to
create a better understanding of preconceived notions that freshman students and
the public at large may have about what determines the properties of matter.
This understanding will be used to create and disseminate active learning
strategies for the classroom and for engaging the public, aiming to improve
academic achievement at the university level, increase the public's
understanding and appreciation of materials science, and inspire more young
people to pursue careers in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education towards developing
a new framework for the computational design of functional materials by
harnessing vast amounts of data that have not been examined systematically.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solving the quantum mechanical equations that govern
properties of matter produces a massive amount of information, most of which
remains unexplored. The first thrust of this project will enable extracting
essential pieces of information, motifs in the electron's wave function, that
govern the behavior of matter. The second thrust will use the extracted motifs,
along with principles of nearsightedness, symmetry, geometry, and topology, to
establish an innovative and systematic strategy for computational materials
design and discovery. The software developed as part of the project will be made
available to the community as open source. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will be closely integrated with educational and outreach efforts to create a
better understanding of preconceived notions that freshman students and the
public at large may have about what determines the properties of matter. This
understanding will be used to create and disseminate active learning strategies
for the classroom and for engaging the public, aiming to improve academic
achievement at the university level, increase the public's understanding and
appreciation of materials science, and inspire more young people to pursue
careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.