* 1848370
* CAREER: Neural and Computational Basis of Guilt in Decision-Making
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Luke Chang, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 886,457.00

Emotions are a critical aspect of the human experience that directly impact how
we make decisions, how we form interpersonal relationships, and our broader
mental and physical health. Emotions result from making evaluations about the
world while considering our future goals, past experiences, and current states.
For example, humans have a basic need to connect with others, and emotions such
as guilt can provide signals that help guide our behavior to meet these broader
social goals by minimizing the negative impact of our actions on others.
However, these internal experiences can currently only be subjectively assessed
via introspection, which has limited our ability to understand how our brain
generates these unique feelings and the overall consistency of these experiences
across individuals. Through a series of studies, we will: (a) elicit feelings of
guilt in participants tasked with making choices to reduce another person's
suffering; (b) develop objective measures of these guilt experiences using
computational models of facial expressions and brain activity; and (c) evaluate
how these guilt experiences relate to other types of psychological processes
such as perceiving guilt in others, remembering past experiences of guilt, and
making decisions to harm others. This work has important implications for a
number of consequential, emotional, and costly decisions that might impact
others in a multitude of domains such as healthcare, politics, and
business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal leverages computational techniques
to identify objective measures of guilt experiences using brain patterns and
facial expressions. In Aim 1, we will elucidate how guilt-aversion is a central
motivation in making decisions to minimize harm to others and can be objectively
measured by modelling patterns of brain activity. In Aim 2, we use these
objective measures to better understand how guilt experiences relate to other
types of psychological processes (perceiving, remembering, and imagining guilt).
In Aim 3, we will examine if brain signals are uniquely able to capture
signatures of guilt, or if these experiences can also be measured using patterns
of facial expressions. This work provides a unique interdisciplinary approach to
improve our understanding of guilt. First, we demonstrate our ability to
successfully elicit guilt using a naturalistic social interaction and identify a
common representation in a pattern of brain activity. This will allow us to
perform construct validation on this measure to characterize how the experience
of guilt relates to other related psychological experiences such as observing
others in pain, recalling a previous guilty experience, or making decisions to
harm others. Third, this proposal will evaluate whether guilt is uniquely
encoded in brain signals, or if it might be manifested in other downstream
signals such as patterns of facial expressions. If successful, this work might
have a transformative impact on the field of emotion by overcoming the
limitations of self-report in studying emotional experiences. This proposal can
also provide important insight into evaluating the utility of alternative low-
cost measurements to neuroimaging in capturing psychological experiences via
facial expressions. Finally, this work could have implications for decision-
making more broadly; our preferences for minimizing guilt may be so strong that
they overwhelm the other costs associated with decision outcomes. This proposal
also incorporates synergistic educational training and outreach to broaden the
work, including a new intensive summer training program; outreach to community
service organizations; and new curriculum for undergraduate and medical
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.