* 1848251
* CAREER: Rolled Scaffold for High-Density Adherent Culture of Mammalian Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Kidong Park, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 507,130.00

Nontechnical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;This project supported by the Biomaterials
program in the Materials Research Division is to develop a novel material called
Rolled Scaffold (RS) and to build a next generation of bioreactors based on RS
for large-scale cell culture. With recent progress in biotechnology, animal
cells are used to produce protein-based drugs and diagnostic antibodies. Also,
stem cells are investigated as effective cures for degenerative diseases that
are previously incurable. These applications require large-scale bioreactors
with higher efficiency and reliability than currently available ones. The unique
microstructure of RS provides very high surface-area to volume ratio and allows
efficient flow of culture media through it, making RS ideal material for high-
density adherent culture. Unlike conventional bioreactors, the bioreactor based
on RS separates the cells from the culture media reservoir, allowing sufficient
aeration of media and removal of cellular bio-waste without cellular damages.
These improvements are expected to significantly reduce the production cost in
biopharmaceutical industries and facilitate the introduction of exciting
clinical applications of stem cells. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Suspension culture in stirred tank bioreactors are widely
used to culture animal cells in large scale. However, harmful hydrodynamic shear
stress and insufficient mass transfer rate of nutrients and gases limit
efficiency and reliability of suspension culture in large scale. In this
project, PI aims to develop novel RS bioreactors to overcome inherent
limitations of suspension culture. RS is a thin polymer film with spacers that
are rolled into a cylinder containing numerous identical microfluidic channels.
Cells are growing in inner surfaces of RS and culture media flows through the
microfluidic channels in a laminar flow. The RS can provide very large cell
culture area and high mass transfer rate of nutrients and gases with minimal
shear stress. In addition, separation of cells from media reservoir allows novel
configurations of RS-based bioreactors. PI plans (1) to develop a mass-
production setup of RS, (2) to develop a dialysis RS-bioreactor that can
effectively remove cellular waste from the media for efficient production of
therapeutic proteins, and (3) to implement a RS-bioreactor with low-temperature
media storage that can extend lifetime of heat-sensitive signaling molecules in
culture media for affordable stem cell production. Besides, this project seeks
to develop self-sustainable STEM curriculum for high school, to promote STEM
literacy among young students through various outreach activities, and to train
graduate and undergraduate student into future workforce in biomaterials area
through active research participation with priorities to female and
underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.