* 1848618
* Collaborative Research: Magnitude and Pathway of Gaseous Atmospheric Mercury Deposition in Forests
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Roisin Commane, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,952.00

Mercury (Hg) is released from both natural sources and human activities. The
goal of this project is to make measurements of mercury for an entire year in
two contrasting forest locations. This rich dataset will be used to better
understand how Hg moves through trees, soil, and the atmosphere. Understanding
the distribution of mercury is important because it is a toxic substance, which
can cause negative neurological effects in humans and react with other
atmospheric gases. The knowledge from this project will be useful for assessing
the global distribution of a mercury so that international recognized goals for
reducing Hg pollution can be achieved. Additionally, the project will provide
partial support for a postdoctoral researcher, two graduate students, and one
undergraduate student per year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Atmospheric mercury
deposits via various dry and wet (e.g., rainfall) deposition processes,
including gaseous mercury uptake by plants. Mercury in vegetation is transferred
to soils when plants die off or shed leaves, contributing 54-94% of mercury in
soil. In the absence of direct measurements, gaseous elemental mercury (Hg[0])
deposition is inferred from litterfall and passive membranes, yet these are not
ideal proxies for net Hg(0) deposition as they don?t account for re-emission.
Consequently, first objective of this project is to quantify the magnitude and
temporal dynamics of net gaseous dry Hg(0) deposition (sum of gross deposition
minus emission) in two forests with different seasonalities, a deciduous
temperate forest and an evergreen subtropical rain forest. Net Hg(0) deposition
will be measured using micrometeorological measurements on large towers, the
only available method for direct, non-intrusive and time-extended measurements
of net Hg(0) exchange at the ecosystem level encompassing all underlying sinks
and sources. The second objective is to partition Hg(0) fluxes into canopy and
soil contributions via deployment of two corresponding flux systems - one above
the forest canopy to measure ecosystem-level Hg(0) exchange and a second system
below the canopy to quantify soil contributions. Canopy Hg(0) fluxes will be
calculated by difference. Flux partitioning will provide annual, seasonal and
diurnal Hg(0) sink (e.g., to canopies) and source strengths (e.g., from soils)
needed to constraint Hg(0) deposition in global and regional chemical transport
models. Finally, the third goal of this work is to elucidate pathways of
deposition by comparing Hg(0) fluxes to those of carbon dioxide, ozone, water
vapor, and carbonyl sulfide. All these trace gases have different sinks and
sources in ecosystems and vary in their degree of canopy, stomatal, mesophyll
and soil contributions to fluxes. Comparison among fluxes, including
seasonality, diurnality and component fluxes will allow us to quantify the
degree to which Hg(0) exchange is coupled to photosynthetic activity, stomatal
conductance, enzymatic activity within leaves, external cuticular uptake and
soil exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.