* 1848486
* CAREER: Investigating earthquake nucleation and rupture dynamics while reducing the hazard vulnerability of the immigrant community
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Lingsen Meng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 589,797.00

Understanding the source of earthquakes is important for predicting seismic
ground motions and tsunami flooding in many coastal cities near active faults.
An improved understanding of earthquake physics relies on better knowledge of
how earthquakes rupture and how faults release stress. The goal of this proposal
is to obtain more robust observations of earthquake rupture. The intent is to
help us better predict the hazards related to these events. As part of this
CAREER grant, the researcher will develop several advanced observational methods
and integrate different earthquake datasets. The goal of the educational
activities is to reduce the vulnerability of the immigrant community to seismic
and tsunami hazard. The project will enhance the science literacy and earthquake
preparedness of newly-arrived immigrants. This is achieved by partnering with
the local immigrant community in Los Angeles. The project will host education
workshops for Chinese American and other media. Earthquake awareness seminars
for the general public and outreach activities for predominantly immigrant K-12
schools will also be included. Finally, the project will engage Hispanic,
African American, and Asian undergraduates through research and summer
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates research of
observational seismology and tsunami sciences to enhance the capacity to extract
reliable information about earthquake rupture and nucleation processes. This
project develops multi-scale signal analysis tools based on back-projection of
high-frequency seismic array data and integrate these results with more
traditional source inversion approaches at lower frequencies. The researcher
will also probe the mechanisms of tsunami-genic earthquakes and sub-marine
landslides with an adjoint inversion method of tsunami waves that does not rely
on prior assumptions of fault geometry and earth structures. The project will
study previous events to correlate earthquake rupture mechanics with tsunamis in
order to develop better algorithms to predict the tsunami direction and
amplitude. In addition, the project will enhance the detection capabilities of
the precursory foreshocks and tremors using Machine Learning techniques.
Understanding earthquake nucleation processes will be improved, which is
essential for physics-based earthquake forecasting models. This project will
support Ph.D. level graduate students and train them with cutting edge
computational and data-processing skills. The research results and implications
will be presented in scientific conferences, published in top peer-reviewed
journals and used as class materials taught in a major public school, at
University of California, Los Angeles. This project is supported by the
Geophysics and Education and Human Resources programs in the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.