* 1848544
* CAREER: Predictability of the Whole Atmosphere from Ground to Geospace
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Tomoko Matsuo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 734,710.00

The focus of this CAREER research is to investigate whether accurate
predictability of the atmosphere, extending from the ground to near-Earth space,
can be achieved through the inclusion of Earth and geospace observations within
the workings of a first-principles model of the whole atmosphere and ionosphere.
The approach is based upon the tenet that prediction serves as the ultimate test
of the scientific understanding of geophysical systems. Achieving accurate
forecasting of near-Earth space environmental conditions would be critical to
society needs regarding radio communication, navigation, positioning, and
satellite tracking. Effective numerical prediction of geospace conditions would
allow improved protection of important space assets and related systems in the
event of natural hazards. A full time graduate student and two undergraduate
students would be supported in this award. Coursework concerning data
assimilation methodology would be developed that would also addresses portions
of the modeling framework that underlies the inclusion of data from Earth and
Geospace sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research represents a paradigm
shift from a deterministic to a probabilistic modeling framework that possibly
would be pivotal to the generation of foundational knowledge regarding the
predictability of the whole atmosphere dynamical processes. This knowledge would
facilitate optimization of observing systems and the targeting of observations
to maximize data impact. The project strategies would develop the capacity to
understand the role of uncertainty in constructing meaning out of ambiguous
facts, which is also a central concern of probabilistic forecasting research.
The ingestion of data from geophysical sensors into a comprehensive global
circulation model framework using data assimilation techniques would provide
significant enhancement of the accuracy of any forecast predictions generated.
Thus, the funded research would provide realistic, global and instantaneous
probabilistic perspectives on the day-to-day variability of the thermosphere and
ionosphere, which up to now, have been difficult to assess. The project
achievements in the data assimilation procedures utilized would be made
accessible to the community through open source portals. Consequently, this
project would help alleviate the geospace community's need for new research
tools to optimally combine heterogeneous observational data from distributed
arrays of small ground-based instrumentation with current and future satellite
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.