* 1848420
* CAREER: Experimental investigation of deformation and slip behaviors of subduction megathrust rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Hiroko Kitajima, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 580,367.00

Devastating earthquakes and tsunamis recur in subduction zones, and the time
interval between large earthquake events ranges from decades and centuries.
Long-lasting international collaborative research and education programs are
necessary to advance understanding of earthquake source physics and transfer the
knowledge from the past events to future generations. To advance understanding
of deformation and slip behaviors of megathrust plate boundary faults and
physics of earthquakes in subduction zones, this project involves development of
innovative deformation and friction experiments on natural fault rocks at
elevated pressure and temperature conditions that are anticipated along the
plate boundary faults. To expand students' learning opportunities on
experimental rock deformation and subduction zone earthquake and tsunami
hazards, the principal investigator develops new education programs including a
senior capstone course, a training course for graduate students and early-career
scientists in geoscience and engineering, and an international field trip that
will educate students on subduction zone earthquakes and tsunamis and hazard
mitigation for natural disasters. The education programs are designed to provide
hands-on laboratory experience in rock deformation and insights into subduction
zone earthquakes. Trough these programs, next-generation researchers will be
trained to facilitate interdisciplinary and international collaborations on
tectonic, geodynamic, and engineering problems and to advance the transfer of
discovery and natural hazard mitigation to future generations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Development of elevated pore fluid pressure along the
megathrust plate boundary faults and thus low strength of faults are inferred
from many geophysical and geological observations including low seismic
velocity, high reflectivity taper angle of the accretionary prism wedge, and
vein formation. This project will test the hypothesis that deformation and slip
behaviors at low effective stress may control a spectrum of slip events and
earthquakes observed along the megathrust plate boundary faults. A series of
true-triaxial compression tests, conventional triaxial extension tests, and
triaxial friction experiments under controlled pore pressure will be conducted
on natural megathrust fault rocks. Low effective pressure at a range of loading
paths and rates will be achieved by controlling of magnitude and pressurization
rates of pore pressure. The series of experiments will document the effects of
elevated pore pressure and loading paths and rates on the formation of shear,
extensional, and hybrid extension-shear fracture and frictional behaviors, and
thus can provide mechanical perspectives on vein formation associated with slip
along the plate boundary faults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.