* 1848887
* Assemblage-wide effects of Ocean Acidification and Ocean Warming on Ecologically important Macroalgal-associated Crustaceans in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Charles Amsler, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Gast
* 07/31/2024
* USD 698,825.00

Undersea forests of seaweeds dominate the shallow waters of the central and
northern coast of the western Antarctic Peninsula and provide critical
structural habitat and carbon resources (food) for a host of marine organisms.
Most of the seaweeds are chemically defended against herbivores yet support very
high densities of herbivorous shrimp-like grazers (crustaceans, primarily
amphipods) which greatly benefit their hosts by consuming filamentous and
microscopic algae that otherwise overgrow the seaweeds. The amphipods benefit
from the association with the chemically defended seaweeds by gaining an
associational refuge from fish predation. The project builds on recent work that
has demonstrated that several species of amphipods that are key members of
crustacean assemblages associated with the seaweeds suffer significant mortality
when chronically exposed to increased seawater acidity (reduced pH) and elevated
temperatures representative of near-future oceans. By simulating these
environmental conditions in the laboratory at Palmer Station, Antarctica, the
investigators will test the overall hypothesis that ocean acidification and
ocean warming will play a significant role in structuring crustacean assemblages
associated with seaweeds. Broader impacts include expanding fundamental
knowledge of the impacts of global climate change by focusing on a geographic
region of the earth uniquely susceptible to climate change. This project will
also further the NSF goals of training new generations of scientists and of
making scientific discoveries available to the general public. This includes
training graduate students and early career scientists with an emphasis on
diversity, presentations to K-12 groups and the general public, and a variety of
social media-based outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will compare population and assemblage-wide impacts of natural
(ambient), carbon dioxide enriched, and elevated temperature seawater on
assemblages of seaweed-associated crustacean grazers. Based on prior results, it
is likely that some species will be relative "winners" and some will be relative
"losers" under the changed conditions. The project will then aim to carry out
measurements of growth, calcification, mineralogy, the incidence of molts, and
biochemical and energetic body composition for two key amphipod "winners" and
two key amphipod "losers". These measurements will allow an assessment of what
factors drive species-specific enhanced or diminished performance under
conditions of ocean acidification and sea surface warming. The project will
expand on what little is known about prospective impacts of changing conditions
on benthic marine Crustacea, in Antarctica, a taxonomic group that faces the
additional physiological stressor of molting. The project is likely to provide
additional insight on the indirect regulation of the seaweeds that comprise
Antarctic undersea forests that provide key architectural components of the
coastal marine ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.