* 1848177
* CAREER:  Investigating shape coexistence near closed shells via lifetime measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Benjamin Crider, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 03/31/2024
* USD 679,627.00

This CAREER award focuses on obtaining a better understanding of the structure
of the atomic nucleus and working toward a predictive model of the atomic
nucleus as a function of proton number, neutron number, and energy. Both
research and educational objectives will be pursued. The objective of the
research component is to determine the properties of exotic, neutron-rich
nuclear systems that are predicted to exhibit multiple shapes. Through
experimentally quantifying this so-called shape coexistence, the research
addresses the question, "How does subatomic matter organize itself and what
phenomena emerge", as outlined by the broader nuclear physics community in
"Reaching for the Horizon: The 2015 Long Range Plan for Nuclear Science". The
experiments investigating shape coexistence are performed at the National
Superconducting Cyclotron Laboratory and build on the principal investigator's
experience using beta-decay to study exotic nuclei. To expand the impact of this
project, the educational component will provide a new and unique physics summer
school experience for students with Autism Spectrum Disorder in Mississippi. By
engaging students who are a part of this underserved portion of the population
in physics, the opportunities of studying physics and performing research can be
shown to a new generation of highly capable scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research that will be performed as part of this project focuses primarily on
determining the lifetimes of excited states in nuclei that are predicted to
exhibit multiple coexisting shapes at similar excitation energies. These
lifetimes will be utilized to calculate transition strengths, which in turn
enable calculations of the degree of deformation of a nucleus in a particular
nuclear state. This information on the nuclear deformation serves as a unique
fingerprint of different nuclear configurations and a stringent test of
theoretical predictions. Transition strength information will be obtained for
neutron-rich nuclei near neutron numbers of 20 and 50, which define regions
where shape coexistence is predicted to occur yet remains to be quantified. The
objective of the education component is to develop a physics summer school for
high-school aged students with autism spectrum disorder (ASD). The summer school
will offer students with ASD in Mississippi an opportunity to experience
physics, including nuclear physics, in a highly interactive way. The summer
school will be designed to be a comprehensive postsecondary transition program
for students with ASD that will enable them to learn physics, socialization
skills, and the opportunities of pursuing research projects and a STEM degree at
a 4-year university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Experimental Nuclear Physics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.