* 1848232
* CAREER: Identifying Ecosystem Properties Promoting Stability and Resistance: Modeling Late Ordovician Paleocommunity Dynamics and Functioning Across the Richmondian Invasion
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,10/31/2022
* Carrie Tyler, Miami University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 10/31/2022
* USD 420,621.00

Invasive species cause many extinctions today, but there is still a lot
scientists do not know about how new, non-native species can change the way an
ecosystem works. The researchers will enter information from the fossil record
into computer models of food webs to understand what happened when new species
arrived in ancient marine ecosystems. What the investigators learn from the past
can benefit society because it can lead to determining consequences of similar
species invasions today and in the future. The fossil food web models are
helping researchers understand the connection between number of species in
ecosystems and their stability, as well as how and why ecosystems have changed
over the last 500 million years. So that others can use fossil food web modeling
in paleontology, the new software program is free and available online.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Cincinnati Series (USA) preserves a well-documented
influx of species that is being used to construct food web models of shallow
marine paleocommunities from the Late Ordovician before, during, and after the
Richmondian Invasion to test hypotheses determining the effects of biotic
immigrations on ecosystem structure and functioning. Comparisons between
Paleozoic and polar ecosystems are being made to provide insight into the
consequences of anticipated immigrations and invasions expected to occur in the
near future. Modeled food web stability and resistance are compared to (1)
identify changes in ecosystem dynamics resulting from asymmetrical biotic
interchange, (2) isolate properties promoting stability and resistance, and (3)
make explicit predictions regarding the outcome of polar invasions. These data
are providing crucial insights into the drivers of the Great Ordovician
Biodiversification Event, one of the most significant prolonged increases of
marine diversity in Earth history. Training of undergraduate interns and
mentoring of graduate students are advancing discovery and understanding. Broad
dissemination of the software program is enhancing scientific and technological
understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.