* 1848067
* CAREER: Theory-Guided Design of Porous Organic Frameworks for Energy Conversion and Storage
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Tim Kowalczyk, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 496,792.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports computational and
theoretical research to develop and apply specialized computer simulations to
understand how electrons and energy are transferred within a class of materials
known as covalent organic frameworks. These materials can be porous at the scale
of single molecules, making them strong candidates for the storage of gasses and
for separation technologies; preliminary work suggests that they may also
provide a valuable scaffold for applications in renewable energy harvesting and
conversion. For example, these frameworks of molecules may be used to anchor and
orient the light-absorbing parts of a material for efficient energy transfer or
increased energy storage density. This project will accelerate the development
of this promising class of materials for renewable energy applications by
providing a targeted computer simulation strategy to predict the behavior of
electrons in these materials after they absorb visible light.&lt;br/&gt;The PI
mentors a team of undergraduate and Master's student researchers in the
development and application of simulations. Their cross-disciplinary training
will contribute to the preparation of a robust STEM workforce in the physical
and computational sciences. The goals of this research also directly integrate
with the PI's efforts as an educator to enhance energy literacy among
undergraduate and high school students. Educational simulations that illustrate
the energy conversion mechanisms at play in the materials studied here will be
developed in collaboration with student researchers; employed in the PI's
energy, materials, and chemistry classrooms; and shared with the public to
broaden access to energy science resources. These research and educational
objectives are directly linked to an undergraduate student-driven energy
literacy outreach initiative, recently established by the PI at WWU, which will
be further enhanced through development into a service learning
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports computational and theoretical research on optical and electronic
properties of covalent organic frameworks. The rational design of photoactive
and electroactive covalent organic frameworks is hindered by a lack of
predictive models at extended length and time scales to link the optical and
electronic properties of these frameworks to their underlying structure. This
project aims to address this knowledge gap through the development of a
multireference computational approach that strategically links semiempirical
ground- and excited-state electronic structure calculations to predict
photophysical properties, energy transfer, and charge carrier mobility in
electroactive and photoactive covalent organic frameworks. The approach builds
on the PI's implementation of a time-independent approach to low-lying excited
states in density-functional tight-binding to incorporate charge-transfer
excitations as well as couplings between electronic states in these materials.
This constrained density-functional tight-binding based configuration
interaction (CDFTB-CI) approach will be deployed to study photoexcitation and
electron/energy transfer in selected covalent organic frameworks as singlet
fission materials and as photoswitchable energy storage materials. The models
developed and applied here will also provide a partial blueprint for
computational materials scientists to quantify links between structural and
electronic properties in other topologically complex environments such as metal-
organic frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;This project will directly enable the training and
mentoring of a diverse group of 15-20 undergraduate and masters-level research
students at a primarily undergraduate institution. To broaden the educational
impact of this work and to communicate energy conversion and storage concepts to
the public, the PI will create and assess the effectiveness of augmented
materials simulations that support fluency in mathematical and physical models
of energy conversion. This project will also establish a sustainable trajectory
for the PI's Energy Ambassadors initiative, a program that couples undergraduate
research across the science, engineering, economics, policy, and business of
energy with cross-disciplinary communication skill-building and K-12
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;The Division of Materials Research and the Division of
Chemistry contribute funds to this award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.