* 1848722
* Collaborative Research: Coupling and Cohesion as Factors Affecting Vulnerability to Abrupt Climate Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,02/28/2021
* Aubrey Hillman, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2021
* USD 33,106.00

Dr. Benjamin Vining, of the University of Arkansas-Fayetteville, along with
collaborators from the University of Louisiana-Lafayette, the University of
Florida-Gainesville, and in Peru, will examine how the organization of different
agricultural production systems relates to climate change vulnerabilities.
Climate change is increasingly a public and policy concern. This research will
focus on understanding how different agricultural strategies were used as el
Nino disasters occurred in the past with changing frequency and strength.
Understanding how agriculturalists switched between productive strategies will
improve long-term adaptations to climate change, provide theoretical and applied
models for how to address climate change in future planning and development, and
promote local adaptive capacities. Using agriculture as a set of case studies,
these models can be generalized to other forms of economic networks to
understand how various strategies can promote resilience. This project will
establish new multidisciplinary approaches to tackle such complex problems as
climate change adaptation, and train graduate students from the partner
institutions and countries in international collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Vining and his team will examine how prehispanic agriculturalists
developed and switched between various productive strategies as the el Nino
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) changed in frequency and severity. The study region,
north coastal Peru, hosted a series of civilizations between approximately 2000
BC - 1450 AD, including the Moche, Lambayeque, and Chimu societies. However, the
region is also particularly vulnerable to el Nino induced disasters, such as
occurred recently in 2016-2017. Initial archaeological work in this region
indicates that prehispanic agriculture was based on a suite of strategies. The
complex economies that supported prehispanic societies were based on in part on
switching amongst agricultural strategies as climatic contexts shifted. The
researchers come from the fields of archaeology, paleolimnology and
palaeoclimate, and ecological modeling. A principal objective will be to combine
high-precision dating of agricultural systems with paleoclimate conditions
reconstructed from lake cores. The researchers will use this multidisplinary
methodological background to improve historic reconstructions of past ENSO
variations, record archaeological examples of agricultural technologies in their
environmental context, and reconstruct how different strategies were employed as
ENSO effected climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.