* 1848740
* U.S. Participation in International Geoscience Unions: IUSS, INQUA, IUGS, and IUGG
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Aida Sztein, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 03/31/2020
* USD 573,080.00

This project will support the National Academies of Sciences (NAS), Board on
International Scientific Organizations (BISO) to represent the relevant US
science communities through separate National Committees (USNC) to four,
individual International Geoscience Unions that are part of the International
Science Council (ISC). These unions are the International Union of Soil Sciences
(IUSS), the International Union for Quaternary Research (INQUA), the
International Union of Geological Sciences (IUGS), and the International Union
of Geodesy and Geophysics (IUGG). The main role of each U.S. National Committee
(USNC) is to facilitate participation of American scientists in the activities
of its respective union and to "advance US visibility and impact globally
through the engagement, collaboration, and leadership of international
scientific societies". &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The USNC for Soil Science will work
to advance U.S. soil science through topical symposia and national conferences
and aid in the development of early career scientists through exposure to
international soil science research at the World Congress of Soil Sciences. The
USNC for Quaternary Research will play an important role in the scientific
content of the 2019 International INQUA Congress and will organize topical
sessions at U.S. professional society meetings on the future of and vision for
Quaternary Research. The USNC for Geological Sciences will support the
development of a more inclusive geologic workforce. The USNC for Geodesy and
Geophysics will focus on nominating U.S. scientists for union leadership
positions and will increase outreach to the geophysical and geodetical
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.