* 1848090
* CAREER: Combined Experimental and Computational Approach to Controlling Site Selectivity in Cross Coupling Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Sharon Neufeldt, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 675,000.00

Cross couplings are a type of chemical reaction in which two different molecules
are joined together by a metal catalyst. These reactions are valuable for
forming carbon-carbon, carbon-nitrogen, and other types of bonds for the
construction of complex organic molecules for use in drug design, the design of
new biomaterials, and other advanced manufacturing applications. In cross
coupling reactions the control of reaction selectivity is often challenging. If
the catalyst cannot differentiate between several possible reaction sites on the
molecules, a mixture of products will result. Purification of that mixture
increases cost and waste. In this project, Dr. Neufeldt is developing catalysts
for cross coupling that efficiently differentiate between similar reactive
sites. Both laboratory-based and computational studies are being employed to
understand how the catalyst structure influences the way the catalyst interacts
with subtly different sites. This information is being used to design improved
catalysts to achieve higher selectivity and efficiency. As part of this project,
Dr. Neufeldt is involved in activities to encourage participation of
underrepresented minorities in scientific research and improve computational
chemistry education at the undergraduate level. These activities include
involving students from neighboring tribal colleges in computational chemistry
research, implementing computational chemistry labs into the organic curriculum
at Montana State University, and engaging in outreach to local schools and
tribal colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Neufeldt is identifying and
exploiting new mechanisms by which phosphine and N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC)
ligands can influence site selectivity in nickel (Ni)- and palladium
(Pd)-catalyzed cross coupling reactions. Phosphine ligands are being studied for
their ability to control selectivity between phenol derivatives and chlorides in
Ni-catalyzed cross couplings. In addition, NHC ligands are under investigation
for their ability to influence selectivity between aryl triflates and chlorides
in Pd-catalyzed couplings. The origin of selectivity in these systems is
examined through a combination of experimental and computational studies.
Density functional theory is also employed to design new site-selective
catalysts on the computer. The work in this project is valuable for improving
the functional group tolerance of cross couplings, facilitating sequential or
iterative couplings, and providing insight into catalyst structure-selectivity
relationships. The broader impacts of this project include engaging American
Indian students in research in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines, as well as introducing students of diverse ages to
computational chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.