* 1848573
* CAREER: Understanding the fundamental mechanisms of vesiculation and solute encapsulation of smectic phospholipid films on cellulose
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2025
* Anand Subramaniam, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 06/30/2025
* USD 627,914.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will support an integrated
research and education plan to understand the assembly of cell-like vesicles
from phospholipid layers on cellulose paper. Nature uses membranes to
encapsulate biological cells. Understanding the process in nature and then
building vesicles that mimic cell membranes is useful. The vesicles can, for
example, be used as microscale chemical reactors or as vehicles for
encapsulating and controllably releasing therapeutic drugs. The principal
investigator (PI) and his students will investigate the effects of physical
parameters such as the temperature, the ionic strength of the solution, and the
charge density of the phospholipids on vesicle formation. The research team will
study the encapsulation of ionic cargo into the vesicles under differing
physical conditions. Experimental data that is gathered will be used to build
and test analytical and numerical models to better understand the process of
formation of vesicles and the process of encapsulating cargo. The award will
also support the PI's efforts to enhance the undergraduate and graduate
Bioengineering curricula by designing new hands-on laboratory courses. The PI
will create a customizable experimental toolkit, the "SynCell Toolkit", that
will be implemented in K-12 classrooms to increase interest in biomaterials
research. The award will provide opportunities for research experiences for high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students in a diverse multidisciplinary
environment in the relatively under-served region of Central
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Giant vesicles
are in vitro constructs that mimic the minimal configuration of biological
cells. There is still a lack of a general understanding of the process of
vesiculation that leads to giant vesicle formation from surface-supported
smectic phospholipid films. This CAREER award will support an integrated
research, education, and outreach plan to obtain new knowledge and fundamental
insights into the basic process of giant vesicle formation and the encapsulation
of solutes in vesicles. A key distinguishing approach of this proposal is the
PI's use of a continuum approximation to analyze the evolution of a population
of vesicles rather than focusing on analyzing the growth of isolated vesicles.
This approach is enabled by two key discoveries in the PI's lab: (1) The
discovery of a cellulose-based method for forming giant vesicles, (2) A stopped-
growth method for large-scale analysis of images that can characterize the
entire population of vesicles from a sample. The PI will achieve his integrated
research and educational goals by using a combination of experiments, and
analytical and numerical modeling. Research aims include: (1) Understanding the
dynamics of vesiculation by studying whole populations of giant vesicles
produced on cellulose paper. (2) Deciphering the intermolecular and/or
intersurface forces that govern vesiculation by controlled perturbation of
double-layer electrostatic forces and membrane undulation forces. (3)
Understanding the process of encapsulation of ionic solutes during vesiculation
by temporally decoupling the process of growth from the process of loading
cargo. The educational and outreach components include: (1) Incorporating
laboratory components and new courses designed to foster a mode of inquiry-based
learning to the Bioengineering curricula. (2) Developing a customizable "SynCell
Toolkit", that will be implemented in K-12 classrooms to encourage K-12 students
to pursue careers in STEM. (3) Provide opportunities for research experiences
for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.