* 1848019
* CAREER:  USTAR-ST--Universalizing Similarity Theories coupling the AtmospheRe and Sloping Terrain
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Holly Oldroyd, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 683,905.00

Land-atmosphere interactions are fundamental physical processes that govern how
surface conditions, such as roughness, temperature and moisture, influence the
state of the atmosphere and vice versa. Hence, the ability to represent the
physical process is important to atmospheric, climate and hydrologic numerical
models. Current representations of land-atmosphere interactions were developed
based on horizontal and homogeneous terrain with various simplified
modification; therefore, they cannot represent the fundamental physical
processes that arise from the atmosphere's interactions with the heterogeneous
and sloping terrain, characteristic of mountains. The research is to advance
fundamental knowledge and representation regarding the atmosphere's interactions
with mountain terrain by analyzing field data collected from two past
experiments and a new field experiment specially designed for mountain terrain.
Through this project, the professor who leads the research will pique student
interest in mountain meteorology by developing an experiential education module
and an interactive web-based slope flow simulator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
addresses fundamental knowledge-gaps that limit prediction capabilities over
mountain slopes, the research project will analyze field datasets to investigate
how slope angle fundamentally modulates near-surface turbulent fluxes of
momentum and heat over mountainous terrain. This new understanding will be used
to develop new, data-driven, land-atmosphere exchange parameterizations that
explicitly account for the effects of slope angle. A slope-flow layer model,
coupling the one-dimensional momentum and heat balances, will be created to
quantitatively evaluate the new parameterizations in comparison to the
traditional, horizontal-terrain relations and to serve as the foundation for a
web-based slope-flow simulator tool. In addition, since many mountain slopes are
forested, the research will employ novel measurement techniques to investigate
the fundamental thermo-mechanical impacts imposed by a heterogeneous forest
canopy on the slope-flow-layer surface exchange fluxes and determine how they
can be incorporated into the new, slope-angle-dependent turbulent flux
parameterizations. The ability to parameterize surface fluxes over mountain
slopes will significantly improve numerical weather forecasting, hydrologic and
air quality models and remote sensing products, which are used to study
environmental stressors that occur at surface-vegetation-atmosphere interfaces,
threaten mountain ecosystems and have significant socio-economic implications,
such as flood-drought cycles, glacier recession, vegetation stress, and wildfire
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.