* 1848498
* Gendered Elective Track Choices in Engineering Undergraduate Education: Antecedents and Career Path Implications
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Maria Cardador, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2023
* USD 307,238.00

Research has shown that women who pursue engineering careers are more likely
than their male counterparts to be in less technical roles and careers paths,
such as business analysis, technical supervision, and product management. In
addition, these gendered career patterns increase attrition risk for female
engineers. This project aims to serve the national interest of broadening
participation by improving the representation of women in technically-oriented
roles and career paths within engineering. This Institutional and Community
Transformation, Exploration and Design project focuses on female engineering
students' elective track choices as a predictor of gendered career patterns.
Project personnel will investigate the driving forces behind elective track
choices for female engineering students. Then, they will use the findings to
inform faculty development and other administrative efforts to improve gender
balance within technical elective tracks and technically-oriented careers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to identify individual and
institutional factors that contribute to female students' elective track choices
within engineering majors. This study builds on previous work that demonstrates
gendered role and career patterns, and will contribute to filling gaps in
understanding how and why these patterns develop. The investigators will collect
data over multiple years through surveys and interviews of female undergraduates
in engineering. The study will also include faculty and staff members who advise
those students regarding elective track selection. The surveys will be developed
by the PIs and will incorporate previously validated measures of math attitudes,
role confidence, engineering identity, and related constructs. Using a
longitudinal, multi-method and multi-level case study approach, the
investigators will identify key relationships between female students' elective
track choices and institutional demographics, culture, curriculum, and
instructional approaches in both gender-balanced and imbalanced majors. The
study, which includes oversight from an external evaluator, will produce
recommendations for engineering faculty, advisors, and administrators who can
directly affect the climate of engineering programs and career path decisions of
engineering students. Moreover, the findings may inform similar investigations
of gendered educational tracking in non-engineering majors (e.g., mathematics;
physics), and may generalize to other educational settings beyond the study
site. Thus, the study could help address gendered practices and identify
strategies to minimize them throughout undergraduate STEM education. This
project is supported by the NSF Improving Undergraduate STEM Education Program
(IUSE): Education and Human Resources (EHR). The IUSE Program supports projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all undergraduate students.
Through the Institutional and Community Transformation track, IUSE : EHR program
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.