* 1848473
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Community Development and Culture Negotiation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2019
* Donovan Adams, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/2019
* USD 15,070.00

The Early Bronze Age (EBA) in the Near East is characterized by marked
sociopolitical and economic changes. In particular, social stratification,
urbanization, extensive intra- and interregional trade networks, and population
movement and densification are notable features of this period. While
archaeological investigations have bolstered understanding of each of these
aspects, bioarchaeological investigations are in a unique position through the
use of human remains to address questions of population interaction, social
organization, and community formation. This research will investigate the
complex interaction between population density, population diversity, and
culture contact in the development of incipient urbanization, migration, and the
production of community identities. Such research has modern-day implications
regarding the human response to population density and diversity, urban and
neighborhood development, migration, and inter-population interaction.
International collaboration will be fostered between several institutions in
both the United States and Turkey. This project will also contribute to the
training of an undergraduate student in bioarchaeological and statistical skills
and encourage the participation of underrepresented groups in biological
anthropology. Results from this research will be shared through publication in
several academic journals, international and domestic lectures, and data will be
shared in the digital data repository, ScholarWorks.

This research will examine the community formation practices and demographic
processes of EBA Anatolia using the site Karata-Semay (c. 2800-2300 BCE) in
southwestern Anatolia. This settlement exhibits evidence of emerging hierarchy,
neighborhood formation, homogenous architectural and burial practices, and
involvement in the interregional trade networks of the Eastern Mediterranean.
Utilizing dental metric and morphological data collected on both permanent and
deciduous dentitions, this research will conduct intra- and inter-site analyses
to investigate biological relatedness between individuals and sites,
respectively. Such analyses contribute to understanding of the social
organization of individuals within a single community; postmarital residence
practices; kinship construction; extent of biological and, by proxy, cultural
diversity; and region of origin. This information, in conjunction with
archaeological and mortuary data, will be used to identify how early settlements
developed and how individuals negotiated common community identities and formed
social units. This research will further anthropological understanding of early
urban development, population movement, social organization, and human reaction
to diversity during the EBA.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.