* 1848215
* CAREER: Coherences and Nonlinear Interactions in Molecular Infrared Polaritons
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Wei Xiong, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2024
* USD 526,856.00

Nontechnical Description: Interactions between material at the molecular scale
and light can produce a new type of material particle called a polariton.
Polaritons have unique properties that make them useful in a broad array of
societally relevant applications, including medicine, chemical sensing, and
homeland security, to name just a few. While the properties and applications of
polaritons resulting from molecule-light interactions for some wavelengths of
light have been investigated, relatively less is known about polaritons
associated with light at wavelengths in the mid-infrared part of the
electromagnetic spectrum. This project uses ultrafast lasers to investigate the
fundamental properties of polaritons in the mid-infrared regime, and aims to
understand and control interactions among polaritons. The results of this
fundamental research are expected to contribute to the eventual development of
new technological capabilities in chemical sensing, materials development, and
visualization in the dark. Central elements of the education project include
development of an online course in photonic materials research aimed at first-
and second-year undergraduate students. The course is designed to help overcome
many students' fears about math- and science-heavy topics, and to attract a more
diverse group of students to the field of materials research. In addition, this
project establishes a pipeline for engaging underrepresented minority students
in summer research activities at UC San Diego, through collaboration with a
faculty member at a historically black college and university
(HBCU).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: Polaritons are hybrid
particles resulting from strong coupling between photon and material
excitations. The scientific aim of this project is to understand and control the
coherences and nonlinear interactions of multiple molecular infrared polaritons,
'on a chip'. The outcome would enable mid-infrared photonic devices, such as
mid-infrared optical modulators, waveguides, and lasers, that are crucial for
realizing lab-on-chip mid-infrared chemical sensing for the medical and material
industries. Polariton research has provided novel photonic applications in the
visible and THz regimes, but not in the mid-infrared regime. Yet, mid-infrared
polariton photonic devices are critical in developing lab-on-chip chemical
sensing. Fundamental knowledge, such as coherent lifetime, spatial coherences,
and nonlinear interactions of mid-infrared polaritons remains unclear, which
prevents mid-infrared polariton photonic application developments. To advance
basic knowledge of mid-infrared polaritons, the research team plans to work on
two important aspects: (1) Coherence of mid-infrared polaritons is pushed beyond
the natural coherence lifetime of molecular vibrations, breaking limits that
currently constrain the use of mid-infrared photons for photonic circuitry and
molecular sensing. (2) Coherent and coupled multiple distinguishable polaritons
'on a chip' can open the gateway for creating coherent superpositions of
multiple coupled quantum states for multi-color photonic devices. In addition,
the novel ultrafast mid-infrared spectroscopic imaging to be developed can be
extended into other mid-infrared photonic studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.