* 1848831
* Sixth Arab-American Frontiers of Science, Engineering, and Medicine Symposium: A Unique Opportunity for U.S.-Arab Scientific Exchange and Collaboration
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* John Boright, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/2020
* USD 49,999.00

Many Arab countries are making significant investments in science and technology
and have unique facilities and resources. However, there are few mechanisms for
U.S. researchers to learn about research efforts in this region. This meeting
provides an exceptional opportunity for U.S. scientists to interact with
promising young researchers in the Middle East to develop new ideas and
approaches to apply to ongoing research and discover opportunities for
collaboration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will help support the sixth
conference of the Arab-American Frontiers program series, to be held in Kuwait
City, Kuwait in fall 2018. The event will provide an opportunity for
approximately 35 early-career US scientists to attend a three-day conference of
approximately 100 total attendees that seeks to: enhance scientific dialogue and
exchange between young US and Arab researchers; encourage the transfer of
techniques and approaches across disciplines, strengthen science and engineering
collaboration within and beyond the US and the Middle East/North Africa region,
and also empower young scientists, engineers and medical professionals to assume
leadership roles in their fields and beyond. Participants are selected through a
competitive application process, ensuring a meeting of research-active
scientists and engineers who are ready to capitalize on the ideas and
relationships developed at the conference. The event is co-organized by the
Kuwait Foundation for the Advancement of Science and NSF funds leverage their
significant support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference purposely focuses on
several topics that are not directly related to encourage the participants to
make connections beyond their field of study and to facilitate interdisciplinary
dialogue that may offer new, unexpected insights. Participants at previous
workshops have highlighted this broad interdisciplinarity as an intellectual
highlight of the meeting. The focus areas for this meeting were developed by the
volunteer organizing committee and represent globally important topics in which
the Middle East has valuable expertise and is investing important resources. All
five topics represent research challenges that require the insights of multiple
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;- Big Data "Data by and for the people"&lt;br/&gt;- Water
Systems "Innovation for the safe, reliable and efficient provision of
water"&lt;br/&gt;- The Microbiome&lt;br/&gt;- Air Quality&lt;br/&gt;- Next
Generation Buildings and Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further development
of ideas for cooperative work that develop at the conference will be facilitated
by small collaboration grants for which participants may apply after the
meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.