* 1848347
* CAREER: Elucidating Fundamental Structure-Property Relationships in Ionomer Nanomcomposites for Redox Flow Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Eric Davis, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2024
* USD 566,359.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this CAREER
award is to develop novel nanocomposite materials with functionality that can
overcome practical hurdles for large-scale energy storage technologies such as
the redox flow battery. Inadequate ion selectivity in existing charged polymers
utilized in redox flow batteries has motivated the incorporation of
nanoparticles, a versatile approach for tuning a wide range of properties of
polymers. However, the molecular-scale heterogeneity in these materials has
confused structure-property relationships needed for the development of viable
nanocomposite materials for flow batteries. To address this gap, the research
component of this CAREER award focuses on advancing our understanding of
fundamental polymer physics governing interactions between functionalized
nanoparticles and charged polymers, and how these in turn alter resultant
polymer architectures and bulk functional properties that are relevant for
selective ion exchange. The design and synthesis of novel soft composite
materials will be guided by these fundamental structure-property relationships
to yield desirable molecular-scale interactions, thus enabling their
functionality for energy storage applications. These findings and materials also
have the potential to impact other critical modern technologies that utilize
functional polymer membranes, such as water purification and energy delivery.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These research efforts are closely tied to educational
initiatives that aim to engage and inspire the next generation of engineers and
scientists. Undergraduate and graduate students contributing to this project
will be exposed to advanced materials synthesis and characterization techniques,
equipping them with the interdisciplinary skills needed to address tomorrow's
engineering challenges. Together with chemical engineering students at Clemson
University, this award will develop and implement a STEM-based afterschool
program, for students grades 6-8, that emphasizes scientific problem solving
through the application of polymer science concepts to tackle hands-on tasks
inspired by real-world challenges. Together with the research component, these
educational and outreach programs seek to foster an inclusive approach to
addressing STEM challenges that improves national technical and economic
competencies, as well as helps to build a diverse, competitive, and innovative
future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of next-generation ionomer
nanocomposites for redox flow batteries, a scalable energy storage technology,
is hindered by an inadequate understanding of the underlying polymer physics
governing ion transport in these charged materials. The complex morphology of
existing materials exacerbates this by further confusing fundamental structure-
property relationships, resulting in, to date, only marginal improvements in
membrane performance. The research goal of this CAREER award is centered on
addressing this fundamental knowledge gap by interrogating how polymer network
structure and segmental dynamics impact technology-relevant performance
properties of ionomer nanocomposites. This will be achieved by systematically
varying the molecular weight, monomer architecture, and degree of sulfonation of
a series of novel ion-conducting aromatic polymer composites (e.g., sulfonated
poly(aryl ether ketone)s) containing functionalized nanoparticles. By tuning the
molecular-level properties of the membrane, as well as the characteristics of
the nanoparticles (e.g., surface functionalization, size, and loading), the role
of morphology on membrane dynamics and ion transport can be elucidated.
Segmental dynamics (localized motions and chain dynamics) of the hydrated
composite membranes will be interrogated using both neutron spin echo and
dielectric spectroscopy, where the latter experimental technique will also be
used to characterize the motion of charge carriers, that is, water-mediated ion
transport. In addition, 'bulk-scale' dynamics of the hydrated membranes will be
captured using infrared spectroscopy and compared to the local membrane
dynamics. These powerful, noninvasive spectroscopic techniques can be used to
interrogate membrane dynamics over a wide range of length and time scales,
providing insight into the impact of nanoparticle characteristics on the
collective membrane segmental dynamics and ion diffusion. Performing such
studies is critical to establishing comprehensive, fundamental relationships
between nanoscale features of the ionomer nanocomposites and device-relevant
performance properties. Poroelastic relaxation indentation will be employed to
characterize the mechanical properties and the dynamics of solvent migration of
the hydrated nanocomposite membranes, as these directly impact water-mediated
ion transport in these materials. As the use of advanced functional polymers in
membrane-based technologies continues to grow, the fundamental knowledge gained
from this research has the potential to impact the design of new materials in
areas such as water purification and energy storage and delivery. The research
component of this CAREER award is closely integrated with educational
initiatives that seek to improve diversity and inclusivity for STEM in the
upstate South Carolina area through teaching, undergraduate research, outreach,
and the implementation of a STEM-based afterschool program at a local middle
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.