* 1848747
* NSF Summer 2019 workshop: Computing Arctic Data: Orono, ME - Spring 2019
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sudarshan Chawathe, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 08/31/2022
* USD 49,999.00

To better understand causes, trends and thresholds of a changing Arctic and to
develop robust societal adaptation strategies new research tools are needed.
There is a wealth of past climate data sets stored in the NSF-funded Arctic Data
Center (ADC) that are unresolved yet have the potential to expand and deepen the
current state of understanding about how the Arctic is responding to
environmental changes. This award supports an integrative workshop that will
bring together a diverse group of early career scientists and experts from the
fields of ice core, computer and climate sciences to transform the existing
research data computation platform. The goal is to pave the way for the
development of a future generation of computer tools necessary to better
understand complex interactions of multiple driving forces that are changing
Earth's environment. Objectives are to evaluate the latest computational
advances, break existing interdisciplinary barriers that limit the use of ice
core data sets in climate research, and, by openly sharing results, promote the
development of future products that will benefit the Arctic research community
and the global population.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Evaluating present and
forecasting future trends in the "New Arctic" system is closely connected to
understanding multidimensional paleoclimate data archives. Using open source
tools to ease the reproduction of computational and data-intensive portions of
paleoclimate research, transparency in data processing steps will increase. In
addition, (1) the range of usability of existing climate and ice core based
paleoclimate data archives will be extended; (2) open access data and software
libraries, utilizing open source based software tools will be developed; (3)
paleoclimate and computer infrastructure specific white papers will be developed
that will summarize the state of the problem, map future pathways for systematic
improvements, and finally converge this rapidly evolving research domain with a
novel computational and easy to use data processing
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.