* 1848651
* Rheology of Nanocrystalline Materials: Clarifying the Sliding Mechanism of Earthquakes
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Javier Garay, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2019
* USD 56,529.00

Earthquakes occur from just below the surface of Earth to almost 700km where
they stop abruptly. Near the surface, earthquakes begin by overcoming friction
on pre-existing faults but at depths greater than about 40km the pressure is so
high that overcoming friction is impossible; the elevated temperatures at such
depths allow rocks to flow at stresses lower than they could slip suddenly and
cause an earthquake. Then why are there any deeper earthquakes? Twenty-five
years ago the investigator discovered the physical mechanism by which faults
(and by inference deep earthquakes) initiate and slide at high pressure. The key
is formation of a "nanocrystalline" sliding zone that is weak because the
crystals in the zone are so tiny-a few millionths of a millimeter in diameter.
Recent high-speed friction experiments simulating shallow earthquakes have
raised major questions concerning how shallow earthquakes actually slide. These
experiments show that immediately after sliding begins, there is strong heating
caused by the two sides of the fault rubbing against each other. The temperature
rises rapidly until it initiates a mineral reaction that produces a very weak
nanocrystalline sliding zone that looks just like the high-pressure fault zones.
The PIs propose that this nanocrystalline zone slides by exactly the same
physical process as the high-pressure faulting and that most earthquakes slide
by this mechanism also. To test this hypothesis, they and a graduate student,
with undergraduate help, will conduct experiments to determine the stresses
needed to make nanocrystalline materials flow over a broad range of temperature,
pressure, crystal size and sliding rate. If successful, they will have
established for the first time a physical understanding of earthquake sliding.
This physical understanding will enable more sophisticated modeling of predicted
shaking damage caused by earthquakes and move us one step closer to the elusive
goal of predicting earthquakes. Another result that should come from these
studies is deeper understand-ding of flow of nanocrystalline ceramics that will
provide valuable basic information for attempts to develop high-speed forming
processes for a variety of ceramic products in industry. This project will
provide a graduate student and undergraduate students with very valuable
interdisciplinary experiences bridging between earthquake physics and materials
science. UCR is the most ethnically diverse campus of the University of
California and one of the most ethnically diverse universities in the USA. The
institution supports the pursuit of state-of-the-art research including
involvement of undergraduates making a vital contribution to their education. As
a consequence, minority students at UCR graduate at the same rate as white
students and at a much higher rate than that of "peer
institutions".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based upon high-pressure faulting and high-
speed friction experiments, the PIs propose a universal sliding mechanism for
most earthquakes. They hypothesize that in the first second or so of most
earthquakes, a low-viscosity, nanocrystalline, "gouge" is generated, enabling
sliding with a very low frictional resistance. They propose to test this
hypothesis by synthesizing nanocrystalline materials and measuring their
rheology as a function of grain size, strain rate, temperature and pressure.
Deformed specimens will be analyzed by SEM and TEM accompanied by Electron Back-
Scattered Diffraction (EBSD), selected-area electron diffraction, and energy-
dispersive chemical analysis. The rheological experiments are straightforward
and the PI and CoPI are experts in such procedures and have the necessary
equipment in their laboratories. The critical step is in synthesizing fully-
dense composites of controlled grain sizes. The CoPI is an expert in this step
as well and has demonstrated success over the last 8 years. Therefore, the
experimental program is essentially assured of success. There is already
fragmentary existing knowledge suggesting that the materials chosen will flow by
grain-boundary sliding at low viscosities under a subset of the conditions that
will be examined. By creating an extensive data set, the PIs will be able to
demonstrate whether or not high-speed friction experiments slide by this
mechanism under some conditions, all conditions, or no conditions. Application
to sliding of real earthquakes will be through comparison to the high-speed
friction experiments and microstructures of deeply eroded faults analogous to
the San Andreas Fault (SAF) of California. It is expected that these experiments
will provide a quantitative mechanistic explanation of why friction falls
precipitously very shortly after sliding initiates, and rises again as sliding
slows. Additionally, the study will also demosntrate why the SAF shows no
thermal anomaly (the so-called San Andreas heat flow paradox) and why
pseudotachylytes are rare.