* 1848079
* CAREER:Atomic Structure and Growth of Helical Nanostructures Studied by Advanced Electron Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Mary Scott, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 01/31/2024
* USD 595,786.00

Non-technical Summary: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER program encompasses
a research and educational plan that uses imaging and visualization as tools to
answer key scientific questions as well as engage in scientific outreach. The
research component of the program uses electron microscopy to understand how
complex nanostructures form. Many properties of nanoscale materials are
determined by structural imperfections that appear during the growth process and
go on to affect the material's final structure. For example, adding a metallic
coating to straight silver-gold alloy nanowires can cause the wires to
transition to a double helix morphology. Before nanostructures such as these can
be widely used in technological applications, there is a need to understand how
the helical structure originates. Using advanced electron microscopy, this
program will combine extremely detailed and high resolution studies in three-
dimensions with high-throughput imaging to obtain a complete picture as to how
the helical nanowires grow and twist. This research will advance the fundamental
understanding of the processes that determine how complicated nanostructures can
be chemically synthesized for future technological applications. The educational
component of this program aims to provide access to academic extra-curriculars
for high school students in severely underserved areas. Students in many areas
in Oakland and Richmond face poverty, hunger, violence and racial
discrimination. Social and economic hurdles often prohibit these students'
participation in traditional summer extracurricular activities, which can
increase the academic achievement gap in this population. Working with local
high school teachers, this program will develop and implement a flexible and
adaptable summer research experience for these and other students affected by
inequitable systems. This program will use imaging and visualization as tools to
convey scientific knowledge and excite the students about careers in science. It
also aims to develop mentorship networks to help students attain their goals in
the college and job market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research portion of this program will use electron
microscopy to determine the structural origin of chirality in core-shell
nanowires. Nanoscale three-dimensional characterization will be used to study
the morphology of the nanowires as they transition from straight to twisted
structures during addition of the shell. By varying the shell thickness and
atomic species, the role that lattice mismatch plays in the structural
transformation from straight to helical in these wires will be determined.
Atomic resolution electron tomography will be used to measure the position of
defects and the strain distribution in these materials to determine how these
structural features are related to the helical structure that these materials
adopt. A high-throughput electron microscopy workflow using a machine learning
approach will be developed to measure structural heterogeneity in many
populations of the straight and twisted nanowires. The comprehensive
understanding of the development of the helical morphology demonstrated by the
core-shell nanowires under study will relate the presence of microstructural
features (defect, strain, grain boundaries) to the overall morphology of the
nanowires. This in turn will enable the rational design of functional materials
based on this system, application in optoelectronic, nanomechanical, biomimetic
or catalytic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.