* 1848738
* Acquisition of a Multi-Sensor Core Logger for Syracuse University
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Christopher Scholz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 02/28/2021
* USD 291,825.00

This National Science Foundation (NSF) grant supports the purchase of a multi-
sensor core logger (MSCL) for the Department of Earth Sciences, Syracuse
University. The MSCL scans drilled sediment and rock cores and identifies their
properties. The MSCL uses several sensors to detect color variations, sediment
density, magnetic properties, and sound speed. Describing earth materials from
different environments is fundamental to paleoclimate and paleoenvironmental
research. Such research informs our understanding of climate change and earth
system processes. In addition, the MSCL provides valuable information for
identifying subsurface pollutants, and provides information for engineering,
geoarcheology, and geological resource assessment. This instrument supports the
NSF mission of promoting the progress of science and advancing the national
health, prosperity and welfare. This technology will be available to students
and faculty from other institutions in Upstate New York and will benefit diverse
researchers from regional geoscience and environmental science communities.
Moreover, the sophisticated array of sensors combines several earth science
techniques in a single instrument making the MSCL a valuable tool for STEM
educational outreach and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multi-sensor core
logger (MSCL) funded by this grant to Syracuse University from the National
Science Foundation includes the following components: 1) the MSCL-S base system
with computer and software, 2) an acoustic P-wave system for measuring sound-
wave propagation, 3) a gamma-density measurement system, 4) a magnetic
susceptibility system for whole and split cores, 5) a color-spectroscopy system
(wavelengths 360-740 nm) for quantifying color and lithology, and 6) a line-scan
camera for high-resolution core photos. The integrated MSCL-S system will be
used in the research of several faculty members in the Department of Earth
Science at Syracuse University with expertise in paleoenvironmental
reconstructions using core materials. Faculty research in the department that
will be supported by this instrument include using color spectroscopy and
lithological changes in lake-sediments to investigate tropical drought and
ocean-atmosphere linkages during the Cenozoic, as well as Arctic climate and
permafrost dynamics over the late Quaternary. Researchers studying basin
evolution over a range of geologic timescales will use the combination of gamma
and p-wave sensors on the MSCL-S to create ?synthetic seismograms?, which allow
for precise calibration of core material to basin-wide seismic reflection data.
Ongoing departmental research using a combination of anoxic lake sediments and
geologic samples to explore global carbon cycle and ocean anoxic events will
also benefit from access to the suite of sensors on this instrument.
Furthermore, educational outreach, locally-based research projects, and resource
development and management in Upstate New York will directly benefit from the
central location of the instrument at Syracuse
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.