* 1848414
* Building an Inclusive Geology Field Camp for the PASSHE:  Workshop Proposal: Pittsburg, PA - January 3-4, 2019
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Nicholas Deardorff, Indiana University of Pennsylvania Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2021
* USD 33,576.00

The creation of a 6-week place-based field course will be transformative to the
Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education (PASSHE) geoscience programs and
impact the surrounding region by enhancing the abilities and quality of
graduating geoscience students entering the workforce. The universities involved
in this proposal are all predominantly undergraduate institutions serving rural
suburban and urban student demographics, many of whom are first-generation
college students. The proposed field course will also enhance the research
environment by promoting collaborations between faculty at different state
universities and promote future curricular collaborations between universities.
The field "short course" will introduce high school students interested in STEM
to geoscience before most declare a major and begin their university education.
The course is a critical step in creating academic pathways for student recruits
into the geosciences with strong institutional connections - starting at the
high school level. Student participants will be prepared for the next step in
their academic careers by using the natural backyard labs in PA. The effort will
also increase the recruitment of under-involved students in STEM as they would
not have to travel away from home to gain a quality experience that will also
prepare them for undergraduate or graduate programs in the geosciences and, in
turn, the geoscience workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this
proposal is to effectively plan for the production of a sustainable, cost-
effective 6-week geology field course, which will allow each Pennsylvania State
System of Higher Education (PASSHE) geoscience graduate to meet the minimum
requirements for applications to graduate school and to take the Pennsylvania
Professional Geologist licensing exam. Additionally, this field course will
accomplish three distinct and important objectives; (1) address a looming
geoscience workforce shortage, (2) better prepare our students for the
geoscience workforce by offering a place-based field curriculum highlighting the
importance of geoscience to all Pennsylvania communities and focusing on modern
day geoscience problems (see section 4 for examples), and (3) broadening
recruitment so that the demographics of our future problem solvers more closely
mimics the demographics of our region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.