* 1848650
* Convergence: RAISE Nearshore Water-Land Interface During Extreme Storms
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2024
* Steve Elgar, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 991,941.00

Extreme storms have significant impacts on the nearshore water-land system,
where ocean and estuarine waves and surge interact with land processes, that
pose high risk to society. Coastal storm-related economic losses have increased
substantially, largely owing to increases in population and development in
hazardous coastal areas (NRC 2014). Degraded water quality impacts ecosystem and
human health; thus, it is critical to improve our ability to predict the impacts
of major storms to the coast. In particular, by enabling convergence of research
spanning oceanography, geomorphology, hydrogeology, geo-engineering technology,
coastal engineering, and ecology, this project will result in a better
understanding of the feedbacks among nearshore water-land system processes
during extreme storms. The researchers will collaborate closely with
biogeochemists, ecologists and social scientists, such that significant and
rapid progress transcending these disciplines can be made with investment and
expertise spanning multiple NSF programs. The proposed convergent, integrative
systems approach will enable rapid advances in understanding and predicting
impacts of extreme storms and coastal resilience, leading to improved coastal
management strategies. The nearshore water-land interface is vital to the
national economy, security, commerce, and recreation, and major storms
increasingly threaten communities, infrastructure, and ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A transdisciplinary approach is needed to investigate
interactions and feedbacks among oceanography (tides, surge, waves),
geomorphology (sediment transport, morphological evolution), ecology
(vegetation), meteorology (wind, rain), hydrogeology (groundwater and solute
transport), geo-engineering technology (soil behavior, soil-structure
interaction), and the built environment (engineering, infrastructure) during
storms. Alongshore variability within this "nearshore-system" will be measured
on scales of 10 m to 10 km, through all of these processes. The researchers will
be co-located in a regional during-storm study to address system-wide science
questions regarding the interactions and couplings between processes at the
water-land interface. Daily interactions between scientists in multiple
disciplines will facilitate co-development of predictive models and integration
of knowledge by focusing on several coupled processes. Experience and techniques
gained during this study will be used to develop a transdisciplinary storm-
chasing Nearshore Extreme Event Reconnaissance association (NEER), with emphasis
on rapid pre-event site characterization and instrument deployment to obtain
observations during major storms. They will also facilitate an exchange program
to enable students to gain the range of skills needed to be leaders in
transdisciplinary research endeavors by working with scientists outside their
primary discipline. Biannual conferences focused on cross-disciplinary research
advances and challenges, techniques and methods for understanding the nearshore
system, and the development of NEER will be used to keep the broad community
with task-diverse expertise focused on the big challenges and guiding
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.