* 1848321
* CAREER: Quantifying the controls of wildfire, climate, and tectonics on the transition between soil-mantled and bedrock hillslopes
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Roman DiBiase, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 04/30/2024
* USD 541,960.00

Where erosion strips soil from hillslopes faster than it can be replenished,
bedrock hillslopes emerge, leading to steeper topography, sparser vegetation,
flashier runoff, and changes to the mechanisms of sediment delivery from
hillslopes to channels, amplifying the effects of destructive floods and debris
flows. However, existing models developed for soil-mantled landscapes are poorly
suited to explain the transition to bedrock hillslopes that emerges due to
either short-term (e.g. wildfire) or long-term (e.g., tectonic) drivers of
imbalance between soil production and erosion. This project aims to address this
knowledge gap by quantifying the transition from soil-mantled to bedrock
hillslopes that arises due to variations in the controls on the relative rates
of soil production and soil erosion in mountain landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Four field studies in granitic landscapes will exploit gradients in
bedrock exposure to elucidate the underlying controls on soil production and
erosion rates. This project will take advantage of increasingly high-resolution
lidar, drone, and ground-based photogrammetry methods to efficiently map the
transition from soil-mantled to bedrock hillslopes driven by wildfire, rock
uplift rate, knickpoint retreat, and climate/vegetation cover. Measurements of
in situ cosmogenic 10Be, soil and bedrock chemistry, and soil thickness will
constrain soil production rates and establish the how soil production, soil
weathering, and erosion rate vary across these gradients. Results from this
project will be used to generate data-rich immersive virtual-reality (iVR)
experiences compatible with low-cost self-contained iVR headset systems and
incorporated into new laboratory exercises developed for an undergraduate
geomorphology course. The educational component of this CAREER proposal will
focus on assessing the effectiveness of iVR and traditional GIS-based laboratory
exercises for engaging students and communicating concepts in hillslope
geomorphology and critical zone science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.