* 1848613
* Convergence: RAISE: Auto-regulatory Scaffolds for Directed Evolution of  Non-living Functional Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* George Schatz, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2022
* USD 999,999.00

This award supports a new approach to identify and realize new functional
materials under realistic conditions. The method is directed evolution of non-
living materials based on auto-regulatory scaffold hosts. The method is bio-
inspired. It mimics the approach observed in living things. The research
involves developing a platform which incorporates synthesis, screening and
feedback, by design, and offers a practical pathway to materials discovery. This
strategy overcomes the limitations of screening materials via computer
simulations only. The project builds on the convergence of different research
areas such as tissue engineering, systems biology, scalable nanomanufacturing
and machine learning. The discovery of new materials leads to new
functionalities, which leads to new devices and systems, which leads to new
products, which benefits society and economy and enhances the nation's
prosperity and security. The project demonstrates a paradigm shift in materials
discovery and invention. Education plans involve training graduate students and
postdocs in convergence approaches to materials screening and discovery, design
and realization of auto-regulatory scaffolds and machine learning. Outreach
plans are to develop programs such as dissemination through public lectures,
integration of research results into new undergraduate courses, and publication
of perspectives that combine convergence of research from different
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's approach is to screen materials
through the auto-regulatory interaction of sensors, regulators and known and
unknown materials. These components are located on scaffolds, which are tissue
engineering-inspired constructs, whose dimensions are convenient for the
developed fabrication and synthesis tools and which may be adapted to a wide
range of node materials that include hydrogels, polymers, nanomaterials, and
biomaterials. The auto-regulatory aspects of the research involve humidity and
photothermal energy sources, among others. The auto-regulatory processes are
based on interference effects, thermal expansion, chemical reactions, and
cellular response and motion for which the project develops theory and modeling.
One benefit of the evolutionary platform is that it interfaces seamlessly with
seemingly incompatible combinations of materials such as hydrogels and
semiconducting nanomaterials or biological cells and inorganic materials.
Materials screening is coupled with machine learning methods for prediction of
new materials, which can be extended to other user-defined
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.