* 1848724
* Collaborative Research: A New Ground-magnetometer for inner Magnetospheric Array Geospace Studies (iMAGS)
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Mark Moldwin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2024
* USD 844,304.00

Space weather refers to the dynamics of the Earth's space environment due to
solar disturbances that directly impact technological systems such as satellite
navigation and communication systems, power grids, and ground-and-aircraft-based
HF radio communication. There are significant variations in space weather
effects depending on latitude, local time, and longitude. These variations have
not been well studied due to sparsity of ground-based instrumentation. Severe
space weather is a natural hazard with significant impact to global society
(e.g., aircraft, communications, satellite systems, power grids). According to a
Lloyd's of London report on Solar Storm Risk to the North American Electric Grid
(2013), "simulations of extreme geomagnetic storms suggest that the total human
population at risk of extended [power] outage... ranges between 20-40 million in
the at-risk areas, with durations of 16 days up to 1-2 years". This project will
(1) develop a new generation of low-cost ground-based magnetometer
instrumentation, (2) develop a unified operation and maintenance approach of
existing American sector magnetometers, and (3) enable the exploration of small
and meso-scale ionospheric disturbances and currents by creating a network of
dense closely-spaced arrays of magnetometers. This will enable better
understanding of the natural hazard from space weather, lead to better
predictions, and allow for better preparedness with an infrastructure for
advanced warnings of changes in the space weather environment. This award is co-
funded by the Magnetospheric Physics and Prediction of and Resilience against
Extreme Events (PREEVENTS) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a new research quality, low-cost and low-power ground magnetometer to
rejuvenate and revitalize existing ground-magnetometer arrays. The new Magneto-
Inductive magnetometer technology has been developed for small satellites with
support from NASA and this proposal requests funds to leverage this technology
to develop, build, test, deploy and analyze data from a new ground based sensor
package. The UM Ground Magnetometer currently has a resolution of about 1 nT and
a noise floor of about 5 pT/root(Hz) @ 1 Hz and draws less than 100 mW including
a GPS receiver for time stamping, and a microcontroller. A "smart-power-cycling"
integrated wireless communication system (WiFi, Cellular or Iridium modems)
enables the system to be stand alone and run on batteries and solar panels even
in high-latitude auroral zone stations. The instruments will be deployed in a
meridional chain augmenting or replacing MEASURE and SAMBA magnetometers in the
American sector to remote sense the plasmapause, study ULF wave propagation and
small-scale current systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.