* 1848785
* Collaborative Research: Understanding the Role of Coupled Chemistry-climate Interactions in Internal Climate Variability
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* David Thompson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 523,678.00

A great deal of past research has been directed at understanding how coupling
between climate and chemical species such as ozone and water vapor influence the
climate response to anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases and ozone-
depleting substances. But the importance of such coupling for year-to-year and
decadal-scale variations in climate represents a key gap in our current
scientific understanding of the climate system. The project will fill this gap
through analyses of both existing numerical experiments across a wide array of
climate models, and from new numerical simulations explicitly for the current
project. The outcomes of the project will lead to improved understanding of the
role of chemistry-climate coupling in the climate system. The work has broad
implications for our understanding of climate variability and change, and their
related climate impacts at the surface. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
provide new insights into the importance of coupled chemistry-climate
interactions for climate variability in the tropics, midlatitudes, and polar
regions, and at both troposphere and stratosphere. It will improve our
understanding of the importance of including coupled chemistry-climate processes
in designing and evaluating future large-ensemble climate simulations. In
particular, it will provide a benchmark for quantifying the importance of model-
to-model differences in chemistry-climate interactions in simulations of climate
change. This would help establish the fidelity of the processes included in
global climate models, and thus has implications for public confidence in
climate models and understanding of climate science. The new knowledge about the
role of coupled chemistry-climate interactions in uncertainty in climate change
projections would have a range of potential implications for both society and
ecosystems over various regions of the globe. The project will also provide
mentoring for two graduate students from groups underrepresented in the
atmospheric sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first part of the work, the
investigators will quantify the effects of coupled chemistry-climate
interactions on climate variability on year-to-year timescales. They will
explore in both existing and targeted numerical climate model experiments: 1)
the differences in climate variability between control simulations with and
without coupled chemistry; 2) the influence of atmospheric dynamics on various
chemical species; and 3) the effects of variations in chemical species on
atmospheric dynamics. The second part of the work will explore the role of
coupled chemistry-climate interactions in climate change as the world moves from
the era of ozone depletion when ozone depleting substances increased (about
1980-1995), to ozone recovery (1995-future). The investigators will focus on 1)
variability in future climate states, 2) surface climate trends on decadal
timescales, and 3) uncertainty in projections of future climate changes in
large-ensemble simulations of coupled chemistry-climate
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.