* 1848141
* CAREER: Chemical Trends of Elements Under Pressure and their Effects to Forms and Properties of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Maosheng Miao, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2024
* USD 490,471.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
in designing novel materials by understanding the basic chemical characteristics
of elements under high pressure. All matter is composed of elements, and all
elements show peculiar chemical properties depending on their positions in the
periodic table. A general rule of chemistry is that the characteristics and
behaviors of elements are determined by electrons of an atom's outermost
orbital. Our current knowledge and practice of chemistry has been limited by the
number of elements in the periodic table and the chemical states in which these
elements could exist. This project aims to reveal how physical forces can be
used to break the above boundary of chemistry. When this happens, the existing
elements can drastically change their chemical characteristics and identities
and behave like entirely new elements. Using advanced computational techniques,
this project will systematically explore the new materials that can be formed by
utilizing the physical pressures that alter the chemical properties of elements.
Combining with a new quantum mechanics model of atoms in confined space, this
project will apprehend how the pressure will transform the periodic table of
elements. &lt;br/&gt;The work may largely extend the scope of materials by
revealing the transformation of elements under pressure. It may also give rise
to knowledge of how the new chemistry can be utilized in designing and obtaining
new materials with unusual properties as well as in understanding the behavior
and distribution of elements in the interior of Earth and extraterrestrial
planets. The computer simulations of atomic and electronic structures will be
incorporated into the early curriculum of undergraduate and graduate students in
California State University Northridge, a minority serving institution with a
large Hispanic enrollment. It will also be introduced to local community college
and high school students, providing them with a deeper understanding of
materials and chemistry and new skills and tools for their future careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports
computational and theoretical research aimed to advance the design and discovery
of materials by understanding how the basic chemical character of elements, such
as reactivity or oxidation state, can change under pressure and how to utilize
this knowledge to make materials with unusual and desired properties. This plan
is inspired by a series of striking phenomena uncovered by recent high-pressure
research, such as core electrons that become reactive and form chemical bonds,
electrons that play the role of anions at the interstitial sites, and noble
gases that react with ionic compounds without forming any chemical bond. These
phenomena are exciting because they not only alter the chemistry at the very
fundamental level, but also can greatly broaden the form and the properties of
materials. An in-depth and systematized understanding of how elements behave
under different levels of pressure is essential but not yet in place. This
emerging area of materials under extreme conditions is difficult to directly
study using current high-pressure experiments, and these methods are also time
consuming and costly. Rapid and low-cost computer simulation can explore high
pressure and have potential to provide guidance to experiment. &lt;br/&gt;The PI
will employ computer simulations based on quantum mechanics and automatic
crystal structure search methods to address these issues by studying the
stability and bonding features of a series of compounds containing focused
elements. Specifically, the PI will undertake the following research objectives,
exploring: 1) the reactivity of inner core p and d core electrons and its
relation to external pressures, and the corresponding bonding feature and the
properties; 2) a reverse chemistry phenomena of binary 3d metal compounds; 3)
the use of the novel chemistry under pressure in designing and producing new
materials with superlative properties; 4) the possibility of representing the
chemical behavior of elements under different levels of pressure by a small set
of parameters, especially whether and how the periodic table changes under high
pressure. &lt;br/&gt;The project integrates research and education through a set
of activities including establishing a new computational materials course and
lab; training and involving students in cutting edge materials research; and
organizing lunch forums and seminars. Furthermore, selected students in other
CSUN research groups will be invited to work as guest researchers and integrate
computational methods into their own research topics. The educational plan will
help increase the involvement of students who are underrepresented in STEM
areas. It includes outreach activities to provide students from underrepresented
groups with multiple opportunities to explore materials science research, STEM
education, and associated educational and professional
pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.