* 1848344
* CAREER: Modulation of the Interlayer Coupling in Heterostructures based on Two-Dimensional Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Marcelo Kuroda, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 536,787.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; This CAREER award supports
computational and theoretical research and education on materials which are
composed of stacked two-dimensional layers and exhibit novel properties and
phenomena. Each layer consists of few-atom-thick crystals, which are
particularly interesting due to the differences between their in-plane and out-
of-plane properties, and the capability to stack them. These properties can be
tuned through external mechanical, electrical, or magnetic fields. Theoretical
descriptions of the properties of these materials do not include atomic-scale
details; this makes it difficult to identify underlying principles to control
their behavior and to devise corresponding control mechanisms. Elucidating the
interplay among weak interactions, structure, and function in these materials
called layered heterostructures is key to the discovery of novel physical
phenomena. The PI will use computational methods to study these materials with
the aim to help accelerate the deployment of functional high-performance
materials and energy-efficient platforms that can revolutionize electronic and
sensing device technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Inspired by recent
experiments demonstrating the modulation of electron tunneling in
heterostructures based on two-dimensional materials, the PI will combine
theoretical models and state-of-the-art computation to describe novel physical
phenomena emerging in these systems. In particular, this project is aimed to
investigate how interlayer coupling can be tuned by using external fields in
two-dimensional materials. Understanding the quantitative relationship between
interlayer coupling and the atomistic details of these material systems will
enable a data-driven search for other complex structures where key properties
are enhanced, and guide design and experimental realization of new materials
with promising properties. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research will be coupled
to education and outreach activities to be carried out at Auburn University and
in the Southeastern US region. The PI will create a webinar series on various
areas of physics targeting broad undergraduate student audiences in universities
and colleges throughout the Southeastern US region. In these webinars, faculty
from different institutions will discuss current directions of their research
areas and disseminate potential opportunities for graduate studies or research
experiences. The PI and his group will be actively involved in two existing and
successful outreach programs at Auburn University for middle and high school
students: The Summer Science Institute and the Semiconductor Day. The PI will
develop student-centered course curricula pertaining to novel physics emerging
at the nanoscale and electronic structure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This CAREER award supports computational and
theoretical research and education on multilayer heterostructures formed with
two-dimensional materials. This family of materials consists of few-atom-thick
crystals, which are particularly attractive due to their highly anisotropic
properties and the capability to stack them without restrictions found in bulk
systems. The strength of the interlayer coupling in these systems is comparable
to energy scales induced through external electric, magnetic, and mechanical
fields. So, these complex heterostructures offer the possibility of
unprecedented modulation of the interlayer coupling with consequences for their
properties. Theoretical descriptions of these interactions have so far relied on
phenomenological lumped models that do not include atomistic details or quantum
mechanical effects which makes it challenging to identify underlying principles
and devise mechanisms to control their functionalities. Elucidating the
interplay among weak interactions, structure, and function in these
heterostructures is key to fully exploit their potential and expand the
repertoire of functional materials and a goal of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The research will combine theoretical models,
first principles calculations, and large-scale computation to describe the weak
interactions in heterostructures based on two-dimensional materials including
atomistic details and quantum mechanical effects. First, the PI and his team
will investigate modulation of the interlayer coupling via external electric,
magnetic, and mechanical fields in two-dimensional materials and their alloys.
Next, the PI will use state-of-the-art high-throughput computations to enable a
data-driven search of heterostructures formed with different two-dimensional
materials that exhibit enhanced properties of particular interest. The result
will serve as a guide to experimental design. This integrated theoretical-
computational approach to the characterization of complex heterostructures may
translate into the discovery of novel physical phenomena. In addition, it may
help to accelerate the deployment of functional high-performance materials and
energy-efficient device structures that can revolutionize electronic device and
sensor technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This research will be coupled to
education and outreach activities to be carried out at Auburn University and in
the Southeastern US region. The PI will create a webinar series on various areas
of physics targeting broad undergraduate student audiences in universities and
colleges throughout the Southeastern US region. In these webinars, faculty from
different institutions will discuss current directions of their research areas
and disseminate potential opportunities for graduate studies or research
experiences. The PI and his group will be actively involved in two existing and
successful outreach programs at Auburn University for middle and high school
students: The Summer Science Institute and the Semiconductor Day. The PI will
develop student-centered course curricula pertaining to novel physics emerging
at the nanoscale and electronic structure. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research through the Condensed
Matter and Materials Research Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.