* 1848393
* CAREER: Assessing the Connection Between Ecological and Environmental Collapse During the Pliensbachian-Toarcian Carbon-cycle Perturbation in Morocco
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Rowan Martindale, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 525,026.00

There are concerns about the declining health of ocean ecosystems today, and
similar events in the past can provide information about how our current
ecosystems might survive. One such event occurred during the Early Jurassic
about 183 million years ago when reefs experienced major extinctions during
periods of warm, low-oxygen, acidic oceans. This Early Jurassic event is
recorded in great detail in the Moroccan High Atlas Mountains, and research
there is establishing (1) when ecosystems disappeared; (2) which organisms
survived (and which did not), and (3) what environmental changes led to
ecosystem collapse. To share this work with the public, a board game is being
designed to educate players about Jurassic reefs, evolution, and extinction in
the face of extreme environmental change. This game is integrated into middle
school, high school, and college-level educational modules; it can also be
enjoyed by the general public and will be made available in multiple languages,
thus enhancing science literacy, both locally and
internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research questions being
addressed are: (1) When precisely does ecosystem collapse occur in the Early
Jurassic and was it synchronous across ecosystem types (i.e., reefs versus
level-bottom communities)? (2) What kill mechanism(s) (e.g., anoxia,
acidification) caused biotic collapse and are they linked to large igneous
province emplacement? (3) What were the timing and tempo of recovery for marine
communities? These issues will be answered through field-based,
interdisciplinary research in the Moroccan High Atlas. Quantitative
paleoecological and sedimentological surveys are being combined with a suite of
geochemical data (e.g., proxies for temperature, volcanism, and water oxygen
levels) to understand the causes, timing, and consequences of biotic collapse in
the Early Jurassic. This integrated, multi-disciplinary synthesis is informing
paleontologists, ecologists, and climate scientists about the conditions that
allowed certain ecosystems to survive a major global catastrophe. The
educational efficacy of the board game is assessed through beta trials in local
schools and universities with self-reported surveys of enjoyment and learning
outcomes from both students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.