* 1848954
* Life-history and behavioral consequences of competition between solitary and pair-bonded primate conspecifics
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2023
* Adalgisa Caccone, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2023
* USD 457,000.00

The ability to establish, develop, and maintain social relationships is
important in many species, including humans. There are positive effects of
social bonds on health, mortality, and reproduction. In this project, the
researchers will examine behavioral, demographic and genetic factors that may
contribute to the ability of an individual to establish successful social
relationships. Focusing on a non-human primate model in which both father and
mother provide care to their young, the researchers will study interactions
between reproducing pair-bonded adults and solitary non-reproducing ones. This
research will contribute to a better understanding of social relationships,
including mating and parenting relationships, in pair-living, monogamous groups.
The team will train nine undergraduate students, two Ph.D. students and one
postdoctoral researcher from groups underrepresented in STEM fields.
International collaborations with researchers in Argentina will be strengthened,
and the investigators will expand efforts to foster the development of the
biological anthropology discipline in Latin America. At the national level,
outreach activities will include working with programs involving
underrepresented minority high-school and undergraduate students in research
(STARS program at the Yale Peabody Museum) and creating a public series of
presentations based on their work for topics regularly covered in animal
behavior and biological anthropology courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project occurs within the Owl Monkey Project of Argentina, an
international research program to advance knowledge and theory about the
evolution of pair-bonding, monogamy, and paternal care. In this new study, a
team of researchers, undergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs will
collect demographic and genetic data from individuals in 60 groups of owl
monkeys. The investigators will study solitary individuals who have left their
natal group but have not yet pair-bonded, as well as pair-bonded adults. The
solitary individuals need to enter a group to reproduce, which generates intense
competition between solitary and pair-bonded adults. Data collected as part of
this project will be used to evaluate how competition between solitary floaters
and pair-bonded adults influences infant development and survival, natal
dispersal patterns, pair-bond formation and stability, and mating patterns. In
addition, because this primate species shows very little physical difference
between males and females, but intense competition in both sexes, these data
will be valuable for understanding the evolution of sex-specific morphologies
and behaviors. The project will therefore make theoretical and empirical
contributions to a number of concepts that are central to biological
anthropology and evolutionary biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.