* 1848930
* Cognitive and motor factors in vocal imitation
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Peter Pfordresher, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2022
* USD 256,750.00

The ability to imitate the actions of others plays a critical role in motor
learning throughout life. In many cases, imitation can rely on visual
observations of an expert's actions, as when a child learns to use a spoon.
Imitation with the voice, used when learning to produce the sounds of an
unfamiliar language or when learning to sing a song, poses a different problem
because one cannot see many of the movements that are involved. Indeed, many
people find vocal imitation difficult. However, because the mechanisms
underlying this ability are poorly understood, instructors have few resources
with which to help such individuals. The research program focuses on vocal
imitation of pitch, a feature that is central to both music and speech
production. The hypothesis guiding these experiments is that formation of a
mental image of the to-be-achieved goal mediates and stimulates neural
associations between auditory and motor networks that allow the actual
production to be accurate. By contrast, a less skilled speaker or singer will
not have formed as strong auditory-motor
associations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three studies will examine participants
imitating pitch patterns associated with song or speech. Spoken pitch samples
will be based on English, where pitch is mostly used to convey emphasis, and
Mandarin, where pitch is associated with word meanings. Participants in this
research will include singers and non-singers, as well as individuals who speak
Mandarin and those who do not. Planned studies will 1) assess basic cognitive
processes (mental imagery, working memory, and perception) that contribute to
imitation accuracy; 2) use electromyography to address whether auditory mental
images are associated with sub-vocal muscle movements; and 3) explore the role
that specific learning experience has on individuals' capacity to imitate.
Results from these studies will be used to improve instruction for learning to
speak a tone language and for singing. More effective instructional techniques
could enhance the capacity and experience of those learning to speak and
sing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.