* 1848655
* Net.Create: Using Network Analysis to Support Digital Humanities in Large History Classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Cindy Hmelo-Silver, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,661.00

This is an EAGER award to use Network Analysis to Support Digital Humanities
Learning in Large History Classrooms. It is an innovative approach to network
analysis that brings simultaneous multi-user predictive network data entry and
live visualization into university history classrooms to support pedagogy and
learning. The network tool is called Net.Create and it will provide an easy-to
use interface and curricular materials that are designed from the ground up to
be successfully implemented in a lecture classroom. Net.Create supports the
collaborative generation of data as a method of interpreting evidence from
multiple historical texts and then using network analysis to understand the
complexity of historical interactions. Net.Create will also give practical
guidance for how instructors in a variety of disciplines with similar complex
interactions can adapt network visualization and analysis skills, typically the
focus of STEM disciplines, to support students as they engage with humanities
and social science learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Network analysis is an
increasingly popular and powerful computational tool for the analysis of large
data sets. Digital historians have used these tools to represent and analyze
historical contexts because they support scholars in looking at a broad range of
connections between people, places, and events. While humanities pedagogues are
optimistic that these capabilities also provide unique opportunities for
supporting students in learning history, available tools do not support easy
integration into humanities classrooms, and there is not yet empirical or
theoretical support for how this might be accomplished effectively. As part of
this integration, Net.Create aims to support novice history learners in
recognizing how historical practices are grounded in argumentation rather than
in single authoritative accounts by scaffolding students in creating and
refining visualizations of historical corpora, allowing them to see these rich
contexts, and then challenging them to develop and defend historical argument
using these visualizations. Analysis will explore how the Net.Create tool and
curricular activities contribute to students' historical practices and to
student understanding of network analysis approaches, and whether these network-
analysis practices result in new historical learning, retention, and
understanding. The design of Net.Create is intended to support students in a
wide range of contexts in engaging in challenging historical practices, and in
appreciating how these practices are grounded in constructing arguments using
evidence from the past. These approaches generalize beyond the 200 students of
this initial pilot to students across the country via freely available tools,
and across disciplines through an easy customization process. Net.Create and the
associated curriculum also provide a unique opportunity to teach students to use
humanities classrooms to learn cutting-edge digital approaches to scholarship
which can apply across disciplinary boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.