* 1848842
* Investigating the Impact of Engineering Graduate Student Financial Literacy on URP Entering and Staying in the Engineering Workforce.
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Luis Vazquez, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 06/30/2022
* USD 200,746.00

Student loan debt is frequently discussed as a creating a financial burden to
underrepresented minority students (URM) leading to the lack of completing
degrees at the undergraduate and graduate levels in engineering. This research
project investigates a framework that describes students? perceptions about
financial options for graduate school and how these options impact decisions to
enter graduate school and the engineering workforce. The focus of this project
is to leverage relationships with select Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCU), Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSI) and Predominately White
Institutions (PWI) in the Midwest that were established from the implementation
of an earlier graduate recruitment program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data
collected from students of the participating universities includes decisions
related to borrowing practices of student loans, accumulation of debt, decisions
that impact career decisions related to debt, along with investigating students?
perceptions and knowledge of financial options available related to their future
as engineering graduate students. In addition, the researchers will investigate
students, perceptions, knowledge and usage of financial options taken while they
are an engineering graduate student and how these choices impact their decisions
during graduate school. A mixed methods approach will be employed using
quantitative and qualitative data to explore these issues from various
perspectives. The expected outcomes from the analysis and the methods that are
most effective at increasing the recruitment, retention and graduation of
underrepresented minorities students will be disseminated through workshops and
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.