* 1848128
* CAREER: High temperature strengthening via solute-enhanced stacking faults in structural alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Michael Titus, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 01/31/2024
* USD 546,853.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Superalloys, which are
comprised of nickel with complex mixtures of other metals, are an important
class of metallic high temperature structural materials used in gas turbine
engines for transportation, defense, and energy generation applications. The
high temperature strength of these superalloys has recently been observed to be
controlled by intricate atomistic-level processes that are not well understood
due to the nature of the superalloy chemistry. The basic research enabled by
this CAREER award will uncover the fundamental, atomistic-level processes
governing high temperature strength in model metallic materials. Computational
methods and theory will be developed to provide predictive capability of these
atomistic processes, and advanced characterization methods will verify those
predictions. This research will enable higher strength superalloys, which could
increase turbine engine efficiencies and power while decreasing pollution
emissions. The fundamental insights garnered from this program will be
applicable to a wide range of ceramic, metallic, and semiconductor materials
used across numerous industries and could enable new technologies. Outreach
efforts as part of this program will include mentoring of local High School
students and materials engineering-related learning module development and
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite knowledge of solute segregation to stacking
faults in crystalline materials, this phenomenon has yet to be utilized as a
strengthening mechanism in most structural alloy materials. Recent works in the
literature and by the PI have suggested that complex dislocation interactions
and minute composition differences in Ni-based superalloys control the solute
segregation behavior at stacking faults, and that this segregation behavior can
be utilized to increase the high temperature creep strength in Ni-based
superalloys. However, due to the complex compositions in advanced superalloys
the driving forces governing solute segregation are not well understood. The
basic research supported by this CAREER award seeks to uncover the fundamental
thermodynamic driving forces for solute segregation to stacking faults in simple
alloy compositions. The objective of this work is then to predict and quantify
solute segregation at stacking faults during high temperature deformation in Ni-
based superalloy compositions in order to utilize Suzuki segregation to further
strengthen this important class of structural
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.