* 1848089
* CAREER: Physics Implications of the String Landscape via Formal Theory and Data Science
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* James Halverson, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 07/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER award funds the research and education/outreach activities of
Professor James Halverson at Northeastern University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;String theory is the leading candidate for a theory of
physics at the smallest length scales. It describes the fundamental building
blocks of the universe, including the elementary particles whose interactions
are measured at the Large Hadron Collider, and it also describes the sources of
energy that drive the evolution of the cosmos. In this way string theory is
capable of connecting particle physics and cosmology. The research funded by
this award focuses on the implications of string theory for these two
disciplines. There are two central challenges. First, certain aspects of string
theory proper still remain to be understood. In particular, in collaboration
with mathematicians, Halverson will study the regime in which strings interact
strongly. An improved understanding of this regime is necessary for a complete
understanding of string interactions. Second, string theory predicts a vast
array of possible laws of physics --- an array known as the string landscape ---
prompting the question of how the laws we observe are realized in nature and
whether their realization leads to new predictions for experiments. From a
practical point of view, however, the landscape can be viewed as an enormous
dataset. As part of this project, Halverson, in collaboration with computer
scientists, will therefore utilize techniques from data science and machine
learning to study the landscape. Research in this area advances the national
interest by promoting the progress of science in one of its most fundamental
directions: the discovery and understanding of physical law. Halverson's
research will also have significant broader impacts by enabling and engaging new
communities of researchers. These include professionals in industry, high-school
students, and the internet data-science community. Among Halverson's activities,
a lecture series will be developed for and delivered to members of these
communities in order to give them the essential background information for
carrying out research at the interface of data science and string theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, Halverson will carry out formal work at
strong coupling in string theory. He will study string junctions in F-theory on
singular spaces, aspects of non-Higgsable clusters, and G2 compactifications of
M-theory. He will also study physical problems in the string landscape using
techniques from data science, including supervised learning, reinforcement
learning, and generative adversarial networks. The interplay between
computational complexity and the use of these techniques in physical problems
will be addressed. Halverson will also study the particle physics and
cosmological implications of the low-energy degrees of freedom that arise
regularly in the landscape, including those associated with large dark gauge
sectors and the string axiverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.