* 1848898
* CHS:Eager:Aiding Reasoning about Correlation and Causation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2022
* Francesco Cafaro, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 03/31/2022
* USD 299,879.00

People are increasingly exposed to data and datasets in everyday life, in
domains from health and science to news and policy. This raises important
questions about how to help non-specialists make sense of those data, in
particular, around understanding how to think about correlation and causation.
These concepts can be slippery; confounding correlation with causation may lead
people to assume causality when there is none, but correlations do often provide
precious hints to causation. This project will investigate how theories of
cognition that emphasize the relationship between thinking and physical action
can be used to design full-body and tangible ways to interact with data-based
museum installations that prime people to think in ways that improve their
understanding of causation and correlation. The goal is to develop bridges
between theories of embodied cognition, the design of data visualizations, and
long-term learning effects about science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics concepts discussed in the installations. The project will be
deployed in real contexts, having direct potential impacts on visitors'
understanding, and will be used to inform educational curricula in ubiquitous
computing and design for informal learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
organized in four phases that will be conducted at Discovery Place, a science
museum in Charlotte, NC. In part one, the team will design visualizations of
geo-referenced datasets on a wall-size projected screen. Using a semi-
experimental design, groups of visitors will interact with one of several
variations of the installation, including full-body and tangible interaction
styles based on different physical metaphors for correlation as well as a
tablet-based control condition. In part two, the team will experiment with
different styles of data visualization (e.g., line charts or heat maps), and in
part three visitors will be asked personalize the dataset on display; these
extensions are necessary to assess the generalizability of the results from
phase one to different data presentations and domains. Part four addresses
transferability of learning across time and to other contexts, following up with
museum visitors weeks or months after their visit and asking them to evaluate
the likely correctness of data-based claims about correlation and causation in
science articles in domains such as health remedies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.