* 1848162
* CAREER: Jet Measurements and a Novel Hadronic Calorimeter at the Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Megan Connors, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 06/30/2024
* USD 834,881.00

This award supports the PI and her research group in investigations to
understand the strong nuclear force and to engage with middle and high school
students in the Atlanta area to broaden their understanding of nuclear physics.
Quarks and gluons are the most fundamental building blocks of normal matter.
However, due to the nuclear strong force, they cannot be observed individually
and are confined within particles like protons and neutrons in the nucleus.
Under extreme temperatures and densities, a new state of matter known as the
quark-gluon plasma (QGP) can be formed. The QGP is an excellent test bed for the
theory of the strong force. The Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) is one of
two facilities world-wide capable of creating the QGP. In addition to producing
the QGP, heavy ion collisions produce energetic quarks and gluons that interact
with the QGP and then produce a spray of particles called a "jet" that can be
measured with detectors. While previous RHIC experiments have shown evidence of
jet energy loss, a new experiment called sPHENIX will enable precise
measurements of fully reconstructed jets. sPHENIX includes a special detector,
the first central hadronic calorimeter (HCal) at RHIC, which is essential for
measuring the energy of these jets. In addition to jet related analyses, this
award includes testing HCal components with cosmic rays before assembly and
development of a calibration procedure for this novel
detector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with the sPHENIX HCal will provide
opportunities for the diverse population of undergraduates at GSU to gain
experience in research and hardware. The undergraduate and graduate students
involved in this project will be trained to work in big data analysis, network
within large collaborations and develop useful hardware skills that are all
important for preparing the next generation in a variety of STEM fields. Using
components similar to those for the sPHENIX HCal, GSU students will work with
Atlanta area middle and high school students to measure cosmic rays.
Participation of the GSU Women in Physics student organization, for which the PI
is the advisor, allows the middle and high school students to engage in science
and work with a diverse group of scientists at a critical time when students are
choosing career paths and is intended to help encourage a diverse population to
pursue STEM careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The sPHENIX hadronic calorimeter has
a novel tilted plate design, which includes scintillator tiles embedded between
steel plates. This award includes the development of a calibration procedure for
this novel detector, which will be essential for successful measurements.
Testing the scintillator tiles with cosmic rays will provide baseline
calibration information and experience from the beam test prototype will be
useful in developing the calibration procedure, which ultimately may include
using photon tagged jets in p+p collisions to set the jet energy scale. Photon
tagged jets are also important probes of the QGP. Since the photon is unmodified
by the QGP, the photon's energy provides access to the initial parton energy of
the opposing jet and therefore access to how much energy was lost. In parallel
to sPHENIX preparations, this project will make the most precise photon tagged
correlation measurements achievable from the 16 years of PHENIX data. These
correlation measurements access the transport coefficient, q-hat, which measures
the energy loss of partons per unit pathlength. Jet structure measurements give
further insight to the fragmentation and energy loss of the partons in the
medium. sPHENIX will enable new jet observables at RHIC that will advance our
understanding of energy loss mechanisms in the QGP and thereby further our
understanding of QCD under extreme conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.