* 1848966
* EAGER: New Algorithms for Feature-Efficient Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Lev Reyzin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 09/30/2021
* USD 100,000.00

The main goal of this exploratory research project is to invent theoretically
sound and practical machine-learning algorithms designed to perform well under
various limitations involving access to data features during deployment. This
tackles a major difficulty encountered in many machine-learning applications: in
running an algorithm, accessing features of the data can be time consuming or
costly. For example, in medical diagnosis, features of patients may correspond
to results of medical tests, which can take significant time to run, carry
enormous cost, and even impose heath risks. Current machine-learning techniques
are ill-equipped to tackle such impediments. This project involves approaches
that incorporate feature-efficient optimization into the training phase of
machine-learning algorithms and also the creation of new frameworks for reducing
both error rates and costs associated with acquiring features. Successful
developments in feature-efficient algorithms create an important advance for
application areas ranging from medical diagnosis to query-answering on the World
Wide Web. Additional facets of this project include incorporating its research
findings into graduate courses and broadening participation in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates new models for jointly
optimizing feature costs, prediction time, and classification error rates, to
create feature-efficient predictors. Techniques for this exploratory project
include solving original optimization problems, creating novel machine-learning
reductions, and analyzing the problem via statistical query oracles. Another
aspect of this work is to tackle a budgeted learning formalization by moving the
feature-cost optimization into the training phase of budgeted boosting
classifiers and support vector machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.