* 1848145
* CAREER: A comparative study of two trilobite diversification events to advance understanding of early animal evolution.
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Melanie Hopkins, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 617,419.00

Almost all major groups of living animals first appeared in the fossil record
around the same time in the geologic past. This was a time period of high
diversification and major shifts in the global ecosystem. The trilobite
arthropods were a major component of these early marine ecosystems and are well
preserved in the fossil record, providing an excellent system for studying the
processes that drove diversification during this time period. Specifically, this
project will use the trilobite fossil record to test long-standing hypotheses
about the relative importance of development and ecology in determining
diversification rates during one of the most critical times periods in the
evolution of animals on Earth. This project also advances Earth Science training
for middle and high school students and teachers from high-needs schools across
New York State. This initiative will provide innovative field experiences for
teachers, support in the development of teaching collections and interactive
classroom activities, and immersive museum visits for teachers and their
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will compare two major
diversification events in the Cambrian and Ordovician in order to examine
diversification rates and to understand the roles of development and ecology in
driving the evolution of trilobites. The PI and collaborators will leverage new
analytical approaches for identifying important evolutionary traits and use
cutting-edge methods for building time-scaled trees that incorporate
uncertainty. A major outcome of the project will be a time-scaled, trilobite
evolutionary tree based on a data-rich trait matrix, which also will provide a
future roadmap for investigating a myriad of questions about the role of
biogeography, trends, and growth patterns in trait evolution and
diversification. In addition, the project will bring together an international
group of trilobite experts to develop common traits and nomenclature for
studying trilobite groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.