* 1848463
* CAREER: Chiral Catalysts for Enantioselective Photoredox-Catalyzed Carbon-Carbon Bond-Forming Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Ming-Yu Ngai, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 739,980.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the NSF Chemistry
Division, Professor Ming-Yu Ngai of the Department of Chemistry at Stony Brook
University develops new and efficient photochemical reactions to prepare chiral
organic molecules. Chiral molecules exist in specific configurations known as
enantiomers. Each configuration has the same atoms, but arranged spatial in a
different order, this results in different chemical properties. The goal of this
project is to design and optimize novel catalysts to yield specific enantiomers.
It is often important to select one specific enantiomer because the other is
ineffective or harmful. New synthetic methods developed in this research may
have applications in the syntheses of pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and
materials chemistry. An integral part of this program is to recruit and prepare
a diverse STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) workforce to
advance the frontiers of science. This project provides students with
opportunities for industrial training through collaboration with a major
pharmaceutical company. Professor Ngai establishes a hands-on synthetic module
to introduce organic synthesis and molecular photochemistry to high school
students and a summer industrial internship program to better prepare graduate
students for future careers in advanced chemical
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over half of all top-selling drugs are
marketed as single enantiomers; often because the other enantiomer is
ineffective or harmful. As a consequence, catalytic reactions that can readily
increase the structural complexity of molecules while maintaining control of the
stereochemistry of the newly formed stereocenters are of importance in drug
discovery and development. Visible-light photoredox catalysis has emerged as a
potentially powerful tool in organic synthesis. This catalysis has changed the
way in which chemists approach some difficult synthetic problems. Precise
stereocontrol of photocatalytic reactions remains a significant challenge. This
research focuses on the design and development of chiral Lewis acid catalysts
which enable stereoselective, visible-light mediated photoredox catalysis. These
new catalysts are applied to enantioselective cross-coupling reactions of
carbonyl and iminyl derivatives with alkenes. This project generates a library
of novel tridentate chiral ligands and chiral catalysts that guide the
development of asymmetric chemical transformations. The hands-on organic
synthesis activities developed by Professor Ngai enrich the educational
experience of high school students and encourage them to pursue advanced degrees
in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) education. These
activities also provide training opportunities to pre-service chemistry teachers
for their professional development. An established industrial collaboration and
a summer internship program for graduate students at Boehringer Ingelheim
further support career development in advanced chemical
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.