* 1848380
* CAREER: Experimental Investigation of Viscous Anisotropy of Foliated Rocks: Implications to the Strength of the Mid to Lower Continental Crust
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2025
* Caleb Holyoke, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 03/31/2025
* USD 530,231.00

Earthquake aftershocks in the shallow upper crust are thought to be controlled
in part by the viscosity of the underlying deep crust or mantle. Models of how
the viscosity of the lower crust affects this portion of the seismic cycle are
based on rocks with simplistic homogeneous viscosities. However, most natural
rocks have heterogeneities due to alignments of minerals called foliations,
which will affect the mechanical behavior of these rocks. The principal
investigator and students are determining how the viscosity of common foliated
rocks is affected by the orientation of these foliations relative to the
direction of loading. They are performing laboratory experiments at conditions
that simulate deformation in the mid to lower crust on two different foliated
rocks with the foliation in a variety of orientations. The results of these
experiments will be incorporated into a model that evaluates how foliations
affect the viscosity of rocks relative to homogeneous rocks, which will benefit
society by: 1) improving our understanding of the response of the lower crust to
loading during the seismic cycle, 2) supporting research experiences of several
graduate students and several undergraduate students, and 3) supporting Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) outreach activities to
underprivileged students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the effects of
foliation orientation, interconnectivity and preexisting lattice preferred
orientations on viscous anisotropy is critical in order to accurately model the
rheology of the lower crust and the earthquake cycle. In this project the
principal investigator and students will: 1) determine if micaceous foliation
orientation causes viscous anisotropy of lower crustal rocks, 2) determine how
interconnectivity of the micaceous foliation affects the degree of viscous
anisotropy of lower crustal rocks, and 3) determine how a preexisting lattice
preferred orientation (LPO) affects viscous anisotropy of these rocks. These
researchers will perform both axial compression and shear deformation
experiments with a fine-grained biotite + quartz + plagioclase gneiss or a
micaceous quartzite with the foliations and preexisting lattice preferred
orientations in a range of orientations relative to the compression direction.
The samples from these experiments will be analyzed using the petrographic
microscope, Scanning Electron Microscopy/ Electron backscatter diffraction
(SEM/EBSD) to characterize grain-scale microstructures and lattice preferred
orientations, Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) to determine water
contents and Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) to determine deformation
mechanisms. Portions of this study will be performed in the Advanced Structural
Geology course at the University of Akron and thin sections from experimental
samples will be used in the laboratory section of the Structural Geology course
at the University of Akron. The expected results will provide significant sets
of microstructural and mechanical data which can be applied to modeling the
viscous anisotropy of the lower crust. The principal investigator and students
will also develop new experimental techniques for high pressure experiments on
crustal rocks and a new, inexpensive apparatus for STEM outreach activities
about earthquake mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.