* 1848316
* CAREER: Probing Non-Equilibrium Dynamics with Ultracold Atoms in Optical, Phononic, and Photonic Lattices
* MPS,PHY
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Chen-Lung Hung, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 02/29/2024
* USD 550,000.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Understanding non-equilibrium dynamics in
quantum systems has been a major focus in quantum physics and materials
research. Applications range from manipulating thermal and electronic transport
in solids to controlling information propagation in a quantum network that
behaves like an interacting quantum system. Non-equilibrium dynamics is however
not very well-understood in certain quantum materials, especially for those with
strong interactions between constituents. To gain precise knowledge on the
quantum dynamics of interest, a quantum material with precise local probes and
control is highly desired. This CAREER award supports an experimental research
and education program to assemble a designer quantum material for the
exploration of elusive non-equilibrium quantum dynamics. The proposed material
consists of an array of cold neutral atoms, each cooled to its quantum
mechanical ground state, and controlled by novel potentials formed by optical,
phononic and nanophotonic lattices to mimic various types of quantum materials.
The project aims at inducing and probing a variety of quantum dynamical
phenomena not previously realized. Success in this project will lead to
advancement in controlling atomic quantum materials and in deeper understanding
of quantum many-body and statistical physics. Due to broad experimental
techniques involved in this research program, the project will provide solid
research training for both graduate and undergraduate students. Furthermore, in
collaboration with the Purdue Physics and Astronomy Outreach office, the project
will initiate a secondary-grade outreach program aimed at improving the learning
capital and STEM career orientation of underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports an experimental research and education program to explore non-
equilibrium dynamics in an atomic quantum gas using a state-of-the-art cold atom
toolbox for optical, phononic, and nanophotonic lattice engineering. One thrust
of this CAREER project is probing quantum critical dynamics of an atomic quantum
gas in an optical lattice. In particular, the PI will employ a new experimental
scheme to access a superfluid-to-Mott insulator quantum critical point, enabling
various ways to explore critical thermodynamics and transport problems that have
remained elusive to date. Furthermore, the PI will explore quasiparticle control
to engineer a phononic band gap crystal in a superfluid quantum gas that can
inhibit phonon transport, just as electronic band gaps do to electrons in solid
state crystals. It can be engineered to manipulate thermal and entropy transport
in a superfluid sample. The PI will perform dynamical control of the phononic
crystals, therefore allowing for the exploration of phononic analogues of
electrodynamics phenomena. For a long-term goal of this CAREER project on
probing novel quantum dynamics, the PI will aim at further integrating ultracold
atoms with nanophotonic lattices to form a designer hybrid material, where the
atom-surface Casimir-Polder interaction provides a deep subwavelength lattice
potential for entering new regimes of quantum dynamics. Success in this project
will advance our knowledge in understanding quantum critical dynamics, provide
valuable insights to quantum transport in phononic bandgap materials, and
potentially lead to the observation of unexpected new quantum phenomena with a
designer hybrid quantum material. The broad experimental techniques involved in
this research program will provide solid research training for both graduate and
undergraduate students. Furthermore, in collaboration with the Purdue Physics
and Astronomy Outreach office, the project will initiate a secondary-grade
outreach program, aimed at improving the learning capital and STEM career
orientation of underrepresented minority students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.