* 1848278
* CAREER: Modulation Nanospectroscopy for Characterization of Local Electronic Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/2019,12/31/2023
* Joanna Atkin, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 12/31/2023
* USD 620,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor Joanna Atkin and her group at the University of North
Carolina - Chapel Hill are devising tools that can better characterize the
performance of semiconducting devices. These tools probe the semiconductor's
structure and electronic properties on the atomic and molecular (nanometer)
length scale. In particular, the researchers seek to understand how nanoscale
crystal structure and the deliberate or inadvertent incorporation of impurities
impact electronic function and device performance. Semiconductors are used as
the building blocks of logic gates, which are fundamental in the design of
digital circuits for computer microprocessors. Graduate, undergraduate, and high
school students contribute to this interdisciplinary research, gaining
experience in building instrumentation, optical spectroscopy, nanofabrication,
and computational modeling. The group partners with the Morehead Planetarium and
Science Center to develop demonstrations illustrating optical, quantum
mechanical, and nanotechnological concepts, with an aim of effectively
communicating the scientific underpinnings of this research to the general
public. Dr. Atkin's research group also partners with existing outreach programs
on campus that target underserved populations, to engage high schoolers in
scientific research and provide mentorship and resources for pursuing a STEM
career. Finally, a website and mentoring network is established to bring
together researchers who experience health and disability challenges to improve
diversity and inclusion in STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Optical techniques are
uniquely sensitive to electronic and structural parameters, but are inherently
diffraction-limited and therefore generally probe averaged behavior for
materials that are heterogeneous in order, grain boundaries, and interfaces at
the nanoscale. The Atkin group is developing "modulation nanospectroscopy" - a
new sub-diffraction-limit technique for characterizing semiconducting materials
and devices. Specifically, they are combining atomic force microscopy-based
optical microscopy with field and optical modulation to reveal otherwise
inaccessible information about free and bound charge carrier excitations on 10
nm length scales. Both inorganic and organic test systems are being considered,
covering a range of transport regimes, in order to explore local structure-
conductivity relations. Quasiparticle excitations such as excitons and polarons
are being probed on their natural length scales, to explore non-equilibrium
properties over timescales from femtoseconds to seconds. The techniques can be
applied to understanding function in a wide variety of electronic and photonic
materials, from 2D heterostructure devices to hybrid organic-inorganic
photovoltaics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.