* 1848892
* EAGER: Co-Creating a Research Agenda to Evaluate University Ambassador Programs' Impact on Engineering Identity of K-12 Students
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Stacey Freeman, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 10/31/2020
* USD 299,812.00

A diverse workforce leads to more creative problem solving and is more socially
just. Though great strides have been made to improve diversity, engineering
remains predominantly white and male. Universities are attempting to increase
diversity by conducting engineering outreach. Specifically, university students
visit kindergarten through 12th grade classrooms and engage in discussions and
activities intended to motivate student interest in engineering. However, what
remains to be seen is if, and to what extent, these programs successfully
increase the likelihood that students from traditionally underrepresented
populations are pursuing engineering degrees and careers. This project seeks to
bring together a diverse spectrum of stakeholders involved in engineering
outreach such that a comprehensive, long-term research agenda can be developed.
Through this agenda, researchers and program administrators will ultimately
become better able to evaluate and assess whether programs effectively encourage
diverse populations to pursue engineering careers, as well as help programs
employ approaches that are more impactful.

The researchers seek to understand the long-term impact that ambassador programs
have on engineering pathways and whether these programs help traditionally
underserved students develop engineering identities. There is a need for
intentional and longitudinal research to determine whether ambassador programs
have real and lasting impact. Longitudinal studies are time and resource
intensive and, the variation that exists across ambassador programs make small-
scale studies only marginally useful. The engineering outreach community is
often underfunded for the scale of social change it seeks to accomplish and
conducting deep evaluation will allow for the better use of resources. Through
research, the most effective strategies can be pinpointed and used to develop
more effective outreach programming. Creating a unified research agenda that a
diverse spectrum of stakeholders buy into, while challenging, has numerous
benefits including: the development of an evaluation protocol that is used by
programs across the county; the creation of relationships between K-12 and
university personnel that results in longitudinal studies on engineering
identity; and the development of models for scalable, effective program
implementation.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.