* 1848428
* I-Corps: Microfluidics for Protein Crystallization and X-ray Diffraction
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Seth Fraden, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
pharmaceutical companies and life scientists with a cost effective and fast
approach for determining the high-resolution protein structure by X-ray
crystallography. Production of high-resolution structures of proteins is one the
main steps in structure-based drug design. Although cost reduction and
efficiency improvements are the important benefits of structure-based drug
design, the lack of generalized methods for high quality, fast and low-cost
crystal production is still a major struggle in this process. Microfluidics, is
a powerful liquid handling tool that reduces the amount of solution in a
screening experiment to nanoliters, have been introduced to the protein
crystallization market earlier. However, none of these approaches have
penetrated the market because of the high cost to performance ratio. Our
innovation is an x-ray transparent microfluidic chip for protein crystallization
which is less expensive, easier to operate and more performant in comparison to
the current market solutions. By commercializing this device and introducing it
to the market, pharmaceutical companies and life scientists will reduce the time
and money spent to determine the high-resolution structure of proteins from
x-ray diffraction, which is a current bottleneck in structure-based drug
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project introduces an inexpensive,
x-ray transparent microfluidic chip for protein crystallization. For many
medical and biological applications, such as pharmaceutical engineering, the
molecular structure of a protein is essential. The most accurate way to
determine protein structure is X-ray crystallography, a process that requires
the analysis of X-ray diffraction patterns of protein crystals. However, protein
crystallization remains challenging because each protein has its own phase
diagram, thus, many different conditions should be tried to find the optimal
conditions for protein crystallization. Our technology addresses four core
challenges in protein crystallization; it (1) screens chemical conditions for
protein crystal stability, (2) produces crystals using optimized processing
kinetics, (3) obtains structure with room temperature crystals, and (4) avoids
crystal handling by diffracting on chip. On-chip X-ray diffraction has been
demonstrated for our protein crystallization chips. Prototypes of our first
design have been made and have been tested for protein crystallization with one
specific solution. Our design is a liquid handling chip with multiple advantages
over current microfluidic chips. It is built from inexpensive bio-compatible
material via a rapid fabrication procedure and it can be altered as needed based
on the customer need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.