* 1848884
* Encephalization, Loading and Bone Formation along the Cranial Vault and Base: Mechanistic Analysis of Basicranial Flexion
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,06/30/2023
* Matthew Ravosa, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2023
* USD 500,282.00

Encephalization, the evolutionary expansion of relative brain size, is a
hallmark of Primates and most notable in the amazingly large human brain. While
it is evident that primate crania (skulls) have evolved to accommodate larger
brain sizes, the mechanistic underpinnings of these modifications are not fully
understood. In this project, the investigators will test long-held assumptions
about the mechanical role of brain growth on cranial morphology (shape). Using a
novel tissue engineering approach to simulate static tensile loads during brain
expansion, the osteogenic (bone producing) potential of calvarial, basicranial
and mandibular non-sutural bone cells will be examined in a murine model. The
research will advance knowledge about the developmental and cellular
underpinnings of cranial morphology, provide comparative mammalian data that
will inform studies in primate and hominin evolution, and potentially inform
clinical research in regenerative medicine. The project will foster
interdisciplinary approaches to research and education involving members of
under-represented groups in STEM. It will benefit a postdoctoral fellow,
graduate students and undergraduates as well as STEM teachers and students, all
of whom will participate in presentations and outreach at public and local
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its location at the interface of
neural and facial skulls, elevated flexion of the mammalian cranial base is
depicted as the mechanical consequence of an increasingly globular brain.
However, most experimental evidence indicates that calvarial bony tissues are
largely buffered against variation in mechanical stimuli. In contrast, the dura
mater is known to be affected by tensile forces during brain expansion and
induces growth of overlying sutural bone. Surprisingly, there is little evidence
about the extent to which neural forces and pro-osteogenic signaling by the dura
affect the development of non-sutural bone in the cranial base and vault. A
major goal of this project is to detail site-specific and age-related variation
in the osteogenic potential and mechanosensitivity of connective tissues in the
growing skull, using the responses of mandibular bone cells as a baseline to
evaluate calvarial and basicranial cells. The investigators will assess if bone
formation in the cranial vault and base is affected by pro-osteogenic signaling
in the underlying dura mater. This research is transformative in its integrative
perspective and novel use of tissue engineering methods. Experimental data on
how the dura mater modulates bone formation in the skull is key for
understanding important questions, including the adaptive nature of cranial
vault thickness and circumorbital form in primates. The presence of site-
specific variation in craniomandibular mechanosensitivity would also emphasize
that variation in intrinsic mechanisms of bone formation should be incorporated
into future work on hard-tissue adaptations in diverse mammals, including
cranial and limb elements with more marked bony responses. The project outcomes
will therefore contribute to both theoretical and analytical advances in
biological anthropology, organismal biology, mechanobiology and pathobiology.
This research is jointly supported by the NSF Biological Anthropology and the
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.