* 1848478
* CAREER: Precise Structural Control in Transformative Catalysts for Efficient Multielectron Carbon Dioxide Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Jonah Jurss, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 04/30/2024
* USD 563,972.00

Energy consumption is a critical factor in the economy and national security.
Global energy is largely obtained from burning nonrenewable fossil fuels that
release carbon dioxide (CO2) as the primary waste product. Successfully
recycling CO2 emissions back into energy-rich chemical compounds could produce
commodity chemicals and renewable fuels economically while reducing waste.
However, CO2 is hard to react and requires additional complexes (catalysts) to
assist in the conversion to other molecules. Despite considerable progress,
significant gaps remain in our understanding of the principles that connect
catalyst structure with catalyst performance. In this project, Dr. Jurss is
developing new catalysts to understand how to develop more efficient CO2
catalysts. Dr. Jurss is actively engaged in recruiting and mentoring
underrepresented undergraduates and Mississippi high school students through
hands-on research programs. These programs promote careers in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). Dr. Jurss and his students
contribute to a series of engaging newspaper articles in Lafayette County, MS to
increase public awareness and scientific literacy through the lens of renewable
energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from both the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) of NSF, Dr. Jurss (University of Mississippi)
develops molecular catalysts based on two strategies involving highly tunable
redox-active ligands and well-defined bimetallic catalysts, by which multiple
redox equivalents can be accumulated at modest potentials to facilitate the
efficient multielectron reduction of CO2. These complementary strategies center
on understanding how geometric and electronic structure dictate activity,
selectivity, and mechanism. In order to control catalyst structure, multidentate
ligand frameworks with limited flexibility are developed to achieve more
reactive geometries or explicit interactions between multiple metal active
sites. Dr. Jurss is analyzing these systems with electrochemical and
spectroscopic techniques, including UV-visible and infrared
spectroelectrochemistry, to establish structure-activity relationships, to
elucidate reaction mechanisms, and to validate design principles for catalyst
development. In parallel, Dr. Jurss is providing research opportunities in his
laboratory that aim to increase the involvement of underrepresented students in
STEM disciplines. These summer research experiences, along with a public
outreach activity in which Dr. Jurss is writing newspaper articles on emerging
energy technologies for The Oxford Eagle, support the broader impacts of the
project and highlight the role of scientists in addressing global energy
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.