* 1848454
* CAREER: Using electrostatic interactions to guide microstructure and mechanical properties in block polyelectrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Matthew Green, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2024
* USD 519,138.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyelectrolytes are polymeric
materials containing electrically charged chemical groups and have been
implemented in a number of important technologies. These include separations
membranes (e.g., gas or water purification), energy storage and harvesting
devices (e.g., Li-ion batteries, ion exchange membranes, or organic
photovoltaics), and materials for biomedical applications. The polymers utilized
in these applications require organization and assembly at the nanometer scale,
which is often difficult to predict and control in polyelectrolyte systems. This
limitation often stems from difficulties related to controlling polyelectrolyte
synthesis as well as inconsistencies in polymer characteristics that appear in
the literature. As a consequence, surveying the literature precludes an
empirical prediction of polyelectrolyte behavior. This CAREER project will
utilize a modular synthetic strategy to reproducibly control the amount and type
of charged groups within the polyelectrolyte, thus enabling correlations between
polymer characteristics and application-specific criteria, such as nanoscale
assembly features and mechanical properties. Additionally, educational materials
related to polymer science will be delivered to local K-12 teachers, who will
also be trained in integrating problem-based learning into their curricula.
Furthermore, this project will engage undergraduate and graduate students, and
highlight the importance and impact of polymer science to the surrounding public
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Establishing empirical structure-property design
rules for polyelectrolytes through a survey of the literature is impractical due
to the variations in synthetic platforms, molecular weight distributions, and
absolute molecular weights reported. Recent theoretical work has identified ion
entropy, ion solubility, and molecular-range electrostatic interactions as key
parameters that synergistically influence the morphology of block
polyelectrolytes. Therefore, this project will employ living anionic
polymerization to prepare a diblock tetrapolymer (i.e., two blocks, four
monomers) precursor with tunable molecular weight and narrow molecular weight
distributions. Subsequently, the precursor will undergo orthogonal post-
polymerization functionalization to controllably introduce various charge types
(e.g., combinations of sulfonate, ammonium, and triazolium ions) at various
charge densities. This approach enables experimental correlation of charge type,
charge density, and backbone composition to ion solvation, counterion entropy,
and electrostatic cohesion and ultimately to microphase separation and
rheological properties. Thus, the outcome of this work will demonstrate
strategies, in the form of empirical design rules that complement recent
theoretical outcomes, to design application-specific performance based on
counterion entropy, ion solvation, and long-range Coulombic interactions in
polyelectrolyte materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.