* 1848309
* CAREER: Development of 2D Materials with High Optical Sensitivity and Efficient Charge Transport Through Local Chemical Modification
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Jonathan Felts, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2024
* USD 401,754.00

Materials only a single atom thick, known as two-dimensional (2D) materials,
possess optical and electronic properties that rival many traditional materials.
Two key properties of these 2D materials - ability to absorb light and the
ability to move charge - are often competing physical properties, where
enhancement of one diminishes the other. This research activity seeks to develop
2D materials with both high optical absorptivity and high electrical
conductivity through nanometer-scale control of local surface chemistry. The
project investigates new chemical routes to functionalize 2D materials, and how
optically active regions interact with electronically active regions on the
surface of a single 2D sheet. Such functionality is critical for a wide range of
applications, including photodetectors, solar photovoltaics, and chemical
sensors. The project activities provide training to graduate and undergraduate
students in the research areas of electrochemistry, surface science, chemical
spectroscopy, and nanoscale transport phenomena. Additionally, the research
supports interactive laboratory activities for underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged secondary school students, as well development of open source book
chapters through the Open Textbook Library Initiative and the OAKTrust Digital
Repository.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project explores new chemical
pathways and techniques to improve both optical sensitivity and response time on
atomically thin sheets of graphene, molybdenum disulfide, and telluride
containing chalcogenides. Chemically altering the surface of 2D materials to
interact strongly with electromagnetic radiation without disrupting charge
transport within the material is currently a significant challenge. Here,
chemical functionalization of 2D materials with optically active organic dyes
and quantum dots is explored via multi-step electrochemical oxidation and
reduction reactions utilizing diazonium salts to create 2D materials possessing
strong interaction with visible and infrared light. Further, optical lithography
and tip-based nanolithography provide routes to integrate optically active
regions with regions of high electrical conductivity, such that charge states
optically excited in one region can efficiently couple to adjacent regions. The
synthesis efforts are complimented by a wide range of optical and electronic
measurement techniques, including nanoscale infrared microscopy, x-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy, and fluorescence microscopy in
concert with back-gated transistor measurements to investigate the effect of
local chemical composition on charge excitation and transport. The fundamental
knowledge gained in this study can be applied to impart unique optical, thermal,
and mechanical properties to a wide range of 2D materials without sacrificing
charge transport performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.