* 1848577
* CAREER: Coupling post-fire vegetation and volumetric sediment regimes in urban Mediterranean systems
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Alicia Kinoshita, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2024
* USD 571,796.00

Wildfires are increasing in size and extent across the western United States.
Human-ignited fires, drought, large fuel loads, and non-native vegetation have
made urban streams and rivers into avenues for fire movement. Very little is
known about these new urban fires and the impacts on local ecosystems. The goal
of this research is to understand and predict changes in vegetation, soil, and
stream processes that occur after fires. Areas adjacent to streams, called
riparian zones, are important in controlling the impacts of fires by regulating
the release of pollutants and the erosion of soil into streams. Yet these
riparian processes are poorly understood in urban stream corridors. Remote
sensing methods provide detailed images of the Earth's surface from satellites
and airplanes. Examining repeated images through time can allow researchers to
document changes in erosion and to relate those changes to differences in
riparian vegetation and stream conditions. The data collected from this project
can be incorporated into mathematical models to make predictions about erosion
and sediment following fires that can lead to poor water quality. The proposed
research will include educational and outreach activities with San Diego State
University and local community college students. Students from community
colleges in San Diego County will be invited to participate in this research and
will be encouraged to pursue higher education in science and engineering. This
work will also increase community education opportunities and interactions
through public seminars and outreach events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human-ignited fires, drought, large
fuel loads, and non-native vegetation have made urban streams and rivers into
corridors for fire movement. The increase in human interactions in fire-prone
areas can significantly alter hydrologic and sediment yield processes, which can
transport contaminants to urban waterways. This research will contribute new
fundamental knowledge on short- and long-term post-fire recovery processes in
urban Mediterranean stream systems. The goal of this work is to understand
coupled sediment and riparian zone interactions using a combination of field,
remote sensing, statistical, and modeling approaches to describe and predict
post-fire changes. Specific research objectives include: 1) establishing non-
linear spatial and temporal relations between vegetation patterns and sediment
volume within the upland and riparian zones after fire; 2) coupling the recovery
trajectory of in situ volumetric sedimentation and hydrologic response after
fires with satellite-based imagery of upland and riparian vegetation; and 3)
developing a mass balance model to predict sediment flux following fires due to
the evacuation of sediment stored behind vegetation. Light detection and ranging
will provide detailed images of the landscape, allowing documentation of the
storage and supply of sediment as a function of non-native and native vegetation
and hydrologic conditions. Satellite imagery will augment these relationships
and document interactions at multiple spatial and temporal resolutions. This
information will be incorporated into a mass balance model to predict sediment
contributions, which can be a source for degraded water quality following fires.
Integrated educational activities include student researchers from San Diego
State University and local community colleges, and outreach events to the public
and local water agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.