* 1848336
* CAREER: Quantum Dynamics and Topology in Low Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Roger Mong, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 498,931.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and education on condensed matter systems that exhibit quantum mechanical
behavior beyond the microscopic regime. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum mechanics
lies at the foundation of many existing and emerging technologies. For example,
computers, cell phones, and medical imaging devices, all have critical
components that operate on quantum technology. In fact, the General Conference
on Weights and Measures has recently adopted a standard of mass (i.e., the
kilogram) that is based on principles of quantum mechanics. This project aims to
develop and study a wide collection of quantum phenomena that may be used in the
next step of the quantum revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the world we
live in is governed by quantum mechanics at the fundamental level, most
macroscopic objects appear "classical" because quantum effects are often washed
out at large distances. The goal of this project is to study how quantum
behavior can survive beyond the microscopic regime. The PI and his team will
look for ways in which fundamental particles, such as electrons, can be bound
together similarly to how atoms form molecules. Conversely, the PI will also
seek ways in which electrons can fractionalize, i.e., behave collectively as if
they were split up into multiple particles. Crucial to this research is
understanding how particles interact with one another.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
critical component to the success of quantum technology is the widespread
literacy in quantum mechanics. Quantum concepts, notably superposition and
entanglement, lie at the heart of all device applications and yet are poorly
understood by students in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics
(STEM). The PI will develop and test self-guided tutorials that could be used to
complement standard undergraduate/graduate education in physics to include
quantum concepts. Once validated, these tutorials can be widely disseminated and
used in STEM education. Ultimately, this project seeks to promote awareness and
deeper understanding of quantum
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
on condensed matter systems that exhibit quantum mechanical behavior and
phenomenology beyond the microscopic regime. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the
world we live in is governed by quantum mechanics at the fundamental level, most
macroscopic objects appear "classical" because quantum effects are often washed
out at large distances. For example, although the origin of ferromagnetism is
quantum mechanical at the microscopic level, the phenomenology of magnets is
well described via classical electromagnetism. The focus of this research is the
study of effects that are macroscopically quantum, defying any effective
classical description. Examples thereof include fractionalization, deconfined
criticality, and many-body localization. The commonality shared by these effects
is that they involve quantum dynamics and/or topology within strongly-
interacting systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research combines both
analytical and numerical methods, to study quantum phenomena in a variety of
theoretical models and experimental settings. The activities and goals of this
proposal include: 1) Exploring the formation of composite excitations (such as
pairs, trions, and tetrons) in low-dimensional systems, 2) Developing and
testing algorithms that can simulate quantum dynamics, in order to study effects
such as thermalization and localization in driven systems, 3) Finding new ways
to extract topological invariants, such as Hall conductivity, from the static
correlations of a many-body disordered system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will also entail improving public education in quantum mechanics, preparing
future engineers and scientists for research in the 21st century and meeting the
growing demand for quantum technologists. The PI will develop, test, and
implement, self-guided tutorials on quantum many-body physics suitable for
undergraduates and graduates in STEM. The tutorials will help students grasp
abstract concepts in quantum many-body systems (such as entanglement), and will
be based on learning models that emphasize scaffolded learning, peer-
instruction, and weaning. These will be self-contained modular units that can be
used to supplement traditional lectures, or be employed in independent self-
study. The evaluation of this program will be published and the tutorials will
be made available publicly to allow for wide dissemination and implementation
across all interested institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.