* 1848107
* CAREER: Following the Flow of Gas Through Dwarf Satellites
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Charlotte Christensen, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 484,300.00

The investigator seeks to understand how galaxies form with such amazing
varieties of structure and content. Astronomers have found that galaxies grow
through a balance of gas loss, gas in-fall, and star formation. However, what
drives these processes is only poorly understood. She will model dwarf galaxies,
which are ideal test subjects for studying galaxy growth. The dwarf galaxies
have low masses, making them especially sensitive to the energy input from newly
forming stars. The investigator plans a comprehensive comparison of the
observations to their numerical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When studying the
growth of dwarf galaxies, astronomers must first account for the environment in
which they exist. Dwarf galaxies are generally found close to more massive
galaxies, which can both prevent gas accretion onto dwarf galaxies and aid gas
loss from them. Therefore, the investigator will examine the effects of both
environment and internal processes on the growth of dwarf galaxies. Using
extremely high-resolution, realistic computer simulations, she will map the flow
of gas to identify what spurs and halts dwarf galaxy growth. To further study
the effect of environment, she will compare the properties of dwarf galaxies at
different distances from more massive galaxies. Finally, she will examine the
gas transferred from dwarf galaxies to their massive neighbors, to better
understand the connection between galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In parallel
with this research, the investigator will develop computational exercises, such
as labs and open-ended research projects, for undergraduate physics students.
These lessons will develop students' programming abilities while reinforcing
skills like problem solving and persistence. This project also supports
continued efforts to increase inclusivity within the Grinnell College science
division. Additionally, it will support summer research opportunities for twelve
undergraduate students, including opportunities to present at national
conferences and to visit collaborators at research
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.