* 1848153
* CAREER: Understanding chemical weathering using lithium and potassium isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Xiao-Ming Liu, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 496,492.00

The chemical weathering or breakdown of rocks and minerals on Earth's surface
transfers essential nutrients from the land surface to streams, groundwater, and
eventually the oceans. Chemical weathering also consumes atmospheric CO2 and
thus helps to regulate climate over millions of years, maintaining a long-term
balance with volcanic emissions. Despite significant research, the processes
that control chemical weathering remain uncertain and debated. This research
project seeks to develop new techniques and innovative modeling approaches to
study the rate and extent of chemical weathering of rocks and minerals on the
surface of the Earth. The work will use existing knowledge of lithium isotope
chemistry and will develop new knowledge in potassium isotope chemistry to
measure weathering. The work will improve our understanding of the interactions
between chemical weathering and climate on geologic time scales and the flux of
elements into surface waters. Students from high school to PhD-level, including
those from low-income households, first-generation college students, and members
of under-represented groups will be trained in modern geochemical techniques.
Results will be reported in conferences and peer-reviewed journals by students
and researchers and introduced into college courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goals of this proposal are to advance the knowledge of Li and K isotope
geochemistry and lay the foundation for using K isotopes as a new tracer of
chemical weathering and especially silicate weathering. The approach is to
systematically investigate Li and K isotopic variations during chemical
weathering and examine the processes and mechanisms that may produce isotopic
fractionation by performing laboratory experiments and studying well-
characterized natural samples. Combining the development and application of the
K with Li isotopes as chemical weathering proxies is the first attempt to
disentangle different controls of chemical weathering in both laboratory and
natural settings. Following recent studies on Li and K isotopes as weathering
tracers, the PI proposes to 1) determine Li and K isotopic variation in fresh
Hawaiian basalts, weathered rocks, soils, streams and ground waters; 2) quantify
the magnitudes and mechanisms of Li and K isotope fractionation during chemical
weathering; and 3) investigate whether K isotopes can be combined with Li
isotopes as chemical weathering tracers. The development of the Li and K isotope
weathering proxy will greatly enhance the understanding of chemical weathering
and its impact on different tectonic and climatic
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.