* 1848620
* Collaborative Research: Bridging the scale gap between local and regional methane and carbon dioxide isotopic fluxes in the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2021,12/31/2024
* Steven Wofsy, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 12/31/2024
* USD 1,602,609.00

Northern latitudes are warming at twice the global mean, making carbon stored in
permafrost increasingly vulnerable to thaw and decomposition by microbes,
potentially leading to large increases in methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions, both important greenhouse gases. Accurate and reliable forecasts of
greenhouse gas emissions are critical for the improvement of global models that
predict changes to temperature and to sea level. On a local level, the data and
modeling products can be used to better inform local populations of the changes
happening to their environment and help predict likely changes in the future.
Improvements to regional and global scale models require advancement in the
current knowledge of methane and carbon dioxide flux sources to gain insight
into how the net flux is expected to respond to a warming Arctic. Comparing
aircraft derived fluxes to local tower measurements and land classification maps
allows for the determination of which mechanisms are primarily responsible for
the variation in emissions. Data, models, and analysis directly measuring the
fluxes over regional scales close to the surface and measuring fluxes using
inverse modeling helps to better understand the differences. Data generated from
this project are important for evaluating which combination of environmental
quantities and categorical quantities are best suited for predicting methane and
carbon dioxide emissions to produce more accurate estimates from remotely sensed
variables and will also be compared with existing carbon emissions models. The
ability to define the current late summer and autumn net flux of methane and
carbon dioxide from the North Slope and adjoining Arctic waters is required to
establish a benchmark for quantitatively tracking the annual time series of net
carbon flux from the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research provides
emission measurements of CO2 and CH4 plus nitrous oxide (N2O), and water vapor
(H2O) from the North Slope of Alaska on a small aircraft operating at altitudes
from 10 m to 10 km, with custom-built spectroscopic sensors, an air turbulence
probe, and GPS systems. This project bridges the scale gap between local studies
of carbon emissions in the Arctic, such as those from flux towers, and large
regional scale emissions estimates from inversion modeling. The work provides
resolved emissions correlated with underlying sources; regional coverage for
comprehensive analysis of carbon emissions in this part of the Arctic basin;
direct coupling of the observations with other observing systems ranging from
small tower measurements to satellite remote sensing; and coupling of the
observations to an air transport model to compare direct emission measurements
to top-down estimates of regional emissions based on profile measurements in the
atmosphere. Specifically, aircraft eddy covariance measurements and vertical
profiles are used to effectively scale process measurements from short eddy
covariance towers to the regional scale, allowing for determining how
representative certain areas are of the larger North Slope with respect to flux
of the major gases that contribute to changes in radiative forcing. Observations
and modeling of fluxes and concentrations of molecules that differ in their
isotopic composition reveal the contributions of key source processes at local,
landscape, and regional scale, a feature unique to this project. This project
creates an analysis framework to allow for the combination of in situ
concentrations and fluxes with regional fluxes calculated using a transport
model that both is adapted for Alaska and widely applicable to other circumpolar
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.