* 1848715
* Experimental Search for Quantum Gravity VI
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2019,10/31/2022
* David Mattingly, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 10/31/2022
* USD 10,000.00

The search for quantum gravity, the merger of general relativity and quantum
mechanics, has been ongoing for eight decades and will never be finished until
we have a complete and experimentally verified theory. While direct, detailed
tests of quantum gravity are currently out of reach, there have been numerous
proposals for experimental tests that indirectly shed light on one quantum
gravity model or another. Many of these proposals rely on re-purposing
technology and techniques originally developed for other scientific endeavors.
The Experimental Search for Quantum Gravity meetings provide the critical cross-
disciplinary environment so that experimentalists with expertise outside quantum
gravity and quantum gravity theoreticians can discuss and make progress on both
improving existing experimental tests of quantum gravity related physics and
creating new ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting for 2020 will be held at the
University of New Hampshire for one week in spring/summer. It will draw between
40-60 faculty and postdocs and have sessions on (1) quantum gravity signatures
in cosmology, (2) prospective laboratory tests of aspects of quantum gravity,
(3) analog gravity and Hawking radiation in condensed matter systems, (4) strong
field observations, including those of black hole-black hole and black hole-
neutron star mergers and horizon scale measurements, and corresponding
constraints on black hole thermodynamics and quantum gravity motivated modified
gravitational theories, and (5) tests of spacetime symmetries. There will two
public talks: one on the theoretical and philosophical problems presented by
quantum gravity, and one on the experimental tools used to test gravitational
physics. Meeting talks and slides will be recorded, collected, and posted online
for a period of three years after the meeting. The meeting will connect
researchers from disparate theoretical and experimental fields, stimulating work
on synthesizing existing techniques, multi-messenger astronomy, and quantum
information approaches in quantum gravitational tests, and train younger
scientists and students in the varied state of the art
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.