* 1848418
* CAREER: Exploration and Controllability of Excitonic Behaviors in Conjugated Polymer Single Isolated Chains and Chain Aggregates
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Paulo Araujo, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 600,000.00

Many molecules have a group of atoms, called a chromophore, that absorb light
and give the molecule its color. All molecules of the same type have the same
atom grouping and the same color. At least that is the case when the molecules
are far apart. Move two molecules close together and their chromophores interact
with each other, changing their color. This interaction plays a central role in
the properties of conjugated polymers, which are formed by linking many
chromophores together into long chains of molecules, like beads on a necklace.
With support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Paulo Araujo at the University of
Alabama Tuscaloosa is studying the interactions between chromophores in
conjugated polymers. Professor Araujo and his students are combining
sophisticated optical microscopies with methods to manipulate polymer structures
to understand how local arrangements of chromophores in individual polymer
chains affects their optical properties. Their discoveries could have important
implications for the design and control of polymers used in a wide variety of
emerging technologies, including light-emitting diodes and solar energy
conversion applications. The team is documenting their progress -- from the
generation of the ideas to the publication of the work -- through a series of
online videos produced in multiple languages. In addition, close collaboration
with students and faculty at Brazilian universities is promoting the integration
of minority groups and international students into top-notch scientific
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The optical properties of aggregate structures in
polymers stem largely from coulombic and charge transfer interactions. The
project is combining classical and tip-enhanced near-field methods to study the
spectroscopic properties of conjugated polymers, including
poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and
poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV), as well as
polymers with artificially implanted defects. Experimental measurements are
performed under distinct pressure, temperature and chemical potential
environments to characterize aggregate formation in polymer chains and chain
aggregates at the individual (microscopic) and collective (macroscopic) levels.
The research team is particularly interested in exploring the relative
importance of Frenkel and charge transfer excitons in H- and J-aggregates, as
well as hybrid aggregates (i.e. HJ, HH, JJ, JH). Theoretical approaches based on
a combination of ab-initio density functional theory (DFT), ab-initio molecular
dynamics (MD), Monte Carlo simulations, and Tight Binding calculations are being
developed to extract values for the coulombic and charge-transfer coupling from
the experimental data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.