* 1848440
* CAREER:  Targeted Memory Reactivation with Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Nathan Rose, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Dwight Kravitz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 750,883.00

There is a significant need to advance understanding of the basic neurocognitive
mechanisms that enable the human mind and brain to accomplish the tasks of
encoding, retaining, and retrieving information in working memory in the service
of goal-directed actions. These mechanisms are fundamental for cognition, and
dysfunction with some of these processes likely underlie age-related memory
deficits over both the short term and the long term. This project will help
clarify how information retained in working memory is reactivated in younger and
older adults, and how the consolidation of these memories, which are volatile
over the short term, may be enhanced with noninvasive brain stimulation over the
long term. This project will also build educational and outreach activities, to
students and older adults, through community-based learning programs about
memory, aging, and the brain. The project will also provide student trainees
with a unique set of research skills that will help catapult them towards
advanced work in a variety of STEM-related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific objective of the research project is to identify the mechanisms that
enable the reactivation of information that is passively retained in working
memory - that is, information that is not in an individual's current focus of
attention, or what is called "latent working memory." The hypothesis is that
applying noninvasive brain stimulation (specifically, transcranial magnetic
stimulation) to sensory (visual) regions of the brain while participants are
passively retaining latent information in visual working memory will reactivate
stimulus-specific features of the information whereas stimulating regions of
frontal-parietal cortex will reactivate the task goals/rules (i.e., which memory
the participant is to be attending to at that particular time), and strengthen
the consolidation of these memories. The hypotheses will be tested in
experiments using new technologies and innovative methods to safely manipulate
brain activity and decode memory representations from simultaneously recorded
neuroimaging signals using artificial intelligence, machine-learning algorithms.
At the conclusion of this project the PI will have shown causal evidence for the
roles of frontal, parietal and sensory regions in storing and reactivating
latent working memories in both older and young adult humans. This basic
research will facilitate the development of techniques that have the potential
for widespread translational applications for enhancing learning and memory
functioning in young and older adulthood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.