* 1848357
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Investigating the social and developmental determinants of vitamin D production
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2021
* Julianna Perez, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 02/28/2021
* USD 29,720.00

Vitamin D is vital to the function of several organs and tissues, with decreased
vitamin D levels hypothesized to be a contributing factor in several disease
processes. Populations in higher latitudes are more likely to have vitamin D
deficiencies due to lack of sun exposure; however, recent research indicates
that vitamin D deficiency has become a global phenomenon, even in countries near
the equator, with women often experiencing more severe deficiency. This doctoral
dissertation project applies a biocultural perspective on vitamin D production
from infancy through young adulthood to investigate how societal practices and
norms create and dictate the physical environments that individuals experience.
By using a longitudinal data set, the study delves deeper into the possible
factors that contribute to vitamin D deficiency in both men and women, and for
societies undergoing urbanization. The project not only addresses the complex
interplay of human biology and culture, but also has the potential to inform
public health efforts to understand and address vitamin D deficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological anthropology has elaborated the tradeoffs
between the need for vitamin D production and the need to avoid damage from the
harmful effects of exposure to ultraviolet rays, but unanswered questions remain
regarding how vitamin D is regulated and why some individuals are at risk for
vitamin D deficiency. The primary focus has been on sun exposure, but other
aspects of the current environment, and aspects of the environment experienced
early in life, may be equally important. This study will use longitudinal data
collected from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey in the
Philippines to assess the effects of rapid urbanization and socioeconomic change
on vitamin D production in young adulthood. A range of environmental factors
early in development, and in adulthood, will be tested as predictors of
circulating vitamin D. Furthermore, DNA methylation - an epigenetic process that
is associated with gene expression - will be measured at sites in genes
associated with vitamin D production. DNA methylation is a plausible mechanism
through which environments during development can regulate genome activity in
adulthood, and the study will investigate the association between environments
in childhood, DNA methylation of vitamin D genes, and vitamin D production in
adulthood. The use of a biocultural anthropological approach allows for an
exploration of how lived experience affects vitamin D production and well-being
over the life course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.