* 1848667
* Collaborative Research: Predicting post-wildfire sedimentation of reservoirs: probabilistic modeling of debris flow generation and downstream sediment routing
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Patrick Belmont, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 02/28/2023
* USD 317,946.00

In the United States, forested lands provide water supply for two-thirds of the
population. However, in the decades since most water infrastructure was
constructed in the western U.S., the burned area, frequency, and severity of
wildfires has increased considerably. While wildfires can have short-term
impacts on the quantity and quality of water supply, the erosion that occurs
after severe burns can also deliver significant amounts of sediment to rivers
and downstream reservoirs, reducing the long-term storage capacity of water
supplies. Further, with projected future increases in wildfire, there will be
increases in river sediment. Thus, in this project the researchers will develop
new computer-based modeling tools capable of identifying and quantifying the
risk that post-wildfire erosion poses to downstream water infrastructure. The
first application of this modeling framework will be the water supply reservoirs
throughout Utah, one of the driest states in the U.S., where the vulnerability
of each reservoir will be quantified as to the erosion and sedimentation risk
posed by wildfire. Similar to dammed reservoirs across the nation, sedimentation
in Utah reservoirs is a growing concern for aging water infrastructure, even
before accounting for the projected increases in future wildfire. Finally, the
researchers will integrate their model into online, open-source programs, making
these resources available to any person or agency interested in applying the
model to other states or regions. The deliverables of this project will provide
critical information and tools for improved and more targeted forest management,
help identify and protect vulnerable water resources, and address crucial
knowledge gaps for predicting downstream impacts from post-wildfire erosion.
Collaborating across two universities, this project will provide support for one
post-doctoral researcher (PI Murphy), two PhD students, and a minimum of six
undergraduate students to train and develop their skills in hydrology,
geomorphology, data analysis and management, and science communication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance fundamental knowledge critical
for predicting the locations and timing of post-wildfire sediment delivery to
downstream water infrastructure. The researchers will link new and existing
models that: 1) predict the locations and magnitudes of post-wildfire erosion,
2) route post-wildfire sediment inputs downstream through river networks in a
physics-based and hydro-geomorphically sensitive manner, and 3) determine a
range of potential volumetric sediment inputs to downstream reservoirs under a
range of wildfire conditions. Applying this new modeling framework to the 133
major reservoirs throughout Utah, this project will answer four key research
questions: 1) Which water supply reservoirs in Utah are most vulnerable to post-
wildfire erosion? 2) What is the time lag between occurrence of a wildfire and
loss of reservoir storage downstream? 3) Which landscape, fire, hydrologic, and
vegetation characteristics exert the strongest control on the upstream storage
vs. delivery of post-fire sediment to reservoirs? 4) What landscape, fire and
river network attributes control the relative increase in post-wildfire sediment
yields above background yields? Through this analysis, the researchers will
specifically assess the influence of sediment connectivity on reservoir
vulnerability, as well as the contribution of coarse sediment inputs to the
reductions in reservoir storage over longer transport timescales. Given the
complex ownership and management of dams, they will engage a stakeholder
advisory group that spans the diverse range of ownership and includes public
utilities departments, state and federal forest management agencies, and dam
operators. Further, they will work with the Community Surface Dynamics Modeling
System (CSDMS) to integrate their models into open-source platforms, and create
a public platform to host the project datasets, educational materials, technical
reports, and publications. This project represents research at the frontier of
integrated geosciences, and this new modeling framework fills a critical gap
regarding the tools needed to assess urgent societal concerns regarding wildfire
and water security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.