* 1848903
* Cognitive graphs: The geometry of spatial knowledge
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Chrastil, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2024
* USD 472,884.00

Being oriented in a new environment and finding and remembering the locations of
resources are critical skills for human existence. When exploring a new city,
tourists often wander through the streets, with the goal of visiting individual
sites and taking in specific views. Through this wandering, they gain an
understanding of the network of the city streets. When returning to their hotel,
they are unlikely to retrace their steps. They also will not take a straight-
line shortcut. Instead, they will draw on what they have learned about their
environment to determine a path home using the city streets. How are tourists
able to find their way back, based on experience alone, yet unable to determine
a straight-line shortcut? This project addresses the challenging problem in the
study of human navigation: What is the underlying geometric structure of our
navigational knowledge? Is it truly a cognitive map, as is commonly assumed? Is
it something coarser and more fluid? We propose that the underlying structure is
a graph?a series of connections between places in a network, much like city
streets. The overarching goal of this proposal is to test hypotheses about graph
knowledge and its properties using walking virtual reality (VR) methods.
Outcomes of this research have the potential to impact other fields, including
robotics, neuroscience, mathematics, and geography. The interdisciplinary
research proposed here will establish a deep understanding of the theory and
cognitive mechanisms of spatial orientation, with far-reaching impacts. Greater
knowledge of the basic properties of human navigational systems will lead to
improved and more effective electronic navigation and GPS systems, self-driving
vehicles, emergency response training, and transportation signage. Dr. Chrastil
is committed to training the next generation of scientists and increasing the
participation of underrepresented groups in STEM fields. As part of this
proposal, Dr. Chrastil will develop a workshop on research methods for virtual
reality to train researchers on this exciting technique. She actively
participates as a teacher and mentor for programs that encourage participation
of women and girls in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project specifically
tests the hypothesis that the most likely structure of navigational knowledge is
a labeled graph, which incorporates local metric information but is not globally
consistent across the environment. We have previously conducted an initial test
of the idea of a cognitive graph, demonstrating that graph spatial knowledge is
used preferentially rather than simply learning routes between locations
(Chrastil &amp; Warren, 2014). However, a systematic test of labeled graph
knowledge has not been conducted. Little is known about how graph knowledge is
constructed during learning or whether labeled graphs are used across all
individuals and situations. Here, we propose a framework detailing the
theoretical contributors to graph knowledge. We will also test the relationship
between graph knowledge and other spatial knowledge taxonomies. In a series of
experiments, we will use fully-immersive virtual reality to test hypotheses
regarding the nature of spatial knowledge. First, we will characterize the
nature of cognitive graphs by pitting labeled graph knowledge against other
types of spatial knowledge and testing a primary prediction of labeled graph
knowledge. Next, we will test the constraints on labeled graph knowledge, such
as generalizability across contexts, its relationship to other taxonomies, and
spatial preference. Finally, we will examine the mechanisms of learning labeled
graph knowledge, in particular the deployment of attention and active decision
making. This research cuts across levels of analysis by contrasting local and
global levels of spatial understanding and by pitting labeled graphs against
other spatial systems. The results of the proposed work will provide critical
insight into the fundamental formation of human spatial knowledge and will
contribute to the fields of robotics and neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.