* 1848135
* CAREER: Aerobic Hypervalent Iodine Chemistry as a Platform for Oxidase Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* David Powers, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 797,102.00

Oxygen (O2) is a major component of air and an ideal raw material to make
chemicals. It is widely available (a component of the air we breathe), strongly
oxidizing, and produces non-toxic byproducts (e.g., water). Fundamental
challenges prevent widespread use of O2 in synthetic chemistry. New strategies
that enable greater utilization of O2 are critical to developing sustainable
synthetic methods. In this project, Dr. Powers is developing synthetic methods
to use O2 to generate hypervalent iodine compounds, a class of useful chemical
oxidants. The successful preparation of hypervalent iodine compounds from O2
helps achieve the goal of greater O2 utilization. The idea is that O2, which
normally does not react with iodobenzene to make these hypervalent iodine
reagents but does so in the presence of sacrificial aldehydes and a cobalt
halide catalyst. Three research areas are proposed: improve understanding of the
ensuing organic applications, innovate on routes and structures to the reagents,
and couple the use of the iodine reagents with diverse dirhodium catalysts, as
well as metal organic frameworks and nanoparticles, to effect C-H activations.
These reactions are important to the chemical industry - ranging from the
advanced manufacturing of new pharmaceuticals to other chemicals of commercial
importance. Dr. Powers is also creating new programs to expand participation in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. For
example, open-access educational resources for community college curricula are
being developed. In addition, STEM education outreach programs to Historically
Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) in Texas and are being formed to
increase STEM participation by traditionally underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Powers of Texas A&amp;M University is developing new
methods to sustainably generate hypervalent iodine reagents for use in oxidation
catalysis. Hypervalent iodine reagents are a class of selective two-electron
oxidants that have been demonstrated to participate is a wide variety of
substrate functionalization reactions including carbonyl oxidation, olefin
1,2-difunctionalization, oxidative dearomatization, alcohol and amine oxidation,
as well as group-transfer chemistry. By diverting reactive intermediates
generated during aldehyde autoxidation chemistry, O2 reduction can be directly
coupled to the synthesis of hypervalent iodine compounds. Application of those
aerobically generated intermediates in catalysis enables the broad substrate
functionalization of hypervalent iodine reagents to be coupled to O2 reduction.
These reactions are applicable to advanced chemical manufacturing techniques as
they are more potential more sustainable and less expensive than current
techniques used in pharmaceuticals and commercial chemical manufacturing. Dr.
Powers is actively engaged in developing new programs that contribute to
expanded participation in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. These activities, which involve developing new open-access
educational resources for community college curricula and developing STEM
education outreach programs to Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCUs) in Texas are directed at increasing participation in STEM education by
traditionally underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.