* 1848349
* CAREER: Monopole Superconductivity and Ferromagnetism of Itinerant Electrons
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Yi Li, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2024
* USD 537,901.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education in unusual states and fundamental questions that arise in
the study of metallic materials. A piece of metal contains many electrons that
are moving and interacting with each other. Quantum mechanics governs their
collective behavior, which can give rise to new states of matter manifesting as
electron order. Consider an example of order from our everyday classical world,
a team of swimmers can control and change their position as a whole by
performing a synchronized change in the shapes their bodies assume. An analogous
phenomenon in quantum systems is called many-body Berry phases: due to quantum
mechanical effects, electrons in a material can synchronize and exhibit
collective effects. The electrons can be induced to organize in many different
ordered states, some of which have not been observed before. This project
advances fundamental concepts by exploring the mathematical description of order
as well as its physical consequences. The project can potentially lead to
developing a new platform for quantum computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI
will also tackle the long-standing problem of uncovering the microscopic
mechanism behind the magnetism some metals exhibit. This is a formidable problem
because of the failure of a common theoretical assumption, namely that electrons
moving in a crystal of atoms can be considered independently. In fact, the
motion of any one electron is strongly correlated with the motion of all others.
The PI and her research team will combine analytic and numerical methods to
tackle this challenge. Apart from theoretical insight, the project could lead to
technological applications that harness these strong correlation
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable a range of educational
and outreach activities, from mentoring graduate, undergraduate, and high-school
students, to developing new course materials aligned with the research project
that cover the application of modern mathematical approaches in condensed matter
physics. The PI will also initiate an interactive community outreach program
targeting Pre-K and K-12 students and their parents, aimed at enhancing the
public's interest in and appreciation of quantum physics and the research
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical research and
education in new quantum phenomena of itinerant electrons arising from the
interplay of topology, interaction, and strong correlation. Specifically, the PI
will focus on developing a theory framework for new classes of many-body
topological states, and on a nonperturbative approach to itinerant
ferromagnetism in strongly correlated multiorbital systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her group will investigate novel classes of
three-dimensional topological many-body ordering states characterized by
monopole harmonic symmetries, including both superconducting and density-wave
states. The particle-particle (Cooper) pairing, or, particle-hole pairing,
inherits nontrivial Berry phases from Fermi surface topology. Their gap
functions cannot be globally well-defined in momentum space, and thus go beyond
the standard realization of rotational symmetry based on spherical harmonics.
Consequently, they exhibit topologically protected nodal structures regardless
of specific ordering mechanism and can only be characterized by monopole
harmonic functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Itinerant ferromagnetism is the
ferromagnetism of mobile electrons based on Fermi surface instabilities rather
than the ordering of local spin moments. However, it lacks a well-controlled
weak-coupling description; a precise answer to the relation between orbital
degeneracy and the mechanism of ferromagnetism has so far been lacking, mostly
due to the lack of nonperturbative results for handling strong magnetic
fluctuations. The PI and her group will develop nonperturbative methods,
combining analytic approaches and unbiased numerical simulations, to study the
role of orbital degeneracy in the mechanism of itinerant ferromagnetism and
strong correlation effects of itinerant electrons close to ferromagnetic
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will enable a range of educational
and outreach activities, from mentoring graduate, undergraduate, and high-school
students, to developing new course materials aligned with the research project
that cover the application of modern mathematical approaches in condensed matter
physics. The PI will also initiate an interactive community outreach program
targeting Pre-K and K-12 students and their parents, aimed at enhancing the
public's interest in and appreciation of quantum physics and the research
frontier.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.