* 1848192
* CAREER: Assimilation of Geodetic Data in Physical Models of Subduction Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2025
* Sylvain Barbot, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2025
* USD 599,295.00

Earthquake and tsunami hazards represent significant threats to society. They
threaten large population centers, notably around the Ring of Fire in Asia and
across the Pacific. As direct observations of past seismic events are limited,
mitigation of the associated risks hinges on the understanding of the underlying
physics. Here, the researchers develop realistic computer simulations of the
largest earthquakes on Earth. Those occur at subduction zones, a type of
tectonic-plate boundary where one plate slides under another and sinks into the
mantle. The team examines the interactions between shallow and deep deformation
processes within the Earth. The goal is to better predict how the surface
deforms before, during, and after large earthquakes. The researchers also study
how earthquakes at subduction zones generate tsunamis. This type of calculations
is challenging because it must account for the shape of the plate-boundary fault
and for the variations of rocks' properties in space and time. Furthermore, it
must encompass different timescales from the short earthquake duration (a few
seconds or minutes) to the thousands of years of Earth's slow deformation in the
context of plate tectonics. The simulations give a framework to understand
numerous observations worldwide from seismic instruments and the Global
Positioning System (GPS). This project provides support to a graduate student
and a postdoctoral associate, training for two undergraduate students and
outreach to local schools and the public. It also promotes the development of
open-source software made freely available to the scientific community, as well
as that of teaching material at the undergraduate and graduate level. This work,
thus, advances numerical modeling of the solid earth and contribute to a safer,
more educated and resilient society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
understand the seismic cycles at subduction zones and how megathrust slip and
mantle flow interact. Subduction zones around the Ring of Fire have produced
among the largest historical earthquakes. Expansive ruptures spreading along a
low-angle subducting slab that cut through the continental crust generate great
(Mw&gt;8) and giant (Mw&gt;9) earthquakes. Such earthquakes impact the
viscoelastic flow at greater depths, which may induce rapid changes in regional
sea levels. Here, the researchers build comprehensive numerical models for three
chosen subduction zones in Japan, Sumatra and Chile. The models incorporate
realistic morphology and material properties. They account for the evolution of
friction on the megathrust and the effective viscosity in the surrounding rocks
(oceanic asthenosphere and mantle wedge); inputs are based on laboratory results
on rocks' friction and plastic flow. Outputs reproduce a wide range of observed
slip behaviors, including slow-slip events, low-frequency earthquakes, slow and
fast earthquakes, and tsunami earthquakes. The project outcomes include state-
of-the-art open-source software to model the seismic cycle and surface
deformation. The project results are integrated into teaching materials and
activities for local-school and university students, and the public. The team
also organizes workshops to train modeling
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.