* 1848688
* Support for student travel to the 11th U.S. National Combustion Meeting, Pasadena, CA, March 24 - 27, 2019
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Paul Ronney, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 11/30/2019
* USD 20,000.00

This proposal is to partially support the travel and registration of students
attending 2019 U.S. National Combustion Meeting. Experiences in attending
technical conferences are extremely beneficial to students. These experiences
will not only help with the professional development, but also stimulate their
critical thinking in formulating future research directions. This meeting will
be held in University of Southern California, March 24 - 27, 2019. This
conference is a very important national conference on combustion science and
engineering. Presentations in this conference represents the most updated
research outcome in combustion in the U.S. The conference facilitates the
exchange of combustion research results through plenary lectures and oral
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to its effect on energy conversion,
environmental quality, and climate effects, understanding of combustion
processes and practical combustion systems is of paramount importance to
society. Exchange of information at conferences increases the rate at which
research breakthroughs can be made to make combustion more efficient and cleaner
with fuel-flexibility. This meeting is the ideal venue for student combustion
researchers to exchange ideas and network with their peers and with leaders in
the field. It is estimated that approximately 50 US-based students will benefit
from this NSF support. Numerous workshops will also be held in conjunction with
the conference to increase the professional skills of the students. This award
will be used to offset the travel expenses of non-local students in an effort to
increase student participation at the meeting, particularly students from
underrepresented institutions that may not have the financial means to fully
support student travel to conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.