* 1848913
* I-Corps: Autonomous Unmanned Vehicle Ecosystem Technology
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Michael Lawrence, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the use of
autonomous robotic systems to save lives across multiple disaster levels by
multiplying human efforts in areas such as disaster response, extending to
reduced response times and improved rescue efforts during disaster relief. Using
autonomous systems, such as drones, that run software which allows for the use
of biosensors and on-board machine learning, natural disaster responders can
find survivors faster and reduce casualties. The technology understands mission
objectives (intent-driven), coordinates with others (collaborative autonomy) and
is voice enabled (natural language conversational interface), allowing it to
work well with both humans and machines. These and other features lend this
technology to broad commercial applications, offering the best strategy to
mitigate multiple disaster levels - at the district or provincial level by
assessing strengths and vulnerabilities to various hazards; at the community
level like search and rescue during a flood or fire; and at the household level
like ambulatory drone service care for the aging.

This I-Corps project will be focused on translating scientific research to
commercialization through lessons on the business model canvas and extensive
customer discovery. Our research has involved hands-on technical experimentation
using deep/machine learning software for prototype development and literature
reviews on a variety of software capabilities. Using a camera with machine
learning, we were able to identify a human with most of the body obscured.
Hardware acts as transport for the optical and acoustical biosensor package
which can take action autonomously by utilizing artificial intelligence (AI)
technologies extending to: realtime onboard object detection capable of
identifying a person in rubble, even when the person is partially obscured
(Machine/Deep Learning/edge), offline cloud-enriched datasets for cloud-sourced
analysis, voice recognition/conversational natural language processing/speech
synthesis. Blockchain enabled autonomous swarm management technology on multiple
robotic devices will enable multiple machine collaboration. All sensor data is
time-stamped and stored in the cloud where the AI technologies are used to
enrich the data. Enriched data is made available offline via the internet to
thousands of volunteers for human review. Results from our research show that
the technological capability exists, the software and hardware components
combined meet a need established through our initial customer discovery.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.