* 1848046
* CAREER: Coordination Polymer Superlattices with Tailored Properties through Chemical Vapor Deposition Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Thomas Kempa, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2024
* USD 755,781.00

Non-Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Coordination polymers are versatile materials
that are currently used to filter pollutants, store energy, and convert raw
materials into useful chemicals. Recently, there has been great interest in
using the extensive structural and chemical tunability of these materials to
make a new generation of electronic devices, such as switches, sensors, and
smart energy storage systems. However, the poor electrical performance of these
materials, and a lack of synthetic methods capable of creating desired material
properties has slowed progress. This CAREER project, supported by the Solid
State and Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research,
addresses these challenges by developing new methods to grow high quality
crystalline coordination polymers from the gas phase. Furthermore, this proposal
addresses the need to improve the electrical performance of these materials by
creating a new material architecture called a superlattice, which is composed of
single crystal sheets of various coordination polymers stacked on top of one
another. The composition, structure, and layering of the individual sheets can
be controlled. Because structure and function are so tailorable in the
superlattice, it has the potential to support enhanced and novel properties,
allowing it to exceed the performance limits of conventional polymers and solid-
state materials. This research can enable technological advances in energy
storage and conversion, and spawn a new generation of filters, actuators,
sensors, and optical/electronic devices. Many of these technologies can be used
to assure the sustainability and improved welfare of society. The research
innovations and methods used in this research provide a multitude of student
training opportunities in the synthesis, structure-property determination, and
application of materials. In addition to the research objectives described in
this proposal, the principal investigator is introducing two education and
outreach activities: a podcast channel focused on materials science topics, and
an online crowd-sourced database that curates materials synthesis protocols.
These activities aim to increase the participation of under-represented
minorities in STEM fields and to build a research infrastructure to accelerate
the dissemination and verification of research protocols.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Coordination polymers (CPs)
can be designed to express a diverse array of structures, porosities, and
chemistries rendering them useful for applications in energy storage,
separations, and catalysis. However, CPs with more complex functionalities and
responsive properties are desired if they are to be successfully integrated into
electronic devices. The principal hypothesis of this project, supported by a
CAREER award through the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in the
Division of Materials Research, is that a CP superlattice can support complex,
multivariate, and responsive properties. A superlattice comprising layered two-
dimensional CP crystal lattices is an attractive architecture, because its
inherent hierarchies of structure and composition can be tailored to promote
desired or emergent physical properties. This CAREER project addresses the
development of chemical vapor deposition methods for the tailored synthesis of
CP superlattices and the study of these materials' dynamic and responsive
properties. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is introduced as a strategy for the
preparation of high-quality crystalline CP superlattices. The project focuses on
three core objectives. First, the scope and mechanism of chemical vapor
deposition synthesis of CP superlattices are being established. Second,
transport studies conducted on devices fabricated on single crystals of CP
superlattices are being used to elucidate their electronic properties. Third,
heterostructured CP superlattices with multivariate and responsive properties
are being developed and their potential to surpass the performance limits of
conventional bulk 3D materials is being determined. In addition to the research
objectives of this project, the principal investigator has introduced two
education and outreach activities: a podcast channel focused on materials
science topics, and an online crowd-sourced database that curates CVD synthesis
protocols. These activities aim to increase the participation of under-
represented minorities in STEM fields and to build a research infrastructure to
accelerate the dissemination and verification of research
protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.