* 1848547
* CAREER: Re-evaluating the evolution of the southern San Andreas Fault along its restraining bend from  Holocene to Mid-Quaternary timescales via 36Cl/10Be burial and cosmogenic...
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Kimberly Blisniuk, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 658,139.00

This study will re-evaluate the seismic hazard potential of individual faults
that make up the southern San Andrea Fault system, in particular the potential
hazard associated with a newly identified fault of the San Andreas Fault system.
The investigation will document and characterize the amount of movement along
this newly identified fault over multiple timescales, to better understand its
displacement history and evolution relative to other faults in the region. To
accomplish this end goal, the application of a new dating technique, 36Cl/10Be
burial dating, will be developed. The societal impact of this study is high
because the results will help refine earthquake hazard models that forecast the
potential of future earthquakes and their recurrence in California. This study
of seismogenic faults will then be integrated into a place-based mentoring
program for undergraduate students, Promoting Undergraduate Research Experiences
(PURE) in Geology at San Jose State University (SJSU). The program will provide
opportunities for students to investigate fault processes and their associated
hazard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development and application of the 36Cl/10Be
burial dating technique in sediment over the 200,000 to 700,000 year age range
will expand the capability and capacity of earth scientists to quantify geologic
processes, such as rates of deformation of lateral faults, fold and thrust belts
and sedimentary successions worldwide over a timescale missing in most geologic
histories. Accordingly, quantifying the continuous displacement history of
faults and fault zones into mid-Quaternary timescales will provide new insights
into the behavior of continental strike slip faults, in particular the San
Andreas Fault. Such data are critical to understanding the evolution of fault
systems. Detailed field and geochronologic data at multiple locations and
timescales provide important constraints and boundary conditions that can be
applied to geophysical models of plate boundary strain, faults, dynamic
earthquake rupture models, seismologic models and models assessing seismic
hazard. Funding for the project is provided by the EAR Tectonics Program and the
GEO Prediction of and Resilience against Extreme Events (PREEVENTS)
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.