* 1848988
* Translational Data Science Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Juliana Freire, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2019
* USD 49,327.00

Translational data science is an emerging field that applies data science
principles, techniques and technologies to scientific, economic, and societal
challenges that hold the promise of having an important national impact. In
order to understand the important shifts in how data is used and applied to many
aspects of daily life, it is important to effectively apply these principles and
tools within our diverse research environments to successfully address these
challenges for the benefit of human and societal welfare. This workshop will
build upon discussions initiated at two previous NSF-funded workshops on
translational data science and focus on the challenges of engaging in
translational data science; challenges related to technical issues; and
challenges related to organizational and cultural change. The perspectives and
insights shared from industry, government, nonprofits, and academia, coupled
with discussions focused on actionable challenges and measurable outcomes, will
serve to advance the field of data science as well as related fields and
application areas. This workshop will provide mechanisms for identifying high-
priority topics and high-impact opportunities for future research, training, and
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this workshop will be to
facilitate the growth of the emerging community related to translational data
science; strengthen existing connections; and engage the academic community with
the perspectives and insights available from industrial and public sector
partners. Another objective will be to discuss and align different views about
the challenges that are most important in translational data science, and
clearly identify opportunities and high priority areas to guide research and
funding. By convening a diverse community of stakeholders who can contribute to
the strategic development of a translational data science roadmap and ecosystem,
this workshop will build and strengthen connections across sectors. Another
theme of the workshop will be "responsible data science", to explore how
foundational issues in responsible use of data can be translated to data science
practice, with a focus here on public sector use cases. The workshop will also
discuss open issues related to if and how the notion of translational data
science fundamentally changes how data science is practiced and taught, and the
applied and basic research and pedagogical issues that may arise in this
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.