* 1848009
* CAREER: Using numerical simulation to investigate the influence of collective behaviors on the sequences of step-grown copolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/2019,02/29/2024
* Kateri DuBay, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 02/29/2024
* USD 661,357.00

Polymers are long molecular chains formed by linking together many repeating
molecular sub-units called monomers. Copolymers are a special class of polymers.
They are made by using two (or more) different monomers and, depending on how
the monomers are combined, the copolymers can exhibit unique properties. In
biological copolymers, such as DNA and proteins, the sequence of monomers is
precisely controlled by the cell. In contrast, controlling the sequence of
monomers in the laboratory remains a significant challenge, and this limits the
usefulness of synthetic copolymers. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular and Nanochemistry and the Chemical, Structure Dynamics, and
Mechanisms A Programs in Division of Chemistry, Professor DuBay at the
University of Virginia is using computer simulations to study copolymers that
are grown step-by-step. Professor DuBay and her students have developed a
computer model to simulate copolymer growth. They are using the model to better
understand the factors that determine the monomer sequence. Insights gained from
their studies could enable better sequence control, which could impact
technologies ranging from energy conversion, to water purification and drug
delivery. This research project is conducted by a diverse team of undergraduate
and graduate researchers, training them for productive careers in the chemical
industry. In addition, the next generation of professional communicators are
embedded into the lab, enabling them to better understand the scientific process
and recognize and report on breakthrough achievements. Finally, this project
focuses on improving the scientific information literacy of current college
students to better equip them to carefully assess information from a variety of
public sources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Emergent collective behaviors among the
polymerizing chains, such chain alignment, self-templating, or phase
separations, can significantly influence how often different reactive species
encounter one another during a copolymerization and the probability of a
reaction when they do. As a result, such behaviors are expected to affect the
incorporation frequency and placement of different monomers in the chain.
However, the current theoretical framework for understanding what governs
copolymer sequences does not account for such complexities. Professor DuBay is
utilizing coarse-grained simulations of step-growth copolymerizations to study
the influence of such behaviors on copolymer sequence. By combining Langevin
dynamics with a reactive cutoff distance approach that allows for the formation
of polymer bonds, these simulations enable a comprehensive investigation of the
influence of various monomer characteristics and reaction conditions on the
resulting copolymer sequences. Copolymers and reaction regimes that are shown to
be sensitive to this unconventional mechanism of sequence biasing are being
studied through a collaboration with synthetic polymer chemists. In addition,
Professor DuBay is developing a program to embed future writers and
communicators in polymer-focused research labs as well as a novel polymer case-
study based curriculum for introductory chemistry
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.