* 1848701
* CHE/DMS Innovation Lab: Learning the Power of Data in Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Xiaoming Huo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michelle Bushey
* 08/31/2020
* USD 225,450.00

With the support from the Division of Chemistry and the Division of Mathematical
Sciences, Professor Xiaoming Huo of the Georgia Institute of Technology and
Professor Paul Zimmerman of University of Michigan will bring together
researchers in chemistry and data science for an immersive five-day Innovation
Lab. Innovation Labs are an evolution of "sandpit" workshops that have been used
by research funding agencies for brainstorming and team formation, to accelerate
scientific innovation. Over five days of in-person interaction, participants
will learn to speak each others' languages through case study presentations and
bootcamp activities, frame new research questions, form interdisciplinary teams
around these ideas, and initiate collaborative projects that include scientists
from both the chemistry and data science communities. The projects will utilize
machine learning and data-driven statistical techniques to tackle challenging
chemical problems and the analysis of complex chemical data sets. A primary
objective of the Innovation Lab is to forge new connections between chemists and
data scientists, and stimulate new research problems and new interdisciplinary
collaborations. The Innovation Lab will include graduate students as well as
participants at different career stages, to strengthen future workforce
development and promote the participation of women and other underrepresented
groups in the research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dramatic advances in
science can result when standard modes of research are replaced with completely
new ways of thinking. The potential for such advances has been recognized at the
interface of data science and chemistry, a key area where chemical sciences can
greatly benefit from emerging strategies in statistics, computer science, and
mathematics. This project brings together experts from historically unconnected
disciplines to accelerate the development of the nascent field of chemical data
science. The outcome of the Innovation Lab is anticipated to be a deeper
engagement of the data and computer science communities with chemistry, sparking
new collaborations between the two communities, the initiation of new ways of
thinking, and joint projects that extend well beyond the time frame of the Lab
itself. These projects have the potential to achieve profound scientific impact
in chemistry, inspire new methodological and algorithmic development, and serve
as prime examples of the interplay between data-driven and chemical approaches.
Fundamental mathematical and statistical principles will be applied to tackle
important chemistry problems. Conversely, the challenging data sets and problems
from chemistry may inspire unanticipated methodological developments in data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.