* 1848789
* Multi-stakeholder workshop to streamline dissemination of evidence-based graduate education practices
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Cynthia Fuhrmann, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* John Weishampel
* 09/30/2020
* USD 30,258.00

STEM undergraduate education research has developed over the past decades to
include numerous frameworks that support rigorous evaluation and dissemination
of undergraduate science education approaches. By contrast, STEM graduate
education research has not yet developed sufficient frameworks (e.g., journals,
conferences). This has led to inefficient dissemination of evidence-based
approaches and challenges for implementation of effective practices. This
National Science Foundation award to the University of Massachusetts Medical
School will support a workshop that will seed action to develop resources and
frameworks for disseminating evidence-based educational approaches for doctoral
STEM education, with a particular focus on effective practices for PhD career
development, a rapidly growing field within graduate education that has urgent
dissemination needs. The workshop will serve to cultivate a multi-stakeholder
community with shared concerns, a passion for graduate education, and a desire
to advance educational practices that enhance the career preparedness of PhD
scientists. The priorities and next steps identified through this workshop will
seed future initiatives and enable STEM doctoral programs to more effectively
and efficiently address the training needs for the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The one-and-a-half-day workshop will focus on
an area that is consistently highlighted as a need in national reports on STEM
graduate education, but which has received little attention: the lack of a
national infrastructure for coordinating and curating dissemination of materials
supporting innovative doctoral educational models. The workshop will bring
together stakeholders with expertise spanning dissemination, evaluation, career
development, and graduate education, to define actionable next steps for
enhancing the dissemination and implementation of evidence-based educational
approaches for PhD career development. This workshop will use panel
presentations, stakeholder-focused group discussions, mixed-expertise small
group discussions, and full group report-outs to define the most critical issues
and recommended actions for dissemination of evidence-based practices. The
workshop will generate a list of the needs, challenges, and barriers to
dissemination and implementation of educational models, informed by the diverse
viewpoints of key stakeholder groups, and will identify a list of recommended
next steps, including how each stakeholder group can contribute to enhancing
evaluation and dissemination of approaches. The workshop will result in a report
synthesizing findings, including actionable next steps focused on individual,
stakeholder group, and national efforts. This report will help stakeholders take
informed action in a coordinated manner to avoid redundancy and amplify
investments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is funded by the NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program. The NRT Program (17-585/18-507) is designed to
encourage the development and implementation of new, potentially transformative
models or approaches for STEM graduate education training that address changing
workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.