* 1848600
* Partial Support for the Planning and Organization of the Tenth International Congress of Arctic Social Sciences
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Andrey Petrov, University of Northern Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 03/31/2021
* USD 49,991.00

Since 1992, the International Congress for Arctic Social Sciences (ICASS) has
brought together scholars from around the world to share the results from Arctic
social science research and explore opportunities for collaboration. The
Congress provides an opportunity to discuss research methodologies, strategies,
and results, and promotes international collaboration. It provides a venue for
the dissemination of knowledge and cross-fertilization of thought in social
sciences and humanities, between the social and natural sciences, and
increasingly includes Indigenous participation from the Arctic and Sub-Arctic.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NSF funding is a US contribution to planning and
organization of ICASS X. Funds will support the development of the scientific
agenda, program, and logistics for the Congress and support efforts to recruit a
diverse and multidisciplinary group of participants. Specific objectives
include: (1) create and select the Organizing Committee; (2) develop ICASS
themes, calls for sessions, calls for papers, and selection/review of suitable
contributions; (3) develop ICASS X scientific program and logistics; (4)
disseminate the information about ICASS X to ensure broad and diverse
participation in the Congress with the emphasis to engage early career
scientists and Indigenous scholars; (5) design the outreach plan to engage local
communities and extend broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.