* 1848452
* CAREER: Labor Productivity in Poor Countries
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2019,04/30/2024
* Supreet Kaur, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 526,000.00

Labor productivity differences explain differences in income and living
standards across countries and families within countries. While low labor
productivity is the cause of poverty and its transmission to future generation,
economists know very little about the causes of low labor productivity among the
poor. This research project will combine insights from psychology and economics,
sophisticated economic theory, and experimental methods to study the sources and
consequences of low labor productivity among the poor. This experimental
research will be carried out in three different settings, thus making the
results generalizable. Each of the three projects will try to answer a specific
development question: individual's labor productivity, people's ability to save
and smooth out consumption, and total productivity in the economy. The results
of this research will provide a better understanding of the sources of low labor
productivity among low income people. In so doing, the results could provide
powerful inputs into policies to increase productivity, hence decrease poverty
in the U.S. and around the world. This could also lead to increased labor
productivity, faster economic growth, and improved living standards for U.S.
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project advances the literatures in
development and behavioral economics. The proposal consists of three projects.
Each project links missing markets to distortions in productivity in a low
income setting. The first project tests whether redistributive arrangements,
considered a response to missing insurance markets, dampen labor supply and
productivity. It will use a field experiment to examine whether enabling workers
to convert earnings gains into long run savings, leads to increases in worker
output and earnings. This would provide the first evidence for such distortive
effects of redistributive pressure in a natural field setting. The second
project seeks to provide the first piece of evidence for the role of cognitive
constraints on consumption smoothening, helping to explain violations of the
permanent income hypothesis. It uses a field experiment to test whether
interventions that lower the cognitive costs of planning improve consumption
smoothing and output. The third project advances the development literature on
both separation failures and factor misallocation by directly testing whether
labor rationing is a cause of factor misallocation. Each of these projects
highlight how the presence of missing markets can exacerbate underdevelopment.
By leveraging insights from both economics and psychology, this research will
enable work that expands our understanding of the causes and consequences of
poverty through new frontiers of inquiry that are not possible through any one
discipline alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.