* 1848987
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2019 Annual International Conference on Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB 2019)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2019
* Max Alekseyev, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 09/30/2019
* USD 10,000.00

Research in Computational Molecular Biology (RECOMB 2019) is an international
scientific conference bridging the computational, mathematical, and biological
sciences. The RECOMB conference series was founded in 1997 to provide a
scientific forum for theoretical advances in computational biology and their
applications in molecular biology and medicine. RECOMB 2019 will be the 23rd
Annual Meeting, held in Washington, DC. RECOMB features keynote talks by
preeminent scientists, together with presentations of refereed research papers
in computational biology, special sessions and poster sessions. This project
requests travel support for student conference participants from any US
university, with priority going to graduate students who will be presenting
paper or posters. Overall, students will be educated on cutting-edge
developments that will further drive the research methods and results of the
field of computational biology. Students and scientists are able to return to
their labs to apply what they have learned as they advance their own research
efforts or begin investigating new areas they were exposed to as a result of
attending RECOMB. NSF investment in this project will help further students'
careers and our nation's competitiveness in an expanding, global industry, and
will benefit the public through new discoveries made by highly trained
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting and proposed travel fellowships
will have particular value for educational purposes, creating a unique training
opportunity for 10 U.S.-based students of computational biology. Awarded travel
fellowships will cover registration, hotel, and travel costs for a selected
group of student presenters. Preference will be given to students with
proceedings papers that are accepted for oral presentation at the conference and
secondarily to those making poster presentations of accepted abstracts. Women,
minorities and persons with disabilities will be especially encouraged to apply
with the goal of achieving diversity at the meeting and directly benefiting
diverse groups. As much as possible, participant support cost requested in this
grant will be used specifically to fund the travel expenses of students from
these three underrepresented groups in order to increase their access to
training opportunities. By attending the RECOMB meeting, students will gain the
latest skills in computational biology, the field that has the potential to
unlock the secrets for understanding life. The field comprises a vibrant,
growing industry, with skilled computational scientists in high demand at
pharmaceutical, agricultural, environmental, consumer products, biotech,
software, hardware, and service companies. Students' participation is vital for
the growth and continuation of the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.