* 1848305
* CAREER: Fundamentals and New Materials for Hydrogen Electrode of Intermediate Temperature Proton Conducting Solid Oxide Fuel Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Zhe Cheng, Florida International University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2024
* USD 571,834.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: Solid oxide fuel cells based on the conduction of
hydrogen ions (called protons) are a type of electrical power generation device
that stands to offer much higher efficiency and lower emission than current
technologies. Such proton conducting solid oxide fuel cells (PC-SOFCs) can
utilize a wide range of fuels from pure hydrogen to readily available
hydrocarbon fuels such as natural gas and biogas. This project aims to generate
new fundamental knowledge about a very important reaction involving hydrogen gas
at the negative electrode of PC-SOFCs at temperatures relevant to operation. It
also aims to develop new electrode materials that could further enhance the
performance and robustness of PC-SOFCs. Knowledge from this project can be
leveraged to other applications such as electrochemical energy storage, chemical
production, and sensors. The project promotes education in advanced ceramic
materials at Florida International University (FIU) and the broader southern
Florida region through various education and outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DETAILS: Despite the advantages of
PC-SOFCs such as higher theoretical efficiency and potential for reduced
degradation, many fundamental aspects are not known. This project aims to
generate new knowledge about the very important hydrogen electrode reaction for
PC-SOFCs using a combined set of technical approaches. For example, PC-SOFC
button cells with patterned metal electrodes are used together with theoretical
modeling to reveal the linkage between hydrogen electrode reaction kinetics and
electrode geometry. Study of the impacts of fuel contaminants (e.g., hydrogen
sulfide) help clarify the origins and the limitations of PC-SOFCs' intriguing
electrochemical behaviors such as better sulfur tolerance. These studies also
provide insights about the underlying hydrogen electrode reaction mechanism. On
the other hand, new hydrogen electrode materials are designed via catalyst
infiltration or exsolution techniques. Tailored doping of highly conductive
oxides is being carried out to achieve mixed proton-electron conduction or
better tolerance to fuel contaminant (e.g., carbon dioxide) for further improved
PC-SOFCs. The education and outreach activities aim to raise awareness and
interest, enhance access to related knowledge, and provide engagement in
research for students (especially minority students), with these efforts
centered around advanced ceramic materials. For example, video recording of
lectures and important lab procedures are provided on the web. In addition,
mobile social networks tools such as WhatsApp are actively adopted for
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.