* 1848330
* Brown Adipose Tissue, Biological Variation and Senescence in Humans
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Daniel Brown, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 05/31/2023
* USD 276,587.00

Fundamental research in human biology includes efforts to understand the nature
and tempo of human life history, including the timing and characteristics of
aging in various physiological systems. This project focuses on hot flashes as
an aspect of human variation during reproductive aging, and tests the hypothesis
that brown adipose tissue - a type of fat that generates heat - may be a factor
associated with hot flash experience. The study will extend our knowledge about
human variation in both brown adipose tissue and hot flash experience, with
particular attention to the relation between hot flashes (subjectively reported
and biometrically measured), brown adipose tissue, body composition, and
climate. The study will address human variation in the ability to generate and
dissipate heat, and findings will contribute to knowledge about modern human
biological adaptations. The outcomes of this research may also inform clinical
understanding and treatments of conditions that affect many women in the U.S.,
including hot flashes and obesity. Results from this study will be shared with
participants and communities through public talks, brochures and a project
website. Undergraduate women will assist with the research, thereby gaining
valuable experience in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When brown adipose
tissue is activated by cool or cold conditions, it creates heat in an effort to
keep the body warm. The central hypothesis of this study is that brown adipose
tissue activation may produce enough heat to cause hot flashes. The aim is to
explore the role of brown adipose tissue activation in the experience of hot
flashes among peri-menopausal and early postmenopausal women, aged 45-55, during
the cold months -- from late October to early April -- in western Massachusetts.
The investigators hypothesize that (1) women with more brown adipose tissue
activity will be more likely to objectively demonstrate and subjectively report
hot flashes, (2) brown adipose tissue activity is more likely to be associated
with hot flashes in heavier women, and (3) acclimatization to heat and (4)
exposure to lower ambient temperatures amplify the association between brown
adipose tissue activity and hot flashes. The study involves face-to-face
interviews about hot flashes and factors associated with hot flashes, physical
activity, and stress; body measurements (height, weight, skinfolds, waist and
hip circumferences); body composition by bioelectrical impedance; an estimation
of brown adipose tissue activity with an infrared camera before and after
dipping a hand into cool (64oF) water for five minutes; an ambulatory hot flash
monitor worn for 24 hours to record both objective and subjective hot flashes;
and an Actigraph GT9X watch to measure activity and sleep patterns for the same
24 hours. On the hot flash monitor pouch, there will also be a small ambulatory
gauge to measure air temperature and humidity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.