* 1848388
* CAREER: Complex Coacervation in Cells
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Allie Obermeyer, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 629,587.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Compartmentalization allows incompatible
processes to occur simultaneously and can improve efficiency. For example,
having separate washer and dryer appliances allows clothes to be cleaned and
dried simultaneously. While all-in-one washer/dryer appliances exist, they are
less efficient, limiting the overall amount of laundry that can be done at one
time. Cells use this same compartmentalization strategy to facilitate the
hundreds of different processes that must take place concurrently to maintain
life. However, cells must also be able to adapt to changing environments and
growth conditions. To address this challenge, cells have certain compartments
that responsively appear and disappear. These dynamic compartments form via a
phase transition of cell contents - a process akin to liquid water freezing to
form solid ice cubes. This project will engineer these dynamic compartments from
the ground-up. Using inspiration from biological systems and guidance from
polymer science, new dynamic compartments will be built in bacteria. A library
of new biomaterials will be prepared and their phase transitions ("water
freezing") will be evaluated in test tubes and living cells. These efforts will
provide a fundamental understanding of how cells form these responsive
compartments and will enable us to efficiently engineer new processes in cells.
This project also aims to educate and train a diverse set of students for
careers in science and engineering. To do this, tutoring in STEM and a short
course on the "Art of Engineering" will be developed for local incarcerated
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Cells organize their
contents from the molecular to the sub-cellular scale. The liquid-liquid phase
separation of biomacromolecules has recently been appreciated as a mechanism for
cellular subcompartmentalization. These phase separated compartments are termed
membraneless organelles or biomolecular condensates. This biological phase
separation is driven by weak, multivalent interactions and shares many features
with the well-studied phase separation of synthetic macromolecules (polymers).
In particular, many membraneless organelles form via complex coacervation of
nucleic acids and proteins - or the liquid-liquid phase separation of oppositely
charged polyelectrolytes. The goal of this project is to use the process of
complex coacervation to artificially promote globular protein phase separation
in E. coli. The design parameters for the in vivo formation of both single and
multi-protein condensates will be determined. Model fluorescent proteins will be
engineered with altered charge and charge distribution to create a library of
supercharged protein polyions. The phase behavior of these engineered proteins
with oppositely charged biomolecules (nucleic acids, proteins) will be
characterized in vitro and in vivo. The insights from these experiments will
enable the creation of synthetic membraneless organelles with potential
applications in metabolic engineering and synthetic biology. These research
objectives will be coupled with educational goals to improve the scientific and
engineering literacy of incarcerated students. Following STEM tutoring of
students inside via existing outreach programs, a short course will be created
on the "Art of Engineering" to introduce engineering concepts to these students
and generate excitement about potential careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.