* 1848888
* International Network-of-Networks (iN2N): Data Experts Workshop
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Leslie McIntosh-Borrelli, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2019
* USD 90,179.00

Data are the necessary foundation of all scientific research, and the ability of
technology to leverage and increase the impact of data has been exponentially
increasing. However, to fully realize the potential of technology to help
address grand challenge research questions and support global decision making,
there must be an alignment and connection among data practices, systems, and
community cultures. Thus, international, interdisciplinary network-of-networks
are critical for advancing global understanding of societal challenges. While
global data communities are primed for considerable progress in accelerating
discovery and advancing research, international collaborations are difficult,
take time, and require ongoing organizational support for facilitation and
coordination of activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address this gap and
advance the data field, the International Network-of-Networks
(&amp;#8203;iN2N)Data Expert Workshop will convene over a nine-month period to
address the socio- and technical challenges in making data shareable and
interoperable internationally. This workshop will result in an expert-written,
publically available, scientific white paper concisely articulating the
complexities of conducting research across international borders with a focus on
data use and interoperability. This white paper will advance progress in
multiple domains by describing the intricacies of international scientific
collaborations across cultures, languages, legal systems, available resources,
priorities, and organizational structures. The knowledge elucidated from this
workshop and articulated in this white paper will provide a crucial resource in
the development of future education and training for multiple, diverse
stakeholders driving international networks of data exchange and re-use, as well
as the way in which national and international research data is managed,
archived, and disseminated for reuse. The combined dissemination of knowledge
and translation into education materials will impact multiple audiences, from
individual researchers, data managers, and technical and infrastructure admins,
to research principal investigators, research funders, research data librarians,
and scientific publishers. Moreover, this workshop will provide a model for
future inclusive, international workshops across trans-disciplinary research and
policy domains wherein data serves a key resource for
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.