* 1848186
* CAREER: Penetrating Barriers - Enhancing Molecular Transport into Complex Biological Membranes and Encouraging Students in STEM
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Ryan Rafferty, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 05/31/2024
* USD 625,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Chemistry of Life Processes in the
Chemistry Division and by the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR). In this CAREER project, Dr. Ryan J. Rafferty at Kansas State
University focuses on the design of molecules that can cross biological
barriers. Living organisms make use of barriers for defense against foreign
substances and to control the transport of chemical substances. Two examples of
such barriers are the blood-brain barrier and the membrane of gram-negative
bacteria. Dr. Rafferty synthesizes molecules that have multiple, different
chemical functional groups that influence the transport properties of various
species through membranes. The research aims to identify systematic approaches
for the design and synthesis of new classes of "universal" molecular
transporters that can carry other molecules through biological barriers. For
example, the new transporters could deliver imaging agents to explore the
structure and function of the brain or therapeutic agents into disease-causing
bacteria. The educational plan is designed to lower the barriers to broader
participation in STEM fields. Dr. Rafferty uses research topics as examples of
real-world applications in undergraduate chemistry classes. Public outreach is
incorporated as a major teaching strategy in a new undergraduate/graduate
Chemical Biology course. The broader outreach plan draws high school students to
science through the K-State Annual Chemistry &amp; Physics Symposium and Summer
Research Bootcamps. The general public is engaged in this research through the
Flint Hills Discovery Center. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The movement of compounds
across the complex biological membranes of gram-negative bacteria and the blood-
brain barrier has been shown to be highly dependent upon physicochemical
properties of the molecular transporters. However, the effects of individual
physicochemical or spatial properties on transport across these barriers have
not been systematically studied. The goal of this research project is to develop
new chaperone-like small molecules (CLSMs) that facilitate general transport
across complex biological barriers. To do so, Dr. Rafferty develops new
molecular scaffolds as well new chemical screening libraries to explore single
and combinational physicochemical properties. He also correlates these
properties to the transport functions of the new molecules across blood-brain
barrier and/or gram-negative bacteria. For example, the new transporters could
deliver imaging agents to explore the structure and function of the brain or
therapeutic agents into disease-causing bacteria. The research is well suited to
the education and training of a diverse group of students and scholars. The
Rafferty lab pursues activities that raise the awareness of the public of the
value of science and research and that attract new students into the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.