* 1848557
* CAREER: History of Science at the Interface of Biomedical and Environmental Concerns
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Derr, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2024
* USD 480,780.00

This award supports a research CAREER project that occurs at the juncture of
three distinct fields: middle east studies, history of medicine, and
environmental history. The locus of the study are health issues that
specifically concern the liver. The project straddles historical and
contemporary public health concerns through a focus on government environmental
interventions initially causing the development of schistosomiasis, which leads
to fibrosis of the liver, and later interventions responding to this health
issue. She also plans to consider the more recent situation with regards to
Hepatitis-C, and the politics of access to anti-Hep C medications. The PI plans
to support three graduate students, who will be recruited to engage in history
of science projects that are complementary to her own
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will use archival research and
interviews to conduct her study. She will begin by focusing on changes in
agricultural practices in the 19th century; specifically, the movement to
perennial irrigation practices. This ecological transformation in turn lead to
changes that affected the health of those who lived and labored in rural
communities; it facilitated the spread of schistosomiasis. The PI will then
transition forward to study developments that occurred during the 1950s and
1960s including global medical exchanges concerning schistosomiasis, and the
implementation of public health policies to treat schistosomiasis. The third
period focuses on is the late 1980s, when Hepatitis C becomes a vital public
health. She brings this in to the contemporary moment, and the politics
surrounding access to anti-Hep C medications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.