* 1848671
* Convergence: RAISE: Engineering Coral Reef Recovery
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Forest Rohwer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 1,008,451.00

With an estimated annual global value of $1 trillion, coral reefs are critical
to food security, shoreline protection, biodiversity, tourism, and jobs. Yet
corals have suffered widespread global death in the last 50 years due to diverse
and interacting threats including heat stress, overfishing, algal overgrowth,
pollution, disease, runoff, coastal construction, dredging, changing water
chemistry, and habitat loss. Because corals generally grow very slowly, their
current reproduction, survival, and growth rates cannot keep pace with the
ongoing losses. This project will target the complex and compelling challenge of
coral reef restoration through Convergence Research. Specifically, the project
will bring together expertise, methods, and researchers from engineering
(materials and mechanical) and biology (microbiology, coral reef science, and
geobiology) to make transformative advances in coral reproduction and juvenile
survival through materials engineering for coral restoration. This program may
have impact on coral reef restoration and restoration science, and also on the
economies and communities that depend on these ecosystems to support tourism and
fisheries. The outcomes of this research may have broad impact in fields outside
of coral reef science, including aquaculture, surface fouling, ocean
engineering, drug discovery, biomaterials, and microbial biofilm research. The
project will support the training of three graduate students and one post-
doctoral researcher. To inspire the next generation of scientists and engineers,
diverse public outreach activities will focus on coral reef science, marine
conservation, and education about combining engineering and biology to create
powerful tools for ocean health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research tackles a
fundamental problem blocking coral reef recovery: juvenile recruitment and
survival. Currently, corals suffer from widespread recruitment failure and over
98% of coral settlers outplanted for restoration die within two years. Altering
coral population dynamics can shift reef systems back toward desirable organisms
(corals, coralline algae, herbivores) and away from harmful competitors
(pathogens, macroalgae, turf algae, cyanobacteria). The project will use a
large-scale, iterative, convergence-based approach to engineer novel substrates
for coral propagation. The team will design, fabricate, and test a diverse array
of substrates using materials novel to coral restoration. After substrates are
deployed to the reef, the performance of each will be assessed by measuring
surface microbial community composition; coral larval exploration, attraction,
and attachment rates; coral larval settlement rates; ecological community
composition; and coral juvenile recruitment, growth, and survival. These data
will be measured using metagenomic sequence analysis, experiments with swimming
coral larvae, custom-built fluidics systems, ecological community assessments,
and skeletal density and microbial community analyses of coral recruits.
Substrate characteristics that maximize positive biological outcomes will be
incorporated into second-generation substrates with further diversity of
millimeter-scale features. The top-performing substrate characteristics will be
incorporated into 3D substrates for coral restoration and tested against
materials traditionally used in coral propagation. Convergence Workshops will
foster the integration of coral biology and engineering, providing hands-on
experience in 3D modeling, materials fabrication, and coral propagation. Results
will be disseminated broadly through a website, social media, conferences,
journal articles, and outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.