* 1848554
* CAREER: Long-term Controls on Short-term Patterns of Magmatism: Towards a Unified Framework for Crustal Magma Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* Leif Karlstrom, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 05/31/2024
* USD 599,951.00

Determining the pathways and timing of magma migration between the source region
and Earth's surface remains one of the biggest challenges for understanding
volcanic eruptions and their hazards. Predicting volcanic activity must contend
with magma transport processes that are hidden beneath the surface and that
reflect an integrated history of magmatic and tectonic events spanning far
beyond direct observational records. Magmatism of any kind associated with the
largest volcanic eruptions in the geologic record has never been directly
observed, which complicates efforts to understand how volcanoes active today fit
into the spectrum of possible volcanic processes. This proposal will generate
new understandings of magma transport on scales that are relevant both to
predicting active volcanic processes and to interpreting the record of past
eruptions. Broader impacts associated with this proposal will leverage the great
diversity of volcanic data to develop sonification and visualization software
tools for use in teaching, outreach, and as a bridge to the arts. Undergraduate
teaching and workshops will generate geoscience education materials. A series of
outreach presentations will use sonification and visualization techniques to
bring project research to the public, including a collaboration with musicians
to produce recordings and performances of sonified volcanic data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two primary scientific objectives of this
proposal. The first objective is to understand the spatiotemporal progression of
magmatism at its largest scales, focusing on the iconic Columbia River Flood
Basalts. New field data describing a massive exposed feeder dike system in
eastern Oregon, USA, will be combined with thermochronology and related
techniques that constrain timescales of subsurface magma flow. Numerical models
will elucidate physical processes controlling the tempo, volumes, and crustal
transport architecture feeding flood basalt eruptions, using Bayesian inversion
methods to formally assess model uncertainty amongst diverse but indirect
observational constraints. This work should provide a predictive basis for
connecting flood basalt eruptions to environmental impacts including climate and
mass extinctions of life. The second objective is to develop a modeling
framework for crustal magma transport that captures multiphase fluid movement
and surface eruption cycles through a network of reservoirs and conduits,
coupled to a crustal model that accounts for the thermomechanical history of
prior magmatism, far-field forcing (i.e. from tectonics, climate), and nonlinear
rheology of crustal materials. This modeling framework will be used to explore
the phenomenological trade-offs in physical and chemical processes that govern
eruption cycles, and explore the complexities of history-dependent crustal
stress and thermal evolution at long-lived magmatic centers. Applications to
historical volcanic datasets as well as the Columbia River Flood Basalts will
provide an observational test for models, while comparison to and calibration
with fully phase-resolved simulations performed by others will help bridge
divergent approaches to modeling multi-scale magma
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.