* 1848689
* I-Corps: Ambient Sleep Architecture Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,06/30/2020
* Yusuf Ozturk, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 06/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to monitor
sleep quality of individuals and report sleep quality index and sleep
architecture using an ambient connected sensor. This project will potentially
improve quality of care in some patient populations such as Alzheimer/Dementia
patients and infants by enabling sleep quality assessment using a non-intrusive
technology. The passive sensor we have developed can precisely detect entire
sleep stages as well as any abnormalities related to breathing or movement
during sleep. The sensor is placed outside of bed and does not pose discomfort
to the patient. It is our goal to offer a sleep sensor that will be an essential
part of our healthy lifestyle choices. The sensor must be non-intrusive and
ambient to be widely accepted. Wearable or body-contact sensors take away from
the natural sensation of sleep and might create a feeling of being monitored.
For this reason, we believe an ideal sleep monitor should be ambient and easily
blend in with the accessories on the bedside table. This monitor will enable the
same kind of diagnostic power available in a hospital, to the comfort of our
bedrooms.

This I-Corps project proposes a sleep monitor based on a passive infrared
sensing technology which utilizes a pyroelectric material for temperature
sensing. The material is lithium tantalate, a crystal that has pyroelectric
properties. A change in ambient temperature creates a change in polarization of
the crystal. This change creates a potential across the crystal and a charge is
generated similar to a capacitor. The generated charge is collected by
electrodes thus we obtain the voltage response of the pyroelectric detector.
Under constant and ambient temperature, the response quickly approaches steady
state. Due to the thermal time constant, the crystal will quickly thermalize to
its environment after input. Thus, we observe a 'voltage pulse' mechanism when
there is a fast change (physical movement) against the background. This property
makes our sensor very sensitive to fluctuations against the background
temperature distribution and allows it to accurately detect fine movements such
as chest motion during breathing. We use these fine chest movements to detect
respiration and heart rate which in turn are used to determine the sleep stage.
We use respiration rate variability to determine sleep stages and derive sleep
quality index using sophisticated signal processing methods.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.