* 1848166
* CAREER:Potential of fiber acoustic sensing in the next-generation seismic networks
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Zhongwen Zhan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 03/31/2024
* USD 493,920.00

Scientists use large networks of seismic sensors to detect ground vibrations
caused by earthquakes, in order to understand their physics and help mitigate
related hazard. In regions with high seismic activity, such as California, there
are dense networks with one seismic sensor every 10 to 30 km. However, past
large earthquakes taught us that this station density is still not enough.
Earthquake shaking can change dramatically from block to block, due to highly
complex shallow soil structures. Furthermore, many small earthquakes are not
detected by the current seismic networks, smearing our images of faults. With
denser seismic networks, scientists will be able to better map earthquake faults
and monitor their activities, also to provide more clear pictures of Earth
interior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Distributed acoustic sensing (DAS) is an emerging
technology that converts every meter of a long optical fiber to a seismic
sensor, by shining a laser pulse into the fiber from one end and interrogating
the "echo" scattered from fiber defects. DAS provides a scalable and affordable
way to deploy a dense seismic network. This CAREER project will build the
Pasadena Array, the first continuous city-scale fiber seismic network, to
explore the potential of DAS in the next-generation seismic networks. The
researcher will collaborate with the City of Pasadena to transform an existing
telecommunication fiber network owned by the city to a seismic array with 50,000
sensors within 10km. The Pasadena Array will be a unique platform to test and
characterize different generations of DAS instruments, develop data processing
algorithms, and explore applications in seismology. The orders of magnitude
increase in station density will push the limits of earthquake detection, basin
structure imaging, and hazard assessment/mitigation. Ultimately, the Pasadena
Array will serve as a template to build a million-sensor seismic network in
Southern California, and transform how we design, build, and use seismic
networks nationally and globally.The Broader Impacts of the project include the
benefits enhanced knowledge of the impacts of earthquakes and the involvement of
students in the Pasadena school system in better understanding seismic
hazards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.