* 1848207
* CAREER: Characterization of Sources of Ionospheric Scintillation and Space Weather Prediction through Analytics and Machine Learning
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Kshitija Deshpande, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2024
* USD 373,380.00

This project supports a CAREER development plan based upon an investigation of
the sources of ionospheric scintillation using an approach that combines
physics-based modeling and machine learning (ML), and further predicts space
weather effects, while supporting and enhancing student research, teaching, and
public outreach at Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU). Space weather
can affect different technologies on the Earth, for example, geomagnetic storms
can alter the signals from Global Navigation Satellite Systems (GNSS) (called
scintillation) and degrade their accuracy and reliability. The main educational
goals of this project will be achieved through mentoring UG and graduate
students, development of a new course "Application of data science and machine
learning to space weather prediction," and including a new space weather
component in the ERAU summer school and Women in Science Embry-Riddle (WiSER)
program. The outreach goals will be achieved through organizing a workshop
"Space weather effects on Air Traffic communication" for ERAU Aviation majors
and collaborating with the Daytona Beach HAM radio club to enthuse students and
local community on space weather and its effect on radio
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While many attempts are underway to predict
the global ionospheric state using Total Electron Content (TEC) and GNSS signal
scintillation indices, little is done to understand and predict the local
ionosphere in terms of the underlying mechanisms responsible for producing high
latitude ionospheric irregularities using GNSS data and modeling. The principal
objectives of this study are to use the inverse method, a full 3D forward
propagation model along with datasets from several established GNSS receivers to
train machine learning (ML) algorithms in clustering of irregularities based on
their sources and to assist with predicting the scintillation at a different
time and frequency. Thus, this project will develop an ML approach, and augment
it with the state-of-the-art physics-based models and inversion method in
predicting space weather effects. Radio communication is critical to many
civilian and military endeavors, therefore predicting the space weather effects
on communication through irregularity physics will prove to be of great societal
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.