* 1848466
* CAREER: Two-Dimensional Quantum Fabric of Ultracold Dipolar Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* Sebastian Will, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 04/30/2024
* USD 780,000.00

Understanding and controlling fundamental properties of materials is a major
frontier of physics. From hardened steel in the industrial revolution to the
doped silicon used in the electronics era, new ways to understand and control
materials often leads to new technology. In a physics perspective, materials are
generally made of densely packed atoms with positively charged ionic cores
permeated by a negatively charged gas of electrons. We know the movement of
electrons and ions is governed by quantum mechanics. However, understanding
exactly how this motion gives rise to material properties such as
superconductivity and exotic forms of magnetism is a major challenge. This is
challenging, in part, because it is difficult to observe individual electrons.
They are small; they move quickly; they interact with each other, and they are
easily disturbed. To address this challenge with a new approach, this project
aims to use gasses of ultracold molecules in vacuum to simulate electrons in
materials. Interactions between molecules are expected to make phenomena such as
the self-organization of crystalline phases easier to observe. This team will
assemble polar molecules atom-by-atom at ultracold temperatures and then trap
molecules in a thin sheet of laser light. While confined in one dimension, the
molecules will still be free to move in two dimensions and interact with each
other. This project will explore how to use this quantum mechanical "fabric" of
dipolar molecules to simulate properties of real materials and to study
fundamental organizing principles of matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will
construct a new apparatus to study two-dimensional quantum systems of ultracold
dipolar molecules. The objectives include (1) the creation of a novel quantum
gas mixture of sodium and cesium atoms. (2) The creation of dense ultracold
samples of sodium-cesium molecules in the absolute ground state. (3) The
investigation of molecular gases in a single two-dimensional sheet via high-
resolution imaging. Sodium-cesium molecules have a large electric dipole moment
(the largest among the chemically stable bialkali molecules). Utilizing the
molecules' dipole moment, this team aims to explore parameter regimes that were
inaccessible so far, and which may enable the observation of novel many-body
quantum phases such as strongly correlated superfluidity, supersolidity, and the
formation of a dipolar crystal. In addition to the technical effort, the project
is accompanied by a broad outreach program that aims to improve literacy in
quantum physics among high school students, undergraduate students, and high
school science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.