* 1848339
* CAREER: An Approach to Pricing, Hedging, Stability, and Asymptotic Analysis in Financial Markets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Oleksii Mostovyi, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2024
* USD 420,000.00

As financial markets have not only grown but have also become very complex,
understanding both their qualitative and quantitative aspects are among highly
active areas of research in mathematics. This award provides methods for
pricing, hedging, stability and asymptotic analysis in financial markets. These
projects will further our understanding of so-called incomplete markets (i.e.,
the markets which have a limited capability to offset risks) and the sensitivity
of such markets to different types of perturbations and trading restrictions.
The topics will lead to new developments in stochastic control, convex and
stochastic analysis, to novel interdisciplinary research, and results applicable
in the financial industry. Graduate students and post doctoral researchers are
included in the work of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first research
topic is stability and asymptotic analysis of financial markets with respect to
perturbations. Mathematically this topic leads to investigations of the
responses of the underlying stochastic control problems to distortions of the
input data. An appropriate form of parametrization for the perturbations and the
corresponding value functions will allow for analysis involving only partial
convexity (in one variable) of the underlying value function. Both dynamic and
static formulations of the underlying stochastic control problem will be
considered. The second topic is the pricing and hedging of financial instruments
when additional trading constraints are imposed. This topic is connected to an
investigation of the optimal investment problem with labor income, where extra
trading constraints make the problem hard to analyze, and special forms of
parametrization of the labor income and the value function are needed. The
mathematical work relies on classical and modern results in stochastic analysis,
stochastic control, finite and infinite-dimensional convex analysis, and new
results to be established by the Principal
Investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.