* 1848029
* Convergence: RAISE Integrating machine learning and biological neural networks
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Bobak Nazer, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 09/30/2022
* USD 999,999.00

The field of neuroscience is undergoing a rapid transformation, and within the
next decade, it may become possible to capture data from millions of individual
neurons at the same time. Such a technological advancement would allow
scientists to record and analyze a significant fraction of the brain's neural
network at unprecedented spatial and time resolutions. The goal of this research
project is to advance our understanding of brain activity through the
integration of bioengineering, systems neuroscience and data science and their
application to the study of networks of neurons. The research team will engineer
new sensors designed to image the activity of individual neurons within a large
network and then apply this method to the study of functioning neural systems.
The team will also develop computational methods to extract information from the
resulting, extremely large datasets. This research will have broader impact
through training STEM students in a convergent science area and through
deepening our understanding of the science underlying neurological disease and
thereby improving mental health treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project aims to create novel protein sensors to acquire single-neuron-resolution
imaging data. This methodology could serve as the basis for ultra-large-scale
neural network imaging. The researchers will establish the architectural
principles and fundamental limits for fluorescence imaging systems and inference
algorithms that extract underlying neural activity. They will then develop
machine learning techniques to extract network-level phenomena from high-
dimensional neural data. Finally, the researchers will study large networks of
neurons during behavior and learning via carefully-designed experiments and
machine learning techniques. The technologies developed in this work, to acquire
and to analyze, single-neuron-resolution imaging data, will facilitate the
understanding of brain's neural network computation at an ultra-large scale,
directly confronting challenging societal problems related to the human brain.
The project participants will also educate the next generation of engineers and
scientists in the convergent area of neuroscience with data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.