* 1848012
* CAREER: EXTENDING GROUND STATE QUANTUM CHEMISTRY TO EXCITED STATES
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2023
* Eric Neuscamman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2023
* USD 418,054.00

Eric Neuscamman of the University of California, Berkeley is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop new theoretical models to describe molecules
that are excited by the absorption of light. Interactions with light are
fundamental to chemistry. Lasers, for example, play a central role in molecular
diagnostics. The absorption of light and its conversion to electricity is
central to solar power and to many of the sensory devices used to guard against
chemical and biological threats. Scientists are still unable to answer many
critical questions about the behavior of molecules that have absorbed light. By
constructing theoretical models to describe light-activated molecules,
Neuscamman's research provides insights that complement and enhance experimental
methods. Neuscamman is also building a multi-level outreach and education
effort. His program uses learn-by-playing and learn-by-teaching principles to
improve numerical optimization concepts and methods across K-12 education. This
effort centers around the design and deployment of age-appropriate games, such
as "program your own virtual robot" for high school students. A key feature of
this outreach is vertical integration, in which older students, especially
undergraduates and high school students, are recruited into the outreach efforts
targeting younger students, thus enabling learning-by-teaching. Together, these
efforts give students a head start in numerical methods thinking and real-world
applications that prepare them for formal calculus training and provide them
with the required mathematical skills for scientific endeavors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ground state variational principle is the single most
important theoretical tool in quantum chemistry, allowing wave function
approximations and their orbital shapes to be tailored for the ground state of a
specific molecule. Historically, the modeling of a large variety of chemical
processes has been hampered by the lack of analogous tools for excited states.
Such excited states play central roles in understanding light harvesting,
atmospheric processes, and energy storage. Although quantum Monte Carlo methods
are able to work directly with rigorous excited state variational principles,
they have important limitations and do not, at present, benefit from the same
quantum-Monte-Carlo/quantum-chemistry synergies that exist for ground states.
Professor Neuscamman is extending the advantages of excited state variational
principles into the ecosystem of traditional quantum chemistry. This project
begins with an excited-state-specific mean field theory that is a direct
generalization of Hartree Fock Theory. Professor Neuscamman is developing new
excited state generalizations of correlation theories like M'ller Plesset theory
and coupled cluster theory. These methods act both as natural partners for Monte
Carlo methods and as powerful tools in their own right. In summary, Neuscamman's
work generalizes excited state variational principles beyond the world of
quantum Monte Carlo in order to bring traditional ground state quantum chemistry
to bear on excited state problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.