* 1848513
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Genetic and Isotopic Investigations of Human Population Origins and Dispersals in Island Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2021
* Scott Fitzpatrick, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 01/31/2021
* USD 24,822.00

Modern humans have dispersed and settled nearly every region on the planet. The
complex timing, movements, and interactions of populations, cultures, and
technology in the past are an important part of our human story. This doctoral
dissertation project combines genetic and geochemical analyses of human skeletal
material from the Chelechol ra Orrak site in Palau, western Micronesia, to
investigate prehistoric colonization of an island setting during one of the most
widespread and rapid dispersals in human history. Despite this being the last
major geographical region to be colonized by humans, information regarding the
timing, direction, and origins of settlement in many respects remains unclear.
This research will also make broader contributions to local, national, and
global communities through undergraduate training and mentorship at the
University of Oregon; community involvement and outreach through public talks
and the distribution of comics about aDNA in archaeology in Palau; and the
implementation of a learning module that teaches the scientific method,
archaeological fieldwork, and genetic techniques to underrepresented elementary
and middle school students in Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will analyze human ancient DNA (aDNA) and geochemical mobility data for
Micronesia and provide critical baseline information for future isotopic and
genetic research in the region. The objective of this research is to investigate
the origins of prehistoric Palauans on a regional scale and subsequent local
human mobility within the archipelago following settlement. While linguistic,
computer modeling, and biodistance studies have resulted in hypotheses
identifying broad general regions of Micronesian population origins, numerous
questions regarding the relationship of early Micronesians to other regional
populations, and a more specific area of origin still remain. In generating aDNA
data for western Micronesia, this project will place early Palauans in a
regional framework to examine broader scale genetic relationships. Examination
of mobility via strontium (87Sr/ 86Sr) and lead (206Pb/204Pb, 207Pb/204Pb,
208Pb/204Pb) isotope analysis from human remains--in conjunction with biological
and geological samples taken from locations across the archipelago--will help to
identify where individuals buried at Chelechol ra Orrak may have been residing
during their lifetime and shed light on inter-island mobility during the
earliest phases of settlement in Palau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.