* 1848607
* Conference Series on Algebra, Geometry, and Combinatorics (ALGECOM)
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Alexander Yong, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 02/29/2024
* USD 44,730.00

ALGECOM (algebra-geometry-combinatorics) is a series of biannual one day
conferences. The main goal is to promote collaboration and regular interaction
among midwest students and faculty. Both (non-local) senior and early career
mathematicians will be invited as speakers. ALGECOM is now a nearly decade-long
tradition in the midwest and has involved over fifty institutions. This grant
will fund participant travel to six conferences, the first of which, ALGECOM
XVII, will be at Loyola University in Chicago on May 25, 2019. The conference
website is at https://sites.google.com/site/algecomday/algecom-
xvii.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each session of ALGECOM consists of four talks and a
student poster session. Dissemination of research at the border of algebra,
geometry and combinatorics is the basic intellectual merit of the series. There
is a wealth of midwest departments with individually small ALGECOM-related
research groups. These one day conferences provide the seed for research
collaboration among these groups. A major effort has been made to encourage the
attendance of graduate students, recent graduates, and untenured faculty. In
terms of broader impacts, there are ongoing efforts to recruit women as
participants and speakers (in fact ALGECOM 14 had the first all women speaker
list). These efforts are enhanced by NSF support, as it allows for invitations
to mathematicians from a geographically larger region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.