* 1848868
* I-Corps:  Residential Energy Management and Analytics
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Srinivas Shakkottai, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project derives from its
promise to positively affect not only consumers, but also enhance efficiencies
in the electric energy marketplace as a whole. The basic functionality of
matching users to optimal electric plans will result in both higher consumer
satisfaction, and result in Retail Electric Providers (REPs) offering more
competitive rate packages. Identifying the actual usage profile of appliances
over time and providing actionable information to consumers will enable
consumers to take informed decisions on appliance purchases, as well as
manufacturers to optimize designs with real-world inputs. The platform will
enable the solution of system-wide problems faced by utility companies like peak
period demand surges to be countered through demand response initiatives such as
incentivizing customers to modify their usage patterns to smoothen the load
curve. Each function of the proposed system is geared toward addressing a
specific source of friction in the electric energy marketplace, and consequently
also possesses commercial potential. Thus, the overall economic impact will be
on consumers, REPs, utility companies and appliance manufactures, while
promoting a greater knowledge and engagement among the electricity
consumers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project explores the value of
creating a bundled energy management system aimed at residential users. The
system uses machine-learning-based analytics of the customer's daily, weekly,
monthly, and seasonal energy usage trends to offer potential savings through (1)
recommending the best retail energy service provider plan matching the
customer's usage patterns, (2) incentivizing customers to enable full
integration with smart home devices, including smart thermostats, (3)
identifying and predicting the electricity consumption of different appliances
and providing actionable information on their optimal usage and maintenance, and
(4) services to allow customers to navigate through the process of switching
plans. A smartphone app available for the iOS and Android platforms forms the
customer interface to the system. The key novelties of this project lie in the
development and integration of machine learning tools and behavioral economics
ideas into the domain of residential energy management. The project is founded
on research into the design, development and validation of such tools in
contexts such as predicting residential energy usage over time, disaggregating
usage on a per-appliance basis, and experimentation on how best to motivate
users to engage in energy usage behavior that induces efficient grid
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.