* 1848327
* CAREER: Unfolding Earth history back to the Mesozoic by incorporating seismic tomography into Pacific realm plate tectonic reconstructions
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Jonny Wu, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 568,310.00

Current plate tectonic theory permits less than half of the Earth surface to be
reconstructed with adequate detail by the early Cretaceous, which is only the
most recent ~3% of Earth history. The largest unknowns lie within the
Panthalassa-Pacific realm, a now-vanished oceanic domain that once covered ~70%
of the Earth. This project will build a new Panthalassa-Pacific plate
reconstruction back to Mesozoic times from the novel constraints of seismic
tomography - seismological images of the Earth?s mantle. The research is
combined with an educational plan that focuses on using Earth interior imaging
to help develop the essential but underutilized STEM skill of 3D spatial
analysis, an identified core geoscience skill. Outreach efforts prioritize
reaching groups historically underrepresented in the sciences via undergraduate
curriculum development, a collaborative partnership with a local inner-city STEM
magnet high school, and through summer undergraduate experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build a tomography-led, full plate
reconstruction for the Pacific-Panthalassa realm back to the Mesozoic era that
will contribute time-dependent kinematic and tectonic boundary conditions for
global models and regional studies. An unconventional tomographic plate
reconstruction workflow is used that involves 3D mapping of slabs from
tomography, slab unfolding (retro-deformation), and assigning plate motions to
the unfolded slabs in a hierarchical fashion using available kinematic
constraints. The tomographic plate reconstruction model is systematically
compared to relevant circum-Pacific geological datasets, and further tested as
input boundary conditions for two distinct geodynamic forward modeling
approaches using established workflows for the mature codes CitcomS and TERRA.
The resulting plate model will provide an alternative subduction history for
more than half of the Earth that can be simulated within other global models. In
addition, the project explores the capabilities and limitations of seismic
tomography for linking the deep mantle to the Earth surface for 4D Earth
evolution, which supports an identified key research frontier for NSF
Tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.