* 1848885
* American Geophysical Union (AGU) Chapman Conference on Scientific Challenges Pertaining to Forecasting Space Weather Including Extremes; Pasadena, California; February 11-15, 2019
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Pranoti Asher, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 01/31/2020
* USD 25,000.00

This one-year project is intended to enable the participation of students and
early-career scientists from the U.S. at the American Geophysical Union (AGU)
sponsored Chapman Conference on Scientific Challenges Pertaining to Forecasting
Space Weather Including Extremes, which will be held in the Spring of 2019. This
AGU Chapman Conference will bring together the solar and Geospace communities to
review and advance scientific understanding of solar-terrestrial relationships
as they relate to forecasting space weather, from moderate to extreme
conditions. Recent years have brought new developments in modeling,
observations, and scientific understanding to research that pertains to space
weather, as well as renewed interest in space weather extremes. Despite its
being a long-sought goal of the Space Physics and Aeronomy (SPA) community,
forecasting space weather remains a challenge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This AGU
Chapman Conference is aimed at creating new community perspectives that will
accelerate space weather forecasting as a scientific discipline and address the
barriers that currently exist in its development. At present, there is an urgent
need to develop new approaches for predicting space weather extremes. The
outcome of this Conference is envisioned as guidance for the SPA community on
new research directions to pursue that will yield major scientific benefits, as
well as the potential for broader benefits to society. The event organizers
emphasize on the active participation and involvement of early-career scientists
from the U.S. at the Conference, which is well aligned with the NSF's goal of
developing the next generation of STEM scientists. Furthermore, this AGU Chapman
Conference directly addresses Goal 5 of the National Space Weather Action Plan:
improve space-weather services through advancing understanding and
forecasting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.