* 1848154
* CAREER:Laser Cooling and Trapping of Beryllium: Frozen Plasmas and Precision Measurements
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2024
* Clayton Simien, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 580,245.00

This CAREER award supports investigation of berillium (Be) as a new candidate
element for the next generation of optical atomic clocks, as well as for
producing an ultracold neutral plasma -- an ultracold gas of ions and electrons.
Atomic clocks have been instrumental in the advancement of science and
technology in the twentieth century, leading to innovations such as global
positioning, advanced communications, and tests of fundamental theories of
particle physics. A next generation optical atomic clock would extend the
capabilities of these systems and will enable enhanced security for data routing
and communications, advanced earth and space time-based navigation, and ever
more precise testing of Einstein's Theory of General Relativity. Ultracold
neutral plasmas (UCNPs) are laser produced plasmas that stretch the boundaries
of traditional plasma physics. However, studies of these table-top ultracold
systems are promising to greatly improve our understanding of much hotter and
denser plasmas thought to occur in many astrophysical systems. The goal of this
project is to laser cool, trap and photo-ionize neutral atomic beryllium for its
potential use as an optical frequency standard, and to produce a UNCP at a
sufficiently low temperature for ionic crystals to form inside the system,
virtually freezing the plasma. This award will also make it possible to attract
and retain more underrepresented minority students to physics studies. The
project will involve minority graduate, undergraduate, and high school students
via existing Univ. of Alabama - Birmingham programs to participate in research
projects in the Simien Spectroscopy and Laser Cooling group. Additional outreach
activities will aim to get K-12 students interested in science and engineering
by performing physics and chemistry demonstrations at local schools in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is an experimental program directed
towards investigation of spectroscopic, laser cooling, and photoionization
properties of atomic beryllium as it relates to atomic clocks and ultracold
neutral plasmas. Be is an alkaline earth element with a simple internal
structure which provides for electric-dipole and intercombination transitions in
the optical regions for both neutral atoms and ions. It is a promising candidate
for next generation frequency standards and for laser cooling, trapping, and
photo-ionization to produce an ultracold plasma. In particular, the
spectroscopic studies will involve measurements of the hyperfine structure of
strong electric dipole transitions. The objective of this study is to determine
Be hyperfine constants, which define the ordering of the hyperfine peaks and
contributions to the energy shifts from the magnetic dipole and electric
quadrupole interactions. The determination of this spectroscopic property is
necessary for implementing laser cooling and trapping of beryllium. In addition,
laser cooling and trapping will be used to create a magneto-optical trap as the
first step towards performing precision measurements on the intercombination
lines. It will also be used for photoionization studies for generation of a Be
based frequency standard and an ultracold neutral plasma that can be efficiently
laser cooled into the strongly coupled regime. This project is jointly funded by
the Plasma Physics program, the Atomic, Molecular and Optical Experimental
Physics program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.