* 1848013
* CAREER: Refining zircon (U-Th)/He deep-time thermochronology for constraining Neoproterozoic thermal histories
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* William Guenthner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 530,932.00

Low-temperature thermochronology focuses on understanding the thermal histories
of rocks in the upper ~10 km of Earth's crust. The suite of thermochronologic
techniques has become essential for understanding the timing and rates of rock
uplift and erosion in active or geologically young orogenic belts. This project
focuses on a particularly promising and emerging area of research in deep-time
(i.e. Precambrian) thermal histories. Deep-time thermochronology can be used to
constrain the multiple phases of heating and cooling that have occurred over
time spans of 100-1000 million years. This project will examine the timing and
magnitude of erosion that created the Neoproterozoic-Cambrian Great Unconformity
in the midcontinent U.S. with zircon (uranium-thorium)/helium thermochronology.
The erosion constraints obtained as part of this project will serve as crucial
inputs for investigations of atmosphere-biosphere-lithosphere feedbacks that
relate estimates of erosion to 1) the disassembly of the supercontinent Rodinia,
2) potential triggers for snowball Earth glaciations, and 3) the Cambrian
explosion in biodiversity. The project will also seek to further refine the
temperature sensitivity of the zircon (uranium-thorium)/helium
thermochronometer. The project incorporates an outreach and education plan that
seeks to instill an appreciation for the concept of deep-time among
undergraduates and the public through the use of a world-class resource
available at the University of Illinois: the Rare Book and Manuscript Library.
This library houses an extensive collection of rare geologic books and
manuscripts dating back to the Enlightenment, which will be utilized in exhibits
and incorporated into geology courses. These activities will impart a cultural
knowledge of the concept of geologic time, foster a deeper appreciation for how
Earth scientists think, and allow undergraduate students to engage with pre-
modern primary literature to provide historical context and target fundamental
questions of their science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
advancing deep-time zircon (U-Th)/He thermochronologic methods at a fundamental
level and uses these advancements to expand the range of thermal history related
problems and questions that researchers can address. Investigations of the
radiation damage-He diffusivity relationship in zircon and the kinetics for
radiation damage annealing in zircon will help refine the temperature
sensitivity of the zircon (U-Th)/He system. This research will advance our
knowledge of the damage-diffusivity relationship via step-heating diffusion
experiments on Sri Lankan zircon grains over a damage range for which currently
only a single data point exists. Raman spectroscopy measurements from a suite of
zircon grains with a wide range of radiation damage will be combined with
thermal annealing experiments to provide new kinetics on the process of damage
annealing in zircon. The advances in zircon (U-Th)/He deep-time thermochronology
will help constrain the timing and magnitude of Neoproterozoic exhumation in the
midcontinent U.S. through thermal history modeling. These results will be used
to assess existing geodynamic models for the formation of the Great
Unconformity, each of which predicts a different timing and magnitude of
erosion, and thus provide insight into atmosphere-biosphere-lithosphere
interactions in deep-time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.