* 1848602
* EAGER: Using the National Organizations Study to Examine Developments in the Labor Force in the 21st Century
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2018,10/31/2020
* Tom Smith, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 10/31/2020
* USD 222,858.00

This project supports the addition of the National Organizations Survey (NOS)
module to the 2018 General Social Survey. The NOS is a hypernetwork sample of
employers in the United States that will produce a nationally-representative
sample of employers from the self-employed up to the largest public and private
organizations. It will cover government agencies, private corporations, not-for-
profits, and all other sectors. In particular, the NOS will provide data on
organizations' approach to occupational health and safety and to workplace
health promotion. The availability of these data, and their linkage to the
General Social Survey will enable researchers to investigate questions of
importance to employers and workers, and to national health and well-being.

This project will link the organizational-level data to respondent-level data
from the General Social Survey (GSS), allowing examination of the effect of
different types of employers with different employment policies and benefits on
employees' assessment of job satisfaction, the quality of working life, and many
other attitudes and behaviors. Support for the addition of the NOS module is
provided by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health of the
Centers for Disease Control (CDC/NIOSH).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.