* 1848516
* CAREER: Graphene as a Bioscaffold for Musculoskeletal Tissue Engineering
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2024
* David Estrada, Boise State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 550,752.00

TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of this NSF CAREER Award is to enrich
scientific understanding of basic principles governing stem cell biology by
using novel approaches to investigate the emerging role of atomically thin
materials such as graphene in controlling stem cell fate. To accomplish this,
the principle investigator will integrate functionally patterned graphene and
graphene derivatives into bioscaffolds to control and measure the fundamental
biophysical cues that encode information for human mesenchymal stem cell (hMSC)
growth and differentiation. Electrical connections to the graphene bioscaffolds
will serve to modulate temperature and electrical fields while also actively
monitoring the electrochemical exchange at the cell-graphene interface during
growth and differentiation. In order to elucidate graphene's structure-property-
processing correlations on hMSC differentiation, genetic profiles will be
compared for hMSC growth on epitaxial graphene on SiC substrates,
polycrystalline graphene films grown by chemical vapor deposition on copper
foils, and graphene films printed from chemically exfoliated graphene
nanoflakes. Electrical bias applied to the graphene films will be used to
monitor the effect of transmembrane voltage on hMSC fate, as well as the impact
of electrical signals on extracellular matrix production and the mechanical
properties of engineered musculoskeletal tissue. Intellectual Merit: The
fundamental knowledge gained will enable a complete set of design rules for
electrically active bioscaffolds that can couple or decouple biophysical cues
responsible for stem cell growth and differentiation. The data produced through
these experiments will be made publicly available to further advance in silico
research of biomolecular processes and subsequent integration in virtual
physiological human models. Broader Impacts: By integrating graphene into the
tissue engineering cycle, potentially transformational outcomes will likely
include new instrumentation for stem cell culture, new multifunctional
bioscaffold materials, and new research avenues for tissue engineering and
regenerative medicine. Integrated educational outreach activities leverage a
local dual-language immersion public charter school and undergraduate service-
learning programs to raise awareness about STEM opportunities for English
language learners. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;Stem
cells offer the remarkable ability to develop into many different cell types and
tissues. Thus, they not only have the potential to cure damaged or diseased
organs, but also provide a platform to study the fundamental chemistry of life.
Researchers have long studied stem cell biology in vitro with a focus on the
impact of biochemical reactions and mechanical cues on stem cell fate. These
scientists culture stem cells on various types of materials which serve as
bioscaffolds, engineering the materials to leverage the mechanical crosstalk
between the stem cell and the scaffold to control their fate. There are few
investigations that leverage electrical and thermal cues which vary in space and
time to control stem cell fate. The recent discovery of graphene (a single layer
of carbon atoms arranged in a 2-dimensional hexagonal crystal structure) has
opened up new possibilities for bioscaffolds to control such electrical and
thermal interactions with stem cells. Therefore, the goal of this NSF CAREER
award is to integrate graphene with stem cell biology to uncover the fundamental
interactions of these two systems. Intellectual Merit The proposed work will
have an impact on stem cell biology and atomically thin materials research by
providing new fundamental insights into the role of electrical and thermal cues
in controlling stem cell fate. Broader Impacts: Achieving control over stem cell
fate could revolutionize tissue engineering and regenerative medicine, reducing
dependence on organ donors to treat patient end-stage organ failure. Scientific
outreach activities will help establish a pipeline of English language learners
from a local dual-language immersion program into Boise State University's STEM
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.