* 1849894
* I-Corps: Lean Factory Waste Reduction Modeling Methods and Management Decision Support Toolkit
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Paul Ranky, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide an
in-depth market analysis of waste reduction, and eventually complete waste
elimination in small to medium size companies / organizations. The team?s goal
is to eliminate waste by deploying measurable and quantifiable waste reduction
methods and technologies, such as waste relating to (1) waiting, (2) inventory,
(3) motion, (4) rework, (5) over-production, (6) over-processing, (7)
transportation, and (8) talent. These groups of wastes will be analyzed and
quantified using mathematical equations, algorithms, as well as visualization
methods and tools, including our novel computerized, multimedia, interactive
dashboards, and others. Based on several industrial feedbacks, the most
important discovery was finding, that the team?s system will work best in small
to medium size manufacturing facilities, which account for approximately 90% of
the companies in NJ and the USA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The commercial impact of
this project is huge, since waste in any company/organization represents lost
revenue. Furthermore, the methods, tools and technologies the team is developing
and commercializing in this grant strongly promote management and associate /
operator curiosity, critical thinking, agility, flexibility, openness, teamwork,
creativity, conscientiousness, and sustainable green and lean engineering and
management principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project has several
Intellectual Merits, including the following: &lt;br/&gt;The team's novel
methods and tools are based on Key Process/performance Indicators (KPIs),
integrated with a three dimensional object-oriented process modeling method,
using the team?s own algorithms, mathematical methods, and software
visualization / interactive multimedia methods. This enables the team to measure
and quantify levels of waste for the purpose of eventually eliminating them in
almost any factory/organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another novel feature of
this project is to use computer and manually controlled drone technology to map
an analyzed site, capture and then evaluate accurate data based on the collected
video files. This will also enable the team to review sites, machines, and
processes, that are difficult to reach, or that operate in relatively
dangerous/hazardous or remote environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore,
team is including novel AR (Augmented Reality) solutions into the set of methods
and tools, programmed specifically for the team?s purposes to help our system
design processes, as well as to visualize and demonstrate alternative lean
system design solutions. All above will enable the team to reduce / eliminate
waste in a very wide range of factories /
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.