* 1849623
* Collaborative Research: Equatorial Glaciation and Landscape Burial in the Late Paleozoic: Implications for Pangaean Climate and Tectonics
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Gerilyn Soreghan, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 08/31/2024
* USD 449,032.00

Climate has varied widely through Earth history. Just as study of human history
helps humankind better understand our future, study of Earth's climate history
aids in better understanding current and future climate systems. This study is
examining whether glaciers existed near Earth's equator at low elevations some
300 million years ago. First, seismic instruments are used to see below the
ground surface of Unaweep Canyon (Colorado); this canyon was located near the
equator 300 million years ago and now contains features that suggest ancient
glaciers may have existed during that time. Peering below the ground surface
allows researchers to see the canyon shape and features, including the amount of
sediment fill. Next, researchers drill out core samples from the sediment.
Detailed analyses of this sediment can reveal the age of the canyon, the past
climate of the region, including whether glaciers existed, and how the present-
day landscape formed. If it is determined that glaciers existed in this region
millions of years ago, understanding of the climate system during that time
would need major revision. Computer climate models then help researchers
understand characteristics of winds, ocean temperatures, volcanic eruptions, and
plant cover needed to produce the climate signal revealed in the core samples.
This project includes education for high-school students from the Southern Ute
Indian tribe, career training and preparation for university students, and
collaboration with art students to create displays and presentations about the
research results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work tests the hypothesis that low-
elevation uplands of equatorial Pangaea hosted glaciers during the Late
Paleozoic. To test this, geophysics, thermochronology, and coring are used to
determine the depth and nature of sediment fill and 3D basement shape of Unaweep
Canyon (Colorado), a globally unique landform hypothesized to archive a
paleolandscape modified by Permo-Pennsylvanian equatorial glaciation. Evidence
for low-latitude glaciation would radically change understanding of the late
Paleozoic icehouse, a critical interval for evolution of land animals and
plants, and spur research on influences of alternative boundary conditions,
climate forcings, and model configurations. Documenting an upland glacial
landscape preserved for 300 (or possibly &gt;600) My would also significantly
challenge understanding of landscape genesis, evolution, and burial, and
feedbacks between tectonics and climate. This research involves outreach to
secondary-school students from the Southern Ute Indian tribe, training of STEM
undergraduate and graduate students, and interfacing with art students to create
impactful public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.