* 1849349
* Collaborative Research: The Multistage Path to Peace in Civil Conflicts
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Heather Elko, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 08/31/2023
* USD 219,406.00

Civil conflicts are critically important to the international community due to
the fact that the consequences of those conflicts often spill across state
borders, such as through refugee flows and weapons movements. Yet we understand
relatively little about the process of negotiating peace in civil wars. The goal
of this project is to better understand the process of negotiating peace
agreements to end civil conflicts. To that end, it analyzes the multiple stages
of the peace process: initiation (negotiation offers), pre-bargaining (agreeing
to negotiate), negotiations (reaching an agreement), and implementation (ending
the conflict). Understanding each stage is important because there are often
multiple starts and stops throughout the peace process. With so many killed and
displaced by civil conflicts around the world, understanding the particularities
of this multi-stage process, and how the actions of international actors can
facilitate (or may actually hamper) the process, is of critical importance for
international peace and security. This project studies the complexities of the
peace process, can enable international actors to be more effective in their
efforts to end civil conflicts. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While there are several
studies on the outcomes of civil conflicts, as well as characteristics of the
peace agreements that sometimes end them, there is a dearth of knowledge about
the process itself: when and why warring parties will choose to move forward
through its multiple stages and when and why they might withdraw from the
process. To fill this gap, the principle investigators are drawing on primary
and secondary documentation to create a comprehensive dataset on peace
negotiations in civil conflicts from 1945-2016. Primary sources include UN and
other international organization documents and signed peace agreements.
Secondary sources include historical accounts of civil conflicts around the
world. The dataset codes each stage of the negotiation process (negotiation,
agreement, and implementation). If a breakdown occurred at any stage, the
dataset includes detailed information on which of the parties (government or
rebel group) refused to move forward in the peace process (refused to negotiate,
walked away from negotiations, or failed to implement the agreement). Third-
party actions such as mediation or military, economic, or diplomatic
intervention will also be collected. This new dataset will allow the principle
investigators to conduct a detailed, quantitative investigation of the peace
process as it played out across a wide variety of civil conflicts, and the
conditions under which successes or breakdowns occurred at the various stages.
The principal investigators will also address the non-random selection of
belligerents into later stages of the peace process through a variety of
statistical methods. The findings illuminate how governments and rebel groups
can navigate the peace process in civil conflicts successfully and what role
third party actors play in facilitating that process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.