* 1849941
* CRII: RI: Computational Thermal Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Achuta Kadambi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2022
* USD 190,792.00

Imagine a future where autonomous vehicles can see through thick fog or even
around corners. How many accidents could be avoided, how many lives could be
saved, with this form of superhuman sensing? Today, ordinary computer vision
systems do not generalize to bad weather or non-line-of-sight obstacle
avoidance. This is because ordinary computer vision systems rely on visible
light cameras that see colors that our eyes see. To overcome this roadblock, the
investigative team will study computational thermal imaging, where novel end-to-
end systems are designed with infrared optics and vision algorithms. These
topics are usually studied separately. This research program will be integrated
into a sequence of newly designed courses in computer vision and computational
imaging at the University of California, Los Angeles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project brings computational imaging to the realm of long-wave infrared
wavelengths and studies the unique performance tradeoffs thereof. The research
rests upon three pillars. In the first pillar, the investigative team will
construct a 3D camera prototype that projects custom-designed structured light
patterns at long-wave infrared wavelengths (circa 10 micrometer wavelengths of
light). The structured light patterns may be specialized to the unique
characteristics of long-wave infrared wavelengths. In the second pillar, the
investigative team will probe deeper into the possibility of non-line-of-sight
cameras that operate at long-wave infrared wavelengths. Creating a camera that
can see around corners sounds like a daunting challenge, but the investigative
team aims to exploit the specularity of reflections that are unique to long-wave
infrared wavelengths. Finally, the investigative team will study the
foundational differences between how scientists mathematically represent image
data at long-wave infrared wavelengths as compared to visible light
wavelengths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.