* 1849300
* S&amp;AS: INT: Traffic Deconfliction for Smart and Autonomous Unmanned Aircraft Systems in Congested Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,09/30/2022
* Xi Chen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 09/30/2022
* USD 800,000.00

Unmanned air vehicle (UAV) operations bring considerable scientific and societal
benefits with its applications ranging from package delivery, linear
infrastructure inspection, to large-scale environmental monitoring. However,
Autonomous UAV operation is not yet allowed by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) without airborne chase aircraft or ground observers to
ensure traffic deconfliction, which is complicated and costly. The goal of the
proposed project is to enable a given UAV to predict the trajectories of its
neighboring UAVs, dynamically assess collision risks, and automatically resolve
potential conflicts without the need for constant human supervision. This
project seeks to: 1) implement the ability to operate a multitude of UAVs
without direct human oversight in a way that might satisfy future FAA
regulations; 2) establish a mathematical representation of a UAV traffic that
can be scaled to handle a complex, heterogeneous, and high-dimensional traffic;
and 3) mature UAV operations for civil and commercial applications in harmony
with existing commercial air traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at
developing a real-time, distributed decision-making algorithm, the Dynamic
Network-based Probabilistic Route Planner (DNPRP), for autonomous operation of
multiple UAVs in congested environments. The key technical components will
include 1) a cloud-sourced database system for UAV data sharing, 2) an algorithm
for virtual and dynamic UAV network discovery, 3) time-dependent, Bayesian
nonparametric Gaussian process regression-based trajectory prediction models,
and 4) a time-dependent collision probability map for conflict-free route
generation. For physical flight testing, DNPRP will be evaluated by using a
couple of multirotor UAVs that operate within an enclosed outdoor facility
(i.e., the Virginia Tech Drone Park) for hours to days without human
intervention. Trade-offs between computational cost and solution optimality in
real-time operation will be assessed rigorously with measurable metrics, which
will inform possible extensions to large-scale complicated systems. A rapid path
for transitioning the research results to open-source or commercial software
will be formed in close collaboration with an industrial
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.