* 1849140
* NSF Student Travel Grant for 2018 ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2020
* Phillip Gibbons, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 01/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Symposium on Cloud Computing 2018
(SoCC '18) brings together researchers, developers, users, and practitioners
interested in cloud computing. ACM SoCC is the premier conference on cloud
computing and a dynamic and comprehensive program for publication, education,
and interaction. The program includes research and industrial papers, poster
sessions, and keynote talks by leaders in academia and industry. The scope of
SoCC is broad and encompasses diverse data management and systems topics such as
software as a service, virtualization, scalable cloud data services, and data
management and analytics at scale. The intellectual merit of the proposal is to
share scientific information. This includes the opportunity for students to
showcase their research results, learn about the cutting-edge research conducted
by others, and interact with experts at a premier cloud computing conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SoCC provides a unique opportunity for students to share
their knowledge and experience with internationally recognized researchers from
both academia and industry. The keynotes and many paper/poster presentations
provide students with invaluable learning opportunities, as well as exposure to
the latest research results and the opportunity to discuss these results with
the authors. It also offers an excellent environment for students to interact
with industry leaders (from Microsoft, Google, IBM, Oracle, Salesforce, VMware,
Facebook, and others) during regular program sessions. These opportunities will
have a long-lasting impact on the future career of the
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.