* 1849234
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reproducing Difference in Biomedicine: The Case of Sex as a Biological Variable
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Madeleine Pape, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Parker
* 04/30/2020
* USD 10,614.00

This project examines how biological differences are reproduced through the
regulation of inclusion in biomedicine by considering how sex is reproduced as
binary, biological, and distinct from gender at an institutional level. It does
so by examining the emergence of a new policy mandate of the US National
Institutes of Health. Called 'Sex as a Biological Variable,' these policies
require the inclusion of equal numbers of male and female cells and animals in
all pre-clinical research funded by the NIH. While scholars have shown that the
production of biological knowledge is shaped by the assumptions of scientific
researchers, far less is known about the role of government agencies and
regulatory processes in reproducing certain forms of biological difference.
Using archival data and other textual materials, as well as interviews with
stakeholders, this project examines the processes by which the NIH developed
policies mandating the examination of sex differences in basic and pre-clinical
research. The overall aim is to show how particular accounts of sex and gender
become institutionalized through regulation and rule-making.

This is a multi-method investigation into the ways in which embodied difference,
knowledge, institutions, and rule-making serve to produce sex and gender as
distinct categories of personhood. The specific case study underlying this
investigation is a new policy mandate at the US National Institutes of Health
that requires the inclusion of equal numbers of male and female cells and
animals in all pre-clinical research funded by the NIH. The project synthesizes
data from archives, public policy documents, and interviews with stakeholders to
understand how biological difference comes to be constructed as an object of
scientific and medical inquiry that is knowable by certain experts who are
granted legitimacy as knowledge-producers, while other accounts are denied
institutional support. In doing so it advances literature in science and
technology studies on the intersection of gender roles and regulatory
interventions and on the influence of gender ideology on the work of scientific
researchers and medical practitioners. Overall, the project seeks to explain how
certain forms of difference come to be presumed biological and privileged as
such within research policy and to examine how actors and organizations located
outside of the NIH influence or attempt to influence such policies.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.