* 1849718
* CRII: CHS: Redesigning Democratized Technology: The Broadening of Citizen Participation in Bottom-Up Technological Innovation
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Guo Freeman, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 05/31/2022
* USD 174,880.00

This research will contribute actionable insights concerning two key issues
about democratizing technology: technological practices remain exclusive in
terms of privileged users, and participation in decision-making is unequal. It
will do so by exploring two emerging, creativity-centric technology communities
as case studies - activist and non-profit oriented independent game developers
and creative live audio and video streamers. Its focus on democratizing
technology will help computing technologies and technological practices become
more inclusive, affordable, accessible, and open to everyday citizens. Its
emphasis on mechanisms, strategies, and techniques that broaden the possibility
of citizen participation in technological innovation increases the opportunities
for and retention of females and underrepresented minorities in science and
engineering education. These findings and the developed prototype resulting from
this work can be used to inform and address the needs of other computing
communities seeking to be more open, accessible, and participative. This
research also promotes public engagement with science and technology on two
levels: by generating interest in the science and technology research community
to pursue research that supports bottom-up technological innovation, and by
directly engaging many of those innovators in this scientific
project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The long-term research agenda of this project
explores computer-mediated collective innovation practices and is guided by the
following research questions: (1) How, if at all, do independent game developers
and creative live streamers perceive, understand, and interpret their
technological practices as democratized? (2) What mechanisms, strategies, and
techniques do they use to support such practices? (3) What requirements and
designs for new sociotechnical systems could be identified to better support
democratized technological practices for end-user driven technological
innovation? This project entails an empirical and conceptual advance in
computer-supported cooperative work and human-computer interaction research on
bottom-up innovation and participatory culture by using new research contexts
and datasets, which have implications beyond the gaming and live streaming
communities. It not only discloses how a technological practice can be perceived
and interpreted as democratized by everyday citizens, but also elucidates why a
community embodies such an interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.