* 1849568
* Fighting for the Homeland
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Henk Goemans, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 75,000.00

This project addresses the question of why states dispute some pieces of
territory and not others. Scholars have found that the most deadly and longest
lasting international disputes often erupt over territory with little or no
intrinsic value, and have proposed that such territory is inherently valuable
because it is regarded as homeland. As it stands in the literature, this
argument presents no systematic evidence to determine ex ante which territory is
considered part of the homeland and which is not. This study explores this issue
by focusing on the region of the world with the most territorial disputes: the
continent of South America. To identity homeland territory, the project collects
and digitizes maps from school textbooks and wall maps from all thirteen South
American countries from 1875 to the present. With this digitized and geospatial
historical (GIS) data, the project can identify which pieces of territory were
claimed as homeland by two countries, and which were not. Given the geospatial
nature of these data, it can be combined with existing geospatial data on the
presence of resources and population patterns to examine whether and how those
disputed areas differ from other areas. With these data, the principal
investigator can test the prediction that international territorial disputes
arise when two countries claim the same territory as homeland.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project assesses a key determinant of territorial
disputes: the status of a piece of land as homeland by two states. The study
identifies homeland territory through collecting and digitalizing maps from
school textbooks and wall maps from all thirteen South American countries from
1875 to the present at roughly five-year intervals. The project in addition
employs micro-level experiments and surveys to explain why citizens are willing
to fight for homeland territory even if it has few or no resources. These
experiments and surveys test the extant claim that maps create common knowledge
and coordinate citizens' beliefs as to what is homeland territory and who is
(and is not) a member of the homeland group, enabling collective action and a
common defense. The first survey experiment examines whether priming subjects
with a map of their country increases willingness to sacrifice should their
country come under threat. This experiment provides micro-level evidence about
the role of maps in fostering group identity and willingness to sacrifice, while
avoiding the problems of endogeneity and collinearity that have hampered
previous research. The second set of surveys examines whether maps taught in
school form an enduring mental map of the homeland. This survey asks citizens to
draw an outline of their country on a contour map of South America. If the map
taught in school has become a stable mental map, the outline should correspond
to the map taught during their school years. The surveys embed a micro-level
experiment in which respondents are presented with a scenario of a threat
against their country. These responses will shed light on whether and why
citizens and their leaders are willing to fight for their perceived
homeland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.