* 1849644
* Doctoral Dissertation: Manner of Death Categories and their Impact on Forensic Research and Death Visibility
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,09/30/2020
* James Malazita, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Wenda K. Bauchspies
* 09/30/2020
* USD 16,200.00

This project examines how 'manner of death' categories are constructed and used
in forensic science. Forensic scientists are required to use a standardized set
of categories when determining how a person dies, however, many forms of death
are uncertain or occur in situations that challenge official categories. As a
result, forensic scientists must often relate causes of death in ways that defy
the actual nature of the death under investigation. This process shapes related
social outcomes, such as the nature of potential criminal investigations and
insurance claims and can lead the justice system to function in ways that
obfuscate the collection of valid scientific knowledge. Understanding how manner
of death categories are constructed and how they might be changed could lead to
more accurate conceptions of death categories, particularly for socially
vulnerable categories of people, and a to improvements in the justice
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a multi-method investigation of 'manner of
death' categories as they are employed in forensic science, and how these matter
for jointly shaping science, medicine, and the criminal justice system. Data
come from documentary analyses of policy documents at the federal, state, and
local levels, and of forensic science textbooks. These will be complemented by
ethnographic observations and interviews at forensic science departments, and at
the offices of coroners and medical examines. The main goal of the project is to
show how academic research practices and seemingly mundane forms of scientific
typologies and categorizations affect legal practices and the effective
functioning of the criminal justice system. In doing so, it helps build on
existing scholarship in science studies indicating that science and technology
not only assist in resolving legal disputes, but can also actively produce
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.