* 1849949
* Investigating what causes the morphology of Large low-shear Velocity Provinces (LLSVPs)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2022
* Mingming Li, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 08/31/2022
* USD 230,000.00

When earthquakes happen, the energy propagates through the Earth's interior in
the form of seismic waves. It is found that seismic waves propagate remarkably
slower in two regions of the lowermost mantle beneath Africa and the Pacific
Ocean than the surroundings. These regions are called the "large lower shear
velocity provinces", or LLSVPs, which cover ~30% area of the Earth's core. The
height of the LLSVPs ranges from 100s of km to ~2,000 km at different locations,
with the Pacific LLSVP taller than the African LLSVP. The steepness of the LLSVP
edges also changes significantly from place to place. The shape of the LLSVPs is
controlled by, and provides important information on the density and viscosity
structures of the deep mantle, which are linked to the origin of the LLSVPs, the
dynamics of the deep mantle and the evolution of the Earth. It is thus critical
to understand how density and viscosity structures of the deep mantle control
the shape of the LLSVPs. Human beings are not able to go into the deep Earth to
examine the LLSVPs in detail, but the interaction between the LLSVPs and the
surrounding mantle should be governed by the fundamental physics laws of
conservation of mass, momentum and energy. In this research, the team will
follow these physical laws and perform numerical simulations to quantify the
relationship between the shape of the LLSVPs and the density and viscosity
structures of the deep mantle. The results should not only provide new
understanding on the causes of the complex shapes of LLSVPs, but also help
constrain the density and viscosity structures of the deep mantle. The project
will also lead to understanding about the fundamental physics in the Earth's
deep mantle. This project provides support to an early-career scientist and a
2nd year graduate student. It also provides teaching materials that will be used
in undergraduate and graduate classes, and promotes educational outreach to the
public at outreach events and via the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
structure and dynamics of the lowermost mantle play a critical role in the
Earth's evolution. Seismic studies have revealed two large low-shear velocity
provinces (LLSVPs) in the lowermost mantle. Complex features of the LLSVPs have
been suggested by seismic observations, with variable topography, internal
structure and steepness of the LLSVP edges. The morphology of the LLSVPs is
mostly a result of the physical interaction between the LLSVPs and the
surrounding mantle, which is in turn largely controlled by the viscosity and
density of the lowermost mantle. However, the viscosity and density of the
lowermost mantle remain not well constrained. It has been suggested that the
LLSVPs are caused by compositionally distinct thermochemical piles. In this
project, the team will use numerical modeling to quantify the relationship
between the morphology of thermochemical piles and the deep mantle viscosity and
density structures, and to explore conditions that lead to structures in the
deep mantle with similar features to the seismically observed LLSVPs. The
results will help understand the morphology of the LLSVPs, and provide
constraints on the density and viscosity of the deep mantle. They will also lead
to understanding about the fundamental physical processes and mechanisms
controlling the interaction between the LLSVPs and the surrounding
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.