* 1849117
* I-Corps: Environmentally-Acceptable BioLubricants
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Basudeb Saha, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Shearman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an enabling technology for the cost-competitive production of
biolubricant base-oils with better performance using 100% renewable carbon to
meet growing customer pressure for sustainable products. The produced
environmentally-acceptable products have a total over $60 billion global market
and applications in industrial machinery, commercial and consumer automotives,
grease, personal care products, turbines, transformers, aviation engines and
machinery, marine vessels, hydropower production machinery, and others.
Successful commercialization of this technology and products will bring multiple
societal and commercial benefits. First, the designer biolubricants, guided by
molecular simulation modeling, will bring market transformation for efficient
and durable products. Second, the technology will bring feedstock flexibility
for new and "greener" products innovation by utilizing the nation's abundant
carbon neutral feedstocks; thus, addressing environmental eco-system concerns.
Third, it will improve rural economies by utilizing the feedstocks and resources
that are available in those areas. Fourth, educational benefits are an integral
element of our proposed work, as it will provide opportunities to train
technicians and early career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project will gather customers' feedback and establish the commercial feasibility
of this patent-pending technology on energy-efficient and atom-economic
production of biolubricant base-oils with tailored molecular architectures and
tunable specifications. Initial specifications, techno-economic analysis, and
customer's feedback suggest that the products are cost-competitive and suitable
for current high performance applications. Bio-degradability, and tunable
specifications of the products will offer significant competitive advantages to
the market. We will gather more customers' feedback through the proposed I-Corps
National program to gain more market insight for products. Especially, we will
(1) evaluate market gaps and customers' desire for next generation products, (2)
validate the market entry strategy, (3) analyze competitions and competitive
advantages for our products, (4) analyze and validate value-propositions and
their fit to the market need, and (5) analyze the market price of competitors'
products. The outcome of this market research will significantly advance the
commercialization of our products and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.