* 1849958
* Strategies: Clean Energy and Environmental Science Career Pathways
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2024
* Kevin Cuff, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Toni Dancstep
* 03/31/2024
* USD 1,198,676.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields
of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM) by engaging the
students in hands-on field experience, laboratory/project-based entrepreneurship
tasks and mentorship experiences. the project will engage a diverse population
of youth residing in low-income, urban communities in the East San Francisco Bay
Area in a combination of technology-enabled STEM learning, skills development,
training and research activities specifically designed to stimulate interest in
clean energy and environmental science-related career pathways. The students
will engage in interventions through a clean energy and environmental science-
related curriculum The project will investigate the capacity of two career
pathway models to stimulate science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) interest and career awareness among underrepresented "opportunity youth"
(i.e., those between the ages of 16 and 24 years old enrolled in non-traditional
educational programs and not working). The project will produce a set of
effective clean energy and environmental science-related instructional resources
useful in helping to improve STEM literacy among youth residing in urban areas.
The project will be assessed through qualitative data derived from observations
and structured interviews with individuals and small groups of participants
throughout their pathway experiences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Project
implementation will occur in close collaboration with two local organizations
that specialize in offering programs for opportunity youth. The project will
engage youth enrolled in programs operated by these organizations in carefully
designed sequences of hands-on activities that address important STEM subject
matter related to clean energy and environmental science. Summer and after
school components will serve as its primary content assimilation mechanism.
Approximately sixty new youth will participate in project activities each year
over the course of the project's three-year implementation. These youths will
engage in hands-on, materials-centered activities designed to aid in the
development of STEM understandings and skills that increase capacity and
confidence necessary for effectively pursuing future academic and career-related
endeavors. Research questions are: 1) What is the impact that a given pathway
model has on affecting career interest, preparation, and trajectory? and 2) Can
these models be successful in impacting how youth value the application of STEM?
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project takes an innovative approach to broadening
participation in STEM by addressing STEM workforce inequities and engaging a
population of students not in the traditional school setting in STEM learning.
The project will provide information about how to re-engage students who are
currently disconnected from the STEM pipeline. In this way, the findings of this
research would move beyond addressing leaks in the pipeline to addressing how to
move individuals back into the pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.