* 1849678
* Living Interfaces: Exploring Synthetic Biology and Evolution for the Development of Next-Generation Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* M.G. Finn, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal seeks support for the participation of leading experts from
academia and funding agencies to explore the role of biomaterials for synthetic
biology and for synthetic biology and evolution for the development of next-
generation biomaterials. The theme of the workshop is "Living Interfaces" -
understanding and controlling interfacial emergent bio-like order and function
in far-from-equilibrium synthetic biomaterials systems. The aim is to use the
results that emerge from the talks and discussion during the Square-Table
workshop to write a report that captures the excitement and promise of this
rapidly growing field of research for the various communities and agencies to
use as a road-map. The proposal is to hold the workshop in Alexandria, VA in the
early part of the week of 3 December 2018. This Square-Table will engage
representatives from the biomaterials, synthetic biology, and molecular
evolution communities, along with funding agencies, regulators and industry. The
intent is to accelerate the discovery and deployment of disruptive technologies
in materials development, with important contributions expected from each of
these perspectives. The focus on "Living Interfaces" frames an exciting first
challenge, the successful prosecution of which will open many other avenues of
collaboration and research.

The agenda is designed to identify gaps and challenges to a new paradigm for
biomaterials discovery, taking advantage of synthetic biology and evolutionary
approaches in ways inspired, but not on strained, by nature. The advances in
biomaterials recently can bring new understanding of fundamental processes and
functions covering a wide range of applications. The convergence of NSF
interests in Rules of Life as part of the ten Big Ideas and so it is time to
devote significant attention to understanding how organisms discover and make
new materials, to expand the range of what constitutes a functional biomaterial,
to use engineered or artificial "living" systems to create novel and sustainable
materials for significant functions, and to extract fundamental lessons that
relate structure to function. The aim is to define the outlines of an exciting
new field of evolvable materials

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.