* 1849249
* S&amp;AS: FND: COLLAB: Planning Coordinated Event Observation for Structured Narratives
* CSE,IIS
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Dylan Shell, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 02/28/2023
* USD 209,998.00

People easily recognize the dramatic moments that unfold in human events.
Dramatic turns of events are key to recognizing and communicating effective
reports or stories about events. Autonomous systems will work more effectively
with humans in obtaining and conveying such narrative when they too can
recognize what is dramatic (or tragic, or comical) about human events. The
challenge is to effectively convey such concepts to a computer in such a way
that humans and autonomous systems can effectively work together in this. This
research studies how to direct a team of robots to obtain video footage to
produce clips that trace a dramatic story arc. It is an examination of how such
systems might achieve goals that people consider to be abstract or high-level.
Within this project, the programs that command teams of robots must predict
likely events, direct the robots to be in position for obtaining the desired
footage, and re-plan based on observed events. This challenge encompasses a rich
and previously unstudied class of problems for robot systems. It will constitute
a unique demonstration of robots that are capable of achieving high-level goals
as they process data in forms which combine both continuous and discrete views
of the world in a new and unusual way. More broadly, the research will advance
how computers can fuse and summarize video streams. Both skills are needed for
automatically generating synopses and in editing videos. Obvious places where
this is useful include helping secure the nation (for surveillance), taming the
deluge of online multimedia content (for summarization), and advancing
applications in the creative industries (for editing). The research project will
also use the ideas underlying these pieces in a new robotics course with
students at three institutions going head-to-head in a series of competition-
based class projects. This course (taught, among other places, at a Hispanic-
Serving Institution) will contribute to the development of the STEM workforce of
the future, helping increase American competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project advances current knowledge by formulating new theory and developing
novel algorithms for autonomous and robot systems, with a focus on those systems
with minimal or no human operator intervention. The research contributes novel
data representations for robots that will inhabit rich environments such as
those characterized by uncertain, unanticipated, and dynamically changing
circumstances. One of the foundational ideas of the project is a means to
specify sophisticated mission objectives via a recursive structure using prior
work in compiler theory for computer languages. The project involves a strong
connection between this theoretical work and demonstrated
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.