* 1849768
* Cultivating Elementary Students' Interest in Cryptography and Cybersecurity Education and Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Swarup Bhunia, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 02/29/2024
* USD 956,733.00

Recent technological advances have popularized cryptography, the art of making
and breaking codes. This project will capitalize on the societal interest in
cybersecurity and cryptography and explore how the skills that underlie the
encrypting and decrypting practices in cryptography parallel the skills that
children must develop to become successful readers and writers. Given the
importance of cryptography and cybersecurity, the project will introduce a new
technology-enhanced STEM education model for engaging children of 7-10 years
old, particularly girls, in cryptography and cybersecurity building and STEM
identity development as they make and break secret codes. The mystery of the
subject, its relevance in today's society, and interactive learning experiences
will engage children, and the after-school environment where the project will be
performed will provide a safe space for them to learn at their own pace. The
important scientific and educational outcomes will include improved
understanding of how literacy, self-efficacy, computational thinking, 21st
century skills, and interest in cryptography and cybersecurity can be fostered
at the elementary school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this project
is to conduct a systematic investigation of the effective conditions for
designing and implementing touch-screen enhanced visuospatial learning curricula
that foster STEM interest and career awareness using the unique context of
cryptography. An interdisciplinary team of K-12 after-school teacher leaders,
education technologists, special educators, computer scientists, and STEM
education researchers will design a 6-week, 24-hour program of cryptography
focused apps and activities for upper elementary students (grades 3-5) in after-
school programs that serve primarily girls and African American students. To
encourage adoption and facilitate dissemination, the Codebreakers curriculum
will be available online in the form of an interactive, touch-friendly website.
A mixed-method research design will employ a range of methods including
phenomenology, comparative case studies, pretest-posttest analyses, and mixed-
effects modeling. The project will use qualitative data to explore students' and
teachers' perceptions and experiences with the Codebreakers activities and
technology. Quantitative data will be used to make inferences regarding the
quantifiable impacts of the strategy on the development of students' self-
efficacy, interest and identity in STEM, evolution of their understanding of
cryptography and cybersecurity, and the development of their morphological
awareness. Ongoing professional development (PD) and support will be provided
face-to-face during bi-weekly meetings with teacher leaders and using the
Codebreakers online social network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.