* 1849087
* I-Corps: Mobile, Smart Gait Assessment System
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Ou Bai, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the product
of a mobile, smart gait assessment system allowing for continuous gait
monitoring outside the clinical settings, which can be used for online, remote
clinical management for patients with gait disorders including patients with
Parkinson Disease (PD). PD alone affects over one million people in the United
States, a number that increases by 60,000 each year. This technology will
support the prevention of re-admission by fall tracking and prevention, lower
hospital visits and length of stay by allowing at-home monitoring of disease
progression, implement monitored wellness programs, differentiate disease types
by pattern recognition, and provide timely and efficient clinical management by
tracking interventional outcomes. The patient customers will benefit by
receiving recommendations on gait and posture habits, leading to a decrease in
fall occurrences. Moreover, they will benefit from activity monitoring by
receiving suggestions on exercise routines, which have been shown to increase
health and fitness. On the other hand, clinics and hospitals will benefit from
reducing the volume of patients at their facilities, and insurance agencies will
benefit by decreasing patients' length of stay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project proposes a system capable of detecting asymmetry between kinetic
and kinematic gait parameters, which consists of embedded inertial measurement
units and insoles with piezoresistive pressure sensor arrays. With machine
learning algorithms, the system can detect and classify the disease progression,
which will support treatment modification along with normal disease course and
symptomatic changes. This smart, non-invasive, non-pharmaceutical approach for
disease prognosis could also lead to an increase in participation in clinical
trials, as the low-risk involvement required could encourage persons with and
without PD to participate. The developed technology allows for continuous gait
recordings outside the clinical setting. This smart, wireless gait monitoring
system has the potential of decreasing the burden associated with the numerous
clinic visits. The intellectual merits lie in the use of emerging technologies,
including cloud computing and artificial intelligence for feature extraction,
classification, and rare-event detection. These features will support medical
professionals' decision-making regarding the course of treatments from its early
stages without having to add more effort to their already busy schedules. In
addition, the designed Internet-of-Things (IoT) architecture will allow mobile
health monitoring, including treatment compliance and categorization for
treatment improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.