* 1849955
* CRII: CHS: Designing, Implementing, and Evaluating Application Software for Meaningful Smartphone Use
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Alexis Hiniker, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2021
* USD 175,000.00

The goal of this research is to develop formative theory that identifies
software interface design patterns that promote compulsive smartphone usage
habits and to invent alternative patterns that promote meaningful usage habits.
Americans across diverse communities and all socioeconomic strata report
engaging with their smartphones out of habit and in compulsive ways. Though
smartphone use in general provides enormous value and quality-of-life
enhancements to users, software designs that promote compulsive, habit-forming
patterns of engagement leave users feeling frustrated with their own behavior
and struggling to make changes. Historically, the scientific literature has
examined these phenomena using monolithic constructs like "problematic Internet
use" and "smartphone addiction," and design research has innovated in this space
by creating stand-alone mechanisms that support users in self-policing their use
of technology, such as lock-out tools and system-wide timers. This project
shifts the design focus to the internal workings of the app itself and redesigns
the existing experience to be less-habit forming, rather than attempting to
combat its habit-forming nature through monitoring
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will use YouTube and Twitter, two of
the most popular apps among American smartphone users, as testbeds for redesign.
The first phase of this project will conduct a series of user-centered design
activities with participants who identify as routine users of these popular
media to understand what they value in their usage experiences, what they wish
they could change, and how their behaviors relate to components of the
interface. Using existing third-party application programming interfaces
provided by the two platforms, the research will then redesign and implement a
new version of the client application software for each technology. Finally, a
four-week deployment study with twenty-five users of each technology will
compare two weeks of baseline usage against two weeks of usage with the
redesigned version of the target app. During both the baseline and intervention
periods, log data of usage patterns will be collected (including frequency of
use, duration of use, context of use, and engagement with various app features),
as well as experience sampling method data probing users' satisfaction with
their own behaviors. Exit interviews and a larger survey with participants will
be conducted following the deployment to understand their experiences with
redesigned YouTube and Twitter clients. At the conclusion of the study, these
redesigned apps will be made available to the broader
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.