* 1849409
* RAPID: A Scientific Deployment of a C-Band Radar to Observe Heavy Precipitation and Convective System Dynamic Processes in RELAMPAGO
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Stephen Nesbitt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 08/31/2019
* USD 184,508.00

RELAMPAGO (Remote sensing of Electrification, Lightning, And
Mesoscale/microscale Processes with Adaptive Ground Observations) will observe
convective storms in the lee of the Andes Mountains in central Argentina during
1 November 2018 - 31 January 2019 (see NSF funded project AGS-1661799). This
project will fund deployment of the Colorado State University's C-Band
dualpolarization radar. The project will leverage other activities funded by NSF
to staff the radar during its deployment, as well as perform post-project data
quality and dissemination of the data. Data from this radar will be available to
the scientific community under the RELAMPAGO data policy to address RELAMPAGO
scientific objectives.

Intellectual Merit: Heavy-rain producing storms will advance the science of
heavy rainfall prediction globally, a risk which faces many regions of the
world. Physical processes leading to deep convection and High Impact Weather
(HIW) in the US rely on a specific set of ingredients that are based on weather
and climate experienced there. However, the learning of deep convection and HIW
outside of the US will not only improve our understanding of how it operates in
other regions, but also improve our understanding of deep convection and HIW in
the US. Advancing our understanding of heavy rainfall and its processes and
precursors will enable improved prediction of rainfall extremes on weather and
climate timescales. The C-Band radar will aid in addressing these objectives by
providing high-quality dual-polarization radar measurements for a 3-month period
during the RELAMPAGO intensive observing period and also following the campaign
during the RELAMPAGO hydrometeorological observing period during the wet season.

Broader Impacts: The exposure and vulnerability of the global population to HIW
is increasing as a result of population growth, land use/land cover change,
urbanization, and climate change. Severe convective storms have significant
impacts on the human-managed environment around the globe. Enhancing our
understanding processes capable of triggering intense, deep moist convection
will help in mitigating its consequences, and is critical for social,
environmental, and economic applications. Through the course of the research,
significant training of graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and close
scientific interactions of the participants with Latin American scientists and
students will be conducted. Local students will be given tours of the radar
facility, coordinated through RELAMPAGO outreach efforts.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.