* 1849519
* Promoting International Collaboration on Developing Scalable, Portable &amp; Efficient HPC Software for Modern HPC Platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Amitava Majumdar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2021
* USD 27,750.00

Supercomputers are used to power discoveries and to reduce the time-to-results
in a wide variety of disciplines such as engineering, physical sciences, and
healthcare. Scalable and efficient software is required for optimally using the
large-scale supercomputing platforms, and thereby, effectively leveraging NSF
investments in the nation's advanced CyberInfrastructure (CI). With the rapid
advancement in the computer architecture discipline, the complexity of the
processors that are used in the supercomputers is also increasing, and, in turn,
the task of developing efficient software for supercomputers is further becoming
challenging and complex. To mitigate such challenges, there is a need for forums
that brings together different stakeholders - the researchers and practitioners
from the areas of software engineering and supercomputing. To provide such a
platform, the second workshop on "Software Challenges to Exascale Computing
(SCEC)" is being organized in India. This project funds the participation of ten
US students from diverse backgrounds in the workshop and will provide them the
opportunities to develop their skills in the area of "software for
supercomputing platforms". The SCEC workshop will not only inform the
participants about the challenges in large-scale software development for
supercomputers but will also steer them in the direction of building
international collaborations for finding solutions to those challenges. The
project provides opportunities for workforce development, and serves the
national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote the progress of
science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure
the national defense. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop participants will learn
about the two NSF funded supercomputers - Stampede2 and Comet - and will get
practical experience at developing scalable, efficient, and portable software on
those systems through tutorials and "bring your own code" sessions. The SCEC
workshop will provide a forum through which hardware vendors and software
developers can communicate with each other and influence the architecture of the
next generation supercomputing systems and the supporting software stack. By
fostering cross-disciplinary associations, the SCEC workshop will serve as a
stepping-stone towards innovations in the future. The workshop will benefit
researchers, students, and practitioners in supercomputing by providing them an
opportunity to disseminate their results to the public, and find potential
collaborators. The students funded through this project will get an opportunity
to network with professionals, faculties and researchers working in the areas of
supercomputing and software engineering, and will get to learn about the
opportunities for internships, jobs, and higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.