* 1849930
* EAGER: Developing a temporally adaptive decomposition framework for analyzing long-term echosounder time series
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Valentina Staneva, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 12/31/2021
* USD 281,608.00

Scientific echosounders are high-frequency active sonar systems used extensively
to study life in the ocean, especially the least-characterized mid-trophic
animals, such as zooplankton and fish. The recent surge in the deployment of
autonomous echosounders has resulted in a deluge of echo data from a variety of
ocean observing platforms, including vehicles and moorings. These data sets
harbor great potential for advancing our understanding of marine ecosystems at
spatial and temporal scales never before possible. However, the volume and
complexity of the data make efficient and effective analysis a major challenge.
This research is aimed at establishing a data-driven methodology to
automatically extract features from echosounder data, thus unblocking this
bottleneck between instrumentation capacity (to collect large data) and
interpretation capability (to analyze large data). The developed method will
expedite the currently labor-intensive data analysis process and help extract
synoptic information from large echo data sets. Results of this research will be
disseminated through open-source echo analysis software packages and online
educational materials created as integrated components of this project. This
research contributes directly to improving our ability to better understand the
marine ecosystems, which are critical for global biodiversity and the economic
well-being of a significant population of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will develop a method for automated discovery and tracking of low-
dimensional spatio-temporal structures from high-dimensional echo data by
adapting a state-of-the-art dynamic non-negative matrix factorization (NMF)
formulation. NMF is an unsupervised machine learning technique that decomposes
complex data into a linear combination of a smaller set of quantitative
descriptors that are more tractable and interpretable than the original data.
This technique has found great success in many basic research and applied
fields, including computer vision, neuroscience, natural language processing,
and recommender systems for internet retailers. In the context of echo analysis,
these low-dimensional descriptors characterize the vertical movements and
grouping activities of marine organisms in the water column imaged by the
echosounder. However, traditional NMF does not account well for a changing set
of phenomena in the data. Therefore, this project aims to develop a method that
can provide a temporally adaptive decomposition in order to accommodate the
complexity and high temporal variability of transient features in long-term
echosounder data. The researchers will use data collected by the two cabled
Endurance Array echosounders in NSF?s Ocean Observatories Initiative (OOI) as a
test bed for methodology development. The stability, robustness, and
interpretability of the developed method will be evaluated and compared with
conventional echo analysis routines. This effort will lay the foundation for
further machine learning and statistical studies of large echo datasets from the
OOI and other ocean observing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.