* 1849343
* S&amp;AS:INT:Learning and Planning for Dynamic Locomotion
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Jonathan Hurst, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 836,000.00

Despite years of work on robot locomotion, we still do not have robots that can
reliably and flexibly move around in homes, workspaces, and natural terrain. For
many of these environments, legged robots, as opposed to wheel-based robots,
appear to be the most viable option for achieving the desired level of
locomotion autonomy. Prior work has produced ATRIAS, a two-legged robot, which
was designed to replicate the dynamic properties of human and animal legs, and
Cassie, which retains this dynamics-first approach but improves upon ATRIAS by
adding steering capability and ankles, along with engineering improvements.
Compared to conventional robot-leg designs, the designs of ATRIAS and Cassie
carefully incorporate "passive dynamics" into the mechanism, essentially
bringing the dynamic behavior of the hardware into partnership with the software
control system. This approach has the potential to exhibit locomotion
capabilities much closer to humans. However, the flexibility and "springiness"
of these human-like legs creates new challenges for locomotion control. While
ATRIAS and Cassie are currently able to walk and run outdoors over moderate
terrain using basic balance control methods, the methods are still not able to
support more complex locomotion activities, such as navigating stairs or rocky
terrain. The proposed research will develop new control methods for dynamic
legged locomotion, which will enable robots such as ATRIAS and Cassie to
effectively move around in our homes, workplaces, and other complex natural
environments with much more flexibility, while using much less energy. This will
significantly expand on the application domains for which autonomous robot
locomotion can be applied. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary technical
contribution of the project will be twofold: First, the research will study
machine learning techniques to dramatically improve the existing hand-crafted
controllers for dynamic locomotion, and create a rich action space composed of
behavior policies that produce robust walking, standing, running, and leaping
behaviors with various speeds, step/jump heights, and other characteristics.
This action space provides an expressive and compact means of controlling the
motion of a legged robot, greatly surpassing direct torque control in
expressiveness while also dramatically reducing the dimensionality of the
problem. Second, the research will design a fast and efficient sampling-based
planning architecture, which also uses machine learning to speed up the planning
process to allow for real-time fulfillment of movement goals while avoiding
collisions and falls. This work adds new knowledge in research on legged
locomotion planning by considering obstacle planning and robot dynamics as an
integrated problem. Most prior work attempts to decouple the two pieces, for
example by using a planner to find footholds in kinematic space and handing them
to a dynamics controller that tries to maintain balance as the robot follows the
kinematic goals. For human-like performance in two-legged locomotion, the
project considers foothold choice to be intrinsically linked to robot dynamics,
and considers foot placement in an integrated way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.