* 1849518
* I-Corps Teams: Mobile Platform for Collecting, Analyzing, and Managing In-Field Data
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is a
significantly improved in-field data collection and data analysis workflow. This
technology leverages the widespread use of smartphones around the world by
providing a robust digital platform with low hardware requirements for
collecting and understanding data. By digitizing inputs from the beginning of
the data collection process and providing live analysis, the platform reduces
the cost, time, and expertise required to collect and understand the information
contained within datasets. The technology can benefit diverse industries, but
has particular application to municipal governments and NGOs, where project
managers need to regularly monitor the effect of their program. Their ability to
do so and make the necessary adjustments directly impact the effectiveness and
efficiency of the projects. The technology has significant commercial potential
beyond governments and NGOs, and impacts any industry that requires rapid and
reliable data insights for decision making. Over time, the technology will make
data collection and usage more accessible to empower average people to better
advocate for their community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to
explore the commercial potential of a fully digital in-field data platform. The
technology allows any team to quickly collect and analyze in-field data. A
robust software platform forms the core of the technology. The platform
automatically tags data with GPS and time information and provides live
visualization of data and team activity with minimal hardware requirements.
Advanced mobile algorithms manage data caching and cloud uploading. These
algorithms enable the platform to operate reliably in areas with intermittent
internet connection and protect data during hardware crashes. This fully digital
process reduces the cost and time required to compile and interpret in-field
datasets so valuable insights can be gained quickly and cheaply to facilitate
data-driven decision making. Over time, this work may also increase the
accessibility of data to the public and empower citizens to better advocate for
their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.