* 1849246
* S&amp;AS: FND: COLLAB: Adaptable Vehicular Sensing and Control for Fleet-Oriented Systems in Smart Cities
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Fei Miao, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 03/31/2023
* USD 179,999.00

In smart cities of the future, how to sense, understand, and manage urban-scale
vehicular systems, e.g., taxis, in an autonomous fashion (with little or no
human intervention) is an essential topic to improve urban mobility efficiency,
such as shorter waiting time for passengers, lower cruising mileage for drivers,
and higher revenues for vehicular system operators. However, the current
management strategies for vehicular systems are mainly based on individual-level
data knowledge, ignoring rich information from a fleet perspective. In this
project, the investigators design and implement a fleet-oriented management
strategy for vehicular systems, which utilizes real-time data from sensors
installed in all vehicles to improve the overall performance of the vehicular
system. In particular, the investigators aim to improve the taxi system
performance by using onboard cameras to detect waiting passengers on streets and
share this information with nearby vehicles and dispatch centers to pick up
these passengers through a dispatching strategy. The research team will develop
a clear understanding of how to design an adaptive autonomous vehicular sensing
and dispatching strategy to improve urban mobility efficiency from a fleet-
oriented perspective, with potential applications to future fully autonomous
fleets. Such an understanding on vehicular sensing and dispatch will improve the
quality of the every-day life such as more efficient commute for passengers, and
lower energy uses for drivers, and finally improve the environment for the
society by low vehicle mileage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a
fleet-oriented sensing and control framework to enable seamlessly integration of
historical and real-time data within a fleet for adaptive vehicular sensing,
modeling, and control. Specifically, this project studies how to best use
spatiotemporally-correlated contextual information (e.g., vehicular mobility,
service demand, disruptive events) among vehicles. Although such correlations
decay over time and distance, it is possible to enable autonomous vehicular
sensing, modeling, and control adaptively based on the following research to
develop novel services: (i) reconfigurable fleet-wide coordinated sensing by
autonomously learning correlated vehicular interactions; (ii) models of mobility
phenomena by collectively interpreting implicit data from different vehicles
with a combination of deep learning, structured learning, and attribute-based
learning; (iii) designs of robust dispatching strategies with uncertainty sets
and receding horizon control frameworks by iteratively considering fleet-wide
knowledge to improve mobility efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.