* 1849280
* S&amp;AS:FND:COLLAB:Unsupervised Rare Event Learning - With Applications on Autonomous Vehicles
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2023
* Henry Lam, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 01/31/2023
* USD 255,967.00

Intelligent physical systems (IPSs) architecture must be cognizant, taskable,
adaptive, and ethical, particularly when users need to reliably address
uncertain, dynamically changing situations. Despite the collection and
availability of massive data on IPSs, a significant challenge, faced by the
autonomous vehicle (AV) industry is the capability to efficiently anticipate and
avoid rare but catastrophic failure events. Developing an information structure
that enables users to make the best use of massive data and to model the
complexity and rarity of critical situations would contribute to addressing this
challenge. This project investigates a novel, unsupervised rare-event learning
framework for AV research that utilizes the collected data to assess and
alleviate the risks, limitations, and failure modes of IPSs. The framework
combines the flexibility in modeling high-dimensional time-series driving data
via unsupervised learning algorithms, with the statistical robustness and
computational efficiency from rare-event analysis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goals of the research include: 1) formulate an effective framework to
extract safety-critical information from driving database; 2) develop a solid
probabilistic measurement scheme for rare but adverse events in AV driving
contexts; 3) disseminate the framework and research outcomes to industry and
government units in urgent need of reliable evaluation and development methods;
and 4) cross-fertilize research thrusts between the academic communities of
rare-event estimation and the study of IPSs. The research will merge high-
fidelity driving representations learned from data and statistically rigorous
rare event analysis so that AV design evaluation in simulated complex driving
situations will become highly efficient. It will synthesize machine learning
with simulation methodologies, including rare-event analysis, stochastic
optimization, and particle methods to boost the performances of state-of-the-art
algorithms. The project will foster transformative academic cross-fertilization
between researchers in rare-event estimation (operations research) and IPSs
(machine learning/robotics), by disseminating the outcomes in top-tier journals,
conferences, tutorials and invited seminars. The research will train under-
represented minority students at the PIs' institutions, provide opportunities to
meet key AV academic and industry players, and show them how to apply
mathematical and engineering skills to improve transportation mobility, safety,
and roadway efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.