* 1849591
* CRII: CHS: Examining and applying robot sociality to enhance intergroup human-robot interaction
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2022
* Marlena Fraune, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 07/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Robots are becoming increasingly common enhancements in people's lives. They
tutor students, help around the house, work in factories, and more. For robotic
technology to be the most helpful, it is important to learn how people best
interact with it. In this project, the researchers apply theory of social
psychology and group dynamics to improve human-robot teaming. Previous research
has shown that humans work better with robots that they view as teammates
(called 'ingroup') than robots that they view as opponents (called 'outgroup').
However, ingroup and outgroup are social categories, and it is not known how
social a robot must behave to benefit from ingroup favoritism. Conversely, it is
uncertain if nonsocial robots can avoid the drawbacks of being viewed as
outgroup members. In this project, researchers will develop the understanding of
these critical factors and apply them to real-world human-robot teams, such as
for construction. This will promote the progress of psychological science,
demonstrating how far principles of psychological group dynamics extend to
nonsocial agents and when these principles break down. The results will lead to
robot design recommendations to improve human-robot teaming. For example, this
research might indicate that humans and machine-like robots can work most
efficiently and smoothly together when the robots behave
uniformly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To examine intergroup human-robot interaction,
the researchers will set up cooperative and competitive contexts to elicit group
effects and determine how social the robots must be to be treated like ingroup
or outgroup members (Study 1). Then the researchers will determine if social
group principles, such as entitativity (cohesiveness) of robot groups, affect
interactions with them even when robots are nonsocial (paralleling factory-
created construction robots in the real world; Study 2). Because human groups
will interact with robots (e.g., family members interacting with a home robot, a
construction crew), the researchers will examine how human group type (e.g.,
friend, coworker) affects responses toward the robots (Study 3). Because groups
are more competitive than individuals, the researchers will examine one-on-one
contact with robots before group interaction with them to reduce prejudice
against them (Study 4). Finally, the researchers will apply their research
findings from Studies 1-4 to the real world and the introduction of construction
robots with their collaborators from the College of Engineering (Study 5). This
research will lay the foundation for understanding group dynamics in human-robot
interaction. Based on the findings, the researchers will provide design
recommendations about what robot form and intragroup behavior will be best
suited for intergroup interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.