* 1849107
* S&amp;AS: FND: Context-Aware Active Data Gathering for Complex Outdoor Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2024
* Ibrahim Isler, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 599,962.00

Traditional agents are programmed to acquire information by recognizing and
attending to predetermined areas and targets in a given environment. Recent
advances in deep learning models and miniature hardware platforms are providing
artificial agents unprecedented capability in processing and interpreting visual
data. These advancements create an exciting opportunity to build intelligent
machines running with greater autonomy and adaptability. Toward this goal, this
project investigates new methods that enable multiple unmanned aerial systems to
understand and explore complex outdoor environment by actively seeking,
acquiring, integrating, and processing visual information across space and time.
The developed framework with enhanced adaptability, self-awareness, and
generalizability will be applicable to autonomous systems in broad applications
such as environmental monitoring, search and rescue, self-driving cars, smart
health, and manufacturing domains. Throughout the project, the principal
investigators will make project results including created datasets, trained
models, code, and papers publicly available. The new integrative research
combining vision, planning and actuation will be incorporated into teaching
materials, underrepresented and undergraduate research projects, as well as K-12
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to develop
algorithms for context-aware active sensing which also incorporate energy
constraints. This will be achieved by: First, proposing new deep learning models
for holistic attention prediction with multiple aerial views. The models will
leverage external knowledge to enable inference and generalization in unseen
contexts. Second, by developing new view and path planning methods that are
efficient and aware of systems' energy, mobility and sensing constraints. Third,
by contributing novel online learning methods that adapt based on uncertainty to
implement adaptiveness and awareness to changing environment. Experiments to
validate the findings will take place both indoors in the newly-renovated
Shepherd UAV Lab at the University of Minnesota and in the field at the Cedar
Creek Ecosystem Reserve. The results of this project have the potential to
inspire further research into intelligent and integrative perceptual, planning
and actuation systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.