* 1849680
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Study of Complementary Interactions between Agricultural Scientists and Local Farmers around Knowledge Production and Agricultural Development
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Spencer Stewart, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 12,640.00

This doctoral dissertation project is a study of the political economy of
agricultural science China during World War II. Using archival research methods,
the researcher will examine how the war years were transformative in
institutionalizing public-funded agricultural research that expanded the
systematic study of local vernacular knowledge systems. The shift from small
individual research institutions to large-scale public initiatives during the
war was central to the emergence of Big Science for agriculture, which served to
alleviate the impoverished wartime economy. The shift was accomplished by
bringing scientists in closer contact with local farmers as scientists benefited
through the study and codification of vernacular knowledge while farmers were
given greater access to scientific education and improved crop varieties. The
findings of this research have potential policy implications for international
development initiatives and Chinese agricultural development more specifically.
With the current renewed interest in pre-1949 models of rural development by the
"New Rural Reconstruction Movement" in China, the co-PI plans to write short
articles to bring his findings to a wider audience, especially those associated
with rural reform today. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to bridge the
gap between histories of science focused on transnational and national
transformations (such as the emergence of Big Science during World War II) and
micro-histories of vernacular knowledge systems. Rather than focusing solely on
one of these aspects of wartime science, this research shows how the local
interacted with the national and transnational: not only were non-elite actors
and local knowledge systems vital to the construction of scientific knowledge
and increasing agricultural production for the war, but the geopolitics of
science and the hierarchies often built into research and development schemes
shaped how Chinese scientists approached the process of knowledge accumulation.
These transformations are vital to understanding post-war rural development and
the foundations of China's subsequent Green
Revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.