* 1849627
* CRII: AF: Theory and Algorithms for Maximum Multiplicative Programs Through the Lens of Multi-objective Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2021
* Hadi Charkhgard, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2021
* USD 174,985.00

A fundamental problem in natural-resource management is which sites or parcels
should be protected within a geographical region for preserving biodiversity.
This problem, which is crucial to human societies, and many other important
problems in different domains including, but not limited to, game theory, system
reliability, and statistical estimation can be formulated as a specific class of
mathematical optimization problems. However, the existing solution approaches
for solving practical-sized instances of this important class of optimization
problems are often slow and ineffective. Hence, the objective of this project is
to deliver novel and effective methodologies for this class of optimization
problems by exploring it from a completely different perspective. The project
will train two graduate students in which one of them will be from groups
underrepresented in academia. Case studies and teaching modules will be created
based on the results of the project and will be integrated into graduate-level
courses in optimization. Also, open-source software packages will be delivered
to help other researchers and practitioners working on similar
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Maximum Multiplicative Program (MMP) is a
single-objective nonlinear optimization problem whose objective function is the
product of some non-negative linear functions, whose constraints are linear, and
and whose decision variables can be continuous or integers. Although an MMP has
only one objective function, this research project will show that it can be
viewed and solved through the lens of multi-objective optimization by
decomposing its objective function into separate linear objective functions. It
is known that when integer decision variables are not allowed, MMPs are
polynomially solvable; otherwise they become NP-hard since single-objective
mixed integer linear programs are also MMPs. Hence, the research project will
first develop novel multi-objective linear programming-based algorithms for
solving MMPs with only continuous decision variables in polynomial time. The
project will next develop novel multi-objective mixed integer linear
programming-based algorithms for solving MMPs with both continuous and integer
decision variables. Additionally, the project will result in developing new
objective-space-based cut-generating and decomposition techniques for
MMPs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.