* 1849418
* Perception of 3D shape and material properties from patterns of image shading
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* James Todd, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/29/2024
* USD 605,726.00

One of the most difficult problems in the study of human perception involves the
ability of observers to correctly interpret patterns of image shading. The light
that reflects from a visible surface toward the point of observation is
influenced by several factors. These include the surface shape, the pattern of
illumination, and the nature of the surface material. The problem for perceptual
theory is to explain how it is possible to tease apart these separate influences
in order to make reliable judgments about each one. This project is designed to
investigate how this is achieved by human observers. There are many potential
benefits of this research. The accurate perception of shape and material
properties are important for many basic human functions, such as grasping
objects or judging whether visible surfaces are appropriate to afford safe
locomotion. A better understanding of these processes may help to facilitate
training to avoid injury due to falling. It could also lead to improved 3D
visualization in medical devices, or aids for visually impaired individuals that
can detect slippery spots or irregular terrain features in the path of
locomotion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first specific aim of this proposal is to
measure how the perception of 3D shape is influenced by changes in surface
material (e.g., glass, wax or plastic) or the pattern of illumination. This will
be achieved by measuring local 3D orientation at numerous probe points on an
object, from which it possible to compute a best fitting surface that is most
consistent with an observer's judgments. The second specific aim is to measure
how the perceptual categorization of surface materials is influenced by changes
in 3D shape and the pattern of illumination. This will be achieved using a novel
categorization task in which observers are shown a shaded object, and are
required to adjust a set of sliders to indicate their confidence that the
depicted material is one of several possible material categories. The stimuli
for these experiments will be created using state-of-the-art computer graphics
to produce physically accurate simulations of real materials. The results of
this research will greatly improve our current understanding of the specific
computational mechanisms by which patterns of image shading provide information
for perceiving the 3D shapes of objects and the identification of their material
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.