* 1849559
* CRII: OAC: A Framework for Parallel Data-Intensive Computing on Emerging Architectures and Astroinformatics Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2022
* Michael Gowanlock, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 02/28/2022
* USD 174,975.00

The amount of data that needs to be analyzed by the scientific community is
increasing due to growing volumes of data collected by current and future
instruments and sensors. Consequently, scientific data analysis requires a
significant amount of time. To decrease the amount of time needed to analyze
data, methods need to utilize more computational resources, such as more
processors in a computer. While the central processing unit (CPU) in a modern
computer has traditionally been used to carry out data analysis, the past decade
has seen an increase in using graphics processing units (GPUs) for data
analysis. The modern graphics processing unit contains thousands of processors
that can be used to execute a program faster than on the CPU. However, many
algorithms for data analysis do not use the GPU to its full potential within the
context of the broader computer system. This project advances a framework for
understanding the performance of GPUs as applied to data analysis applications.
The major goal of the project is to bridge the gap between algorithms that only
use the GPU, and fully integrated algorithms that exploit the strengths of both
the CPU and GPU. The ensemble of algorithms that are explored in the project
support the needs of the astronomy community and researchers in other scientific
areas that require efficient data analysis methods. The project aims to realize
a new era in CPU/GPU computing that impacts both computer science and other
scientific fields. An outcome of the project is the development of materials for
educators teaching at the intersection of data analysis and parallel computing.
This project includes mentoring K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students.
Consequently, the project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's
mission, by promoting the progress of science, and to advance the national
health and prosperity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New cyberinfrastructure, such as
data analysis algorithms for emerging heterogeneous architectures, are needed to
address cutting-edge scientific problems. Data analysis building blocks and
algorithms have many data-dependent performance bottlenecks. New architectures
have the potential to alleviate some of these key bottlenecks. However, the
majority of GPU research minimally involves the CPU/host, and performs most of
the computation on the GPU. This is a missed opportunity to more closely
integrate both data and task parallelism between the CPU and GPU to
simultaneously exploit concurrency across both architectures. This project
examines a selection of key algorithms in the database, machine learning, data
mining, and parallel computing communities. Using these algorithms, this project
explores the continuum between GPU-only and mixed hybrid parallelism (data and
task parallelism between the CPU and GPU) to identify key bottlenecks that can
be reduced by exploiting underutilized resources. The selected algorithms are
fundamental to scientific data processing workflows, and can advance time-domain
astronomy cyberinfrastructure. The project integrates data-intensive computing
insights into courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels, and pedagogical
modules are developed to be used by instructors for teaching concepts of mixed
(data and task) parallelism across the CPU and GPU. This project includes
mentoring students at the undergraduate, graduate, and K-12 levels, including
outreach at science festivals to encourage participation and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.