* 1849338
* The Genetic History of the Aleut People
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,08/31/2024
* Dennis O'Rourke, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2024
* USD 513,643.00

In recent years, ancient DNA research has transformed our understanding of human
history. In the Americas, ancient genomes have revealed new and surprising
details, such as the presence of previously unknown populations, previously
unsuspected relationships between groups, and new estimates of dates for past
events in human history. Although recent studies have investigated the origins
and history of different Native American groups, few have focused on the
indigenous peoples of the Aleutian Islands, a population that may prove central
to our understanding of human dispersals in the western hemisphere. The analysis
of genomes from ancient and contemporary Aleuts will allow us to better
understand the origins of these peoples, how they adapted to a challenging
environment, and how European contact and recent population events have affected
their genetic diversity. This research is supported by Aleut political and
cultural leaders, who are interested in using genetic approaches to better
understand their people's history. Results from this project will be used in
education materials for the participating communities, as well as in initiatives
designed to train Native American students in genetics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Americas were the last continents to become inhabited
by humans, but it has recently become clear that the history of this process was
far more complicated than originally understood based on archaeology alone. For
example, current archaeological evidence suggests that the Aleutian Islands were
peopled approximately 9,000 years ago in a series of population movements from
the Alaska Peninsula westward, with groups inhabiting the western islands by
about 3,000 years ago. A recently published analysis of genomic-scale data from
ancient and contemporary peoples of the Arctic, which includes data from a few
ancient individuals from the Eastern Aleutian islands, indicates that the
Aleutian gene pool dates to approximately 5,000 years ago, leaving a 4,000 year
discrepancy between archaeological and genetic records. One hypothesis to
resolve the discrepancy between the genetic and archaeological dates holds that
the earliest ancestors of Native Americans - who lived in Beringia approximately
20,000 years ago - may have moved southward to the Alaska Peninsula, eventually
peopling the present-day central and western islands. The investigators will
test this hypothesis and uncover additional details of the history of the
peopling of the Aleutian Islands through the analysis of complete genomes from
ancient and contemporary Aleuts. They will also assess the demographic effects
of European contact beginning in the 18th century on Aleut populations, and
characterize the genetic adaptations of ancient and contemporary Aleuts to the
challenging environmental conditions present in the archipelago over time. This
research was developed in a partnership between Aleut political and cultural
leadership and the researchers at the University of Kansas, which is the result
of a decades-long collaboration. This project is jointly funded by the
Biological Anthropology Programs, the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Arctic Social Science Program at the
National Science Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.