* 1849657
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Historical Study of Land Use Changes and Emerging Epidemics
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2020
* Emily Webster, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 05/31/2020
* USD 15,120.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project that studies
epidemic diseases in the British Empire. The researcher will develop a
comparative study of three cities: Belfast, Melbourne, and Bombay. She will
focus on the microbe, the colonial administrator, and the bacteriologist as the
central actors in each of the three cases. She will do so by engaging in a study
of archival documents and other sources to obtain a deeper understanding of the
social, economic, and cultural complexities that make each region unique. She
plans to show how specific features of the local environment in these three
regions, when combined with plans of sanitary improvement and land use change
espoused by the British Empire, served to produce unique environments in which
particular microbes thrived. The proposed project draws from multiple
disciplinary sources and is intended for multiple disciplinary audiences. The
researcher plans to disseminate her research results at conferences and
workshops sponsored by history departments, epidemiology and public health
departments, public health policy centers, and organizations that engage in
climate studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a historical frame while
engaging with a number of central topics in the field of science and technology
studies. It engages with the concept of nonhuman agency with its focus on the
ecological specificity of microbes, and it uses Niche Construction Theory to
access the localized environments and to draw out their relationship to
microbial actors. Cultural construction of science and technology, particularly
as it relates to imperialism and nineteenth century colonial practices, will
also be an important element of consideration to this project. Using relatively
new social scientific frameworks to guide this history, this project will engage
with STS in its goal to induce new consideration of the agency of living objects
and actor-network theory as a viable historical and social scientific
frame.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.