* 1849464
* Workshop: Localizing Representations in the Brain with Neuroimaging Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Jessey Wright, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 27,147.00

This award supports an interdisciplinary workshop that critically evaluates the
use of neuroimaging technology as a window into the representational content of
neural activity. The workshop will provide a context for critically examining
the empirical significance of appeals to representations. It will bring together
philosophers and neuroscientists with overlapping interests in conceptual and
empirical challenges related to the search for representations in the brain. The
primary goal of the workshop is to identify empirical criteria for individuating
representational states and specifying their content within the domains of
memory, perception, and action. The workshop will result in a collection of
journal articles published in an open access venue that will demonstrate the
value of focused interdisciplinary collaborations between philosophers and
neuroscientists. The curated program and organizational plan will also be widely
shared after the workshop, along with reflections on its
effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary workshop brings
together philosophers and neuroscientists to focus on the notion of
representation and its relationships to neural processes. Neuroscientists
investigating human cognition with neuroimaging technology often describe their
findings in terms of representations. This concept is ubiquitous, but its
meaning and significance varies. Sometimes representations are treated as
genuine phenomena that are the targets of investigation and intervention, and at
other times the concept is used as a theoretically insignificant stand-in for
claims about information carried by or transformed in neural processes. If the
concept of representation carries any empirical significance, fully exploiting
that significance requires an account of what kind of evidence is required to
justify claims about the content and role such a state plays in realizing
cognitive capacities. In light of this, workshop participants will focus on
three central questions: What is the significance of identifying a pattern of
brain activity as a representation? What evidence is required to make such an
attribution? Can neuroimaging technologies provide that evidence? Approaching
these questions from a purely empirical perspective may end up reinforcing the
ambiguities already present in the cognitive neuroscience literature and doing
so from a purely philosophical perspective risks generating accounts of
representation that are not amenable to empirical investigation. An integrative,
interdisciplinary approach seems to be the best path
forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.