* 1849130
* S&amp;AS: FND: Decision-Making for Autonomous Systems with Limited Resources
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Panagiotis Tsiotras, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 422,797.00

A fundamental question in decision-making of autonomous robotic systems is how
these systems make decisions such that these are similar to a decision a human
would make in a similar situation. This aspect of decision making is important
in order for the robotic agent to generate predictable behaviors which are
necessary in order to establish trust in human-machine teams. Traditional
approaches to solve this problem assume that humans are well-informed, perfectly
rational agents that always reach the optimal (e.g., the best decision). Several
empirical studies, however, suggest that most humans do not act as perfectly
rational agents when making decisions but rather as bounded-rational ones. In
other words, they do not try to get the best possible outcome unconditionally,
but rather they tend to weight the benefits of reaching the best outcome subject
to constraints (time, cognitive effort, energy, money, or just laziness). Using
this key idea, this research will investigate decision-making for autonomous
systems subject to resource constraints. Similar to how humans make decisions,
instead of trying to get the optimal decision no matter what, the decision-
making process will have to factor in the computational, information, or energy
constraints available to the agent. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
investigates the interaction between autonomous robotic agents and other agents
either human or robotic, while considering the decision-making constraints of
the agents. Instead of focusing on maximizing expected utility (as in standard
formulations) this research will address the maximization of expected free
utility (or free energy), a quantity that encapsulates in a precise manner the
effect of information and computational constraints of the decision-making
process. The results of this research will be applied to the case of multiple
agents having perhaps conflicting objectives. As a test case this framework is
applied to the problem of autonomous vehicles in traffic including both human
drivers and other self-driving vehicles. By adapting the agent's decision-making
process to the available resources, this framework can be used to generate a
hierarchy of abstractions for decision-making brought about by the severity of
information-processing costs. Each abstraction is tailored to the "right" level
of granularity of the problem. That is, coarser abstraction levels are preferred
when the computational resources are scarce and finer (more accurate) levels of
abstraction when the computational resources are plentiful. Finally, "theory of
mind" principles will be utilized to design bounded-rational decision-making
algorithms that avoid the infinite regress between conflicting agents. This
infinite regress hinders the computation of purely rational equilibria and will
be avoided by adopting a framework that restricts each player's depth of
recursive inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.