* 1849026
* RUI: Discrete States of Wakefulness in Human Subjects and their Relevance to Memory
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2023
* Erin Wamsley, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2023
* USD 527,551.00

'Zoning out' during our daily tasks is typically considered a waste of time, as
when an inattentive student daydreams during a lecture. But to the contrary,
moments of inattention to our surroundings may be essential to the formation of
memory. This project will test the hypothesis that even when we seem to be
sitting still and doing nothing, the mind and brain are continuously switching
between two distinct states - one in which we are focused on processing our
immediate external environment (an 'online' state), and another during which we
ignore our immediate surroundings and turn our attention toward internally
generated activity, including thinking of the past and planning for the future
(an 'offline' state). This project tests the hypothesis that the early stages of
memory processing occur specifically during moments of this offline state,
interspersed throughout our day. By developing new methods of measuring these
waking states and their function, this work will help to move us toward a more
accurate understanding of wakefulness as an oscillation between distinct
processing modes that are essential for the formation and retention of long-term
memories. As a part of NSF's RUI (Research in Undergraduate Institutions)
program, this project will also provide high-quality research training for
approximately 12 undergraduate students across the course of 3 years, including
members of underrepresented minority groups and students from underserved public
high schools in South Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies of human memory
have typically treated wakefulness as a homogenous state. But to the contrary,
moment-to-moment alternation between online attention to the current environment
and offline attention to internally generated thought and imagery may be a
fundamental feature of the waking state, occurring even in the absence of a
directed cognitive task. Although we all experience such attentional
fluctuations throughout the day, the structure and function of these short bouts
of offline time remain almost entirely unknown. The objective of the current
project is to model this temporal microstructure of wakefulness in human
subjects, assessing the functional relevance of fluctuation between online and
offline attentional states to memory processing. The central hypothesis is that
the early stages of memory consolidation occur specifically during these offline
moments interspersed throughout the day. This hypothesis is based in part on the
researcher's preliminary data describing features of these proposed states of
wakefulness using simultaneous high-density EEG, pupillometry, behavioral, and
subjective report measures. To test the hypotheses, the research team will
pursue two specific aims. Aim 1 will model the transition between online and
offline waking states at seconds-level temporal resolution, using simultaneous
high-density EEG, pupillometry, behavioral, and subjective report measures. Aim
2 will assess the contribution of spontaneous offline time to memory
consolidation. Together, these studies will test the novel hypothesis that a
fast-timescale alternation between online and offline attentional states is
essential for memory consolidation to occur. This work thus challenges the
traditional view of wakefulness as a unified state, instead describing wake as
an oscillation between statistically discriminable cortical states, each with
different cognitive functions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We anticipate that this
work will lead to two main scientific advances. First, this project will develop
a new, data-driven model of the alternation between waking states in human
subjects. The classification algorithms to be developed will allow future
investigators to more easily and objectively detect and measure offline time,
while providing a uniquely comprehensive description of the heterogeneous
structure of wakefulness. Second, the project will test the relevance of
fluctuation between waking states to memory consolidation, resolving a continued
uncertainty in the field of memory research regarding the brain state(s) during
which consolidation occurs, and the timescale(s) on which it operates. Finally,
as a part of NSF's RUI (Research in Undergraduate Institutions) program, this
project will also strengthen the undergraduate STEM pipeline in an underserved
region of the country, providing high-quality research training to approximately
12 undergraduate students, including members of underrepresented minorities and
local high school students in South Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Perception Action &amp; Cognition Program, the
Cognitive Neuroscience Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.