* 1849265
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Intergenerational effects of prenatal stress on physiological and psychosocial outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2021
* Andrew Kim, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 08/31/2021
* USD 29,434.00

In recent decades, research has underscored the importance of early life
experiences, especially those that occur in utero, as factors that influence
biological outcomes across the life course. Growing evidence suggests that some
early life biological effects, such as those triggered by psychosocial stress,
can persist into adulthood and in some cases influence offspring and
grandoffspring development. This doctoral research project will use existing
survey data, and newly collected data and biological samples, to examine life
course and intergenerational effects of early life stress experienced by now
young-adult mothers who were exposed to highly adverse social conditions. The
research will advance knowledge about potential biological pathways of
multigenerational effects of stress in humans, and contribute more broadly to
our understanding of the complex interplay between human biology and culture.
The outcomes of this project will contribute valuable data that may inform
public health research and policy. The project will also support student
training, international research collaborations, and science outreach
activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers have proposed that there may be
multigenerational pathways of biological "memory" whereby an individual's
biology reflects not only their own experiences and that of their mothers, but
potentially also their grandmothers' experiences. The hypothalamic-pituitary-
adrenal axis is a central component of the body's system of stress response and
is among the candidate outcomes likely to be influenced by such
multigenerational plasticity. This study provides a unique opportunity to trace
the long-term impacts of early life stress exposure to biological and social
disparities, focusing on both the physiology and well-being of exposed
individuals, and the birth outcomes and stress physiology of their unexposed
offspring. This project will utilize existing and newly collected data for a
cohort of women, their children, and grandchildren, that has been followed for
nearly 30 years and that experienced highly adverse social and environmental
conditions. The investigators will first assess long-term effects of the
mother's stress experiences during her own early life on her adult biology and
well-being, before exploring downstream impacts on her
offspring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.