* 1849109
* CAREER: Advancing Ion Concentration Polarization to Enrich New Classes of Analytes from Complex Media and to Interface with Analysis: Breaking the Glass Ceiling on Enrichment
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Robbyn Anand, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 01/31/2024
* USD 620,000.00

Professor Robbyn Anand of Iowa State University is supported by the Chemical
Measurement and Imaging Program of the Division of Chemistry to develop
analytical techniques that address current limitations to the selective
separation and enrichment of chemical compounds from difficult to handle fluids.
The newly developed technique sensitively detects the separated compounds at the
site of enrichment. The focus is on currently inaccessible categories of
compounds, including medications, food additives, and clinically-relevant
targets present in biological fluids, food, and pharmaceutical formulations. The
project positively impacts society by improving public health through more
accurate medical diagnostics and the assurance of high quality food and
medications. The project supports the development of a workshop-style college
course to promote diversity in science by engaging students in discussions on
topics such as work-life balance, workplace climate, entrepreneurship, and
networking. In addition, case studies are developed to improve learning outcomes
in graduate-level electrochemistry educational material.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tackles a major challenge in the field of
electrokinetic separations and enrichment. Namely, its applicability to
uncharged species in complex media and the integration of the separation
platform with downstream detection and quantification methodologies. The long-
term objective is to broaden the applicability of electrokinetic focusing that
is based on the concept of ion concentration polarization through the
development and standardization of versatile and reproducible chemical
processes. New ion concentration polarization strategies that address current
limitations are investigated. These strategies take advantage of guest-host
interactions that impart charge to neutral species; unique features of ion
depleted zone initiation, growth, and stability in viscous fluids; and the
enhanced sensitivity of in situ detection with three-dimensional flow-through
electrode architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.