* 1849430
* Engineering for US All - E4USA: A National Pilot High School Engineering Course and Database
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Leigh Abts, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 09/30/2022
* USD 4,122,192.00

The College Board currently serves 7 million students, 23,000 high schools, and
3,600 colleges through the AP and SAT annually. However, no standardized
educational program exists for pre-college students to earn widely accepted,
transferable, engineering course credits. In addition, there are no nationally
offered professional development programs to train and certify highly qualified,
secondary teachers to support an undergraduate-level engineering course at the
pre-college level. An Engineering for US All (E4USA), one-year high school
course has the potential to 'democratize' the learning and practice of
engineering by engaging high school students and their teachers to think and
practice engineering principles and design practices, like an engineer. E4USA
would be equivalent to placement credit for an introductory college course, such
as: 1) core engineering; or 2) an elective; or 3) a substitute required course
in the general education sequence. The impact might well go beyond an E4USA
credit, through the credentialing of a broad range of STEM trained teachers to
instruct and assess engineering principles and design-based experiences, and
therefore become cornerstones supporting the introduction of engineering
principles and design as outlined in the Next Generation Science Standards
(NGSS). The E4USA framework will focus on three "big ideas:" 1) Engineering and
Society; 2) Engineering Processes; and 3) Essential Engineering Content, Skills
and Tools. Credit would be earned by students through two integrated pathways:
1) a standard's based curriculum covering the Principles of Engineering; and 2)
a submission of a design project. The national pilot will be lead by the
University of Maryland College Park and include Arizona State University, Morgan
State University, Vanderbilt University, Virginia Tech, a dissemination
collaboration with NASA, and a sampling of some 70 high schools across the
United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineering for US All (E4USA) would help to
'demystify' and 'democratize' engineering, and empower science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teachers to gain the self-efficacy, self-
confidence and skills to teach and assess their students engineering-based
competencies. No standardized programs currently exist at a national level to
train and certify high school teachers to support a one-year high school course
based on engineering principles and a design-based experience. Our proposed
national pilot would enable the standardized and centralization of data
collection from across the United States, thus tracking STEM teachers and their
students' trajectories of learning engineering concepts through competency-based
evaluations and design project submissions. A national, data repository will be
created and updated at the University of Maryland to track the training of the
teachers, and their students. The research will explore if: 1) a broader
diversity of students will consider engineering as an academic and career
option; 2) professional development (PD) can enable teachers to apply
engineering concepts across STEM disciplines to train students to tackle and
solve problems; and 3) the piloting of the PD models can be used to certify
highly qualified teachers. Projected outcomes will include: 1) a hybrid (e.g.,
in-person and online) PD model that prepares STEM teachers to gain the
confidence, instructional skills and assessment competencies to support E4USA;
2) guidelines for the use of a Learning Management Systems and on-line
analytical tools to collect data from a diverse sampling of teachers, students,
institutions, and high schools; 3) E4USA course materials and resources; and 4)
E4USA models that can be aligned to state and local high school graduation
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.