* 1849622
* CRII: SHF: Foundations for Stateful Network Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2019,10/31/2019
* Jedidiah McClurg, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 10/31/2019
* USD 175,000.00

Billions of people use web-based services on a daily basis for a variety of
tasks, such as communication, social networking, and navigation. These services
rely on correct and efficient functioning of complex networked systems, which
are prone to failures that are often caused by human error. Existing
technologies such as software-defined networking (SDN) seek to reduce human
error by providing centralized network management and programmability via a
standard API, and by separating network management (the SDN "control-plane")
from packet forwarding (the SDN "data-plane"). While centralization permits a
single network controller to have a global view of the network--which simplifies
the control logic--it suffers from severe scalability limitations when the size
of a network increases. Moreover, modern SDN data-planes feature powerful,
decentralized devices that are able to perform computations and update their
local state based on packet contents, thereby allowing them to implement
functionality traditionally restricted to the SDN control-plane. Such
decentralization requires viewing a network program as a distributed system
running on network hardware, rather than as a process running on a controller
and interacting with switches. This project establishes a new approach for
constructing modern network programs, viewed as distributed systems. The
project's novelties are (i) a new abstraction for writing network programs that
takes distribution into account and ensures that a network program correctly
maintains distributed views of global state; and (ii) techniques for ensuring
efficiency of network programs: the techniques ensure that network performance
is not penalized by maintenance of global state. The project's impacts are (i)
contributions to the general understanding of how to properly build distributed
systems, and (ii) development of a language and associated tools which eliminate
some of the difficulties domain experts face in building these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key contribution is a thorough investigation
of the network data-plane as a platform for executing dynamic, stateful code,
resulting in a programming system which allows network functions to be realized
in the data-plane, and ensures that network programs are verifiably correct and
efficiently implementable. The project has two research thrusts. The first
thrust focuses on generalizing and implementing event nets. While previous work
introduced the concept of event nets (a Petri-nets-based abstraction) for event-
driven programming in the context of SDN, this project enriches the event nets
language with functionality needed to make it easily usable in other domains
such as wireless sensor networking (WSN), internet of things (IoT), and data-
centric programming. The resulting language allows programmers to write, for
each of these domains, event-driven network programs that use global data
structures to describe network-wide behavior, without having to handle
unexpected data races during program execution on the (distributed) switches.
Additionally, the project implements a compiler that produces executable code
from an extended event net: specifically, the compiler automatically constructs
a network program's distributed version that targets modern hardware such as
Barefoot Network's Tofino chip. The second research thurst focuses on
formalizing event nets. The project investigates an algebraic formalization of
the extended event nets language, allowing (mechanized) formal reasoning about
dynamic, stateful network programs. Finally, the project explores ways in which
event nets can be used as a pedagogical tool in teaching undergraduate classes
on Computer Networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.