* 1849654
* Spring Land Surface and Subsurface Temperature Anomalies and Subsequent Downstream Late Spring-Summer Droughts/Floods in North America and East Asia
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2019,05/31/2024
* Yongkang Xue, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2024
* USD 688,165.00

Episodes of extreme events, such as droughts and floods, can have serious
societal, agricultural, economic, and ecological impacts. Basin-wide tropical
sea surface temperature anomalies are known to play a major role in causing
these extreme events. The linkage of these extreme hydrological events to
tropical sea surface temperature anomalies allows us to predict them with useful
skill at a long lead time in advance ranging from few months to few years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore the idea for the first time
to utilize the information of spring land surface temperature/subsurface
temperature anomalies over the western high elevation areas in North America and
East Asia for the prediction of late spring/summer droughts or floods over the
eastern part of the continents. The results from this research would be useful
for the sub-seasonal to seasonal prediction community. This project is a direct
response to the new initiative "Impact of initialized land temperature and
snowpack on sub-seasonal to seasonal prediction" recently developed by the
Global Energy and Water Exchanges (GEWEX) Program, which involves more than 30
institutions worldwide. Findings of this NSF project should provide valuable
information to the GEWEX community. Knowledge gained in this research will be
disseminated through classroom teaching, short course training classes as well
as the GEWEX initiative. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike predictions using sea
surface temperature, which uses sea surface temperature as a lower boundary
condition for atmospheric models, the PI will use the information of spring land
surface temperature (LST) and subsurface temperature (SUBT) anomalies as initial
conditions in the land component of coupled climate models. The main hypothesis
is that LST and SUBT anomalies in early Spring hold the information about the
abundance of water locked in frozen ground (i.e., the amount of snow/ice on the
ground and in the frozen surface layer below) to be melted in later Spring and
early Summer. The more snow/ice on the ground and in the frozen surface layer
below is, the longer the seasonal transition from Spring to Summer is. The
timing of such seasonal transition over high elevation areas in the west plays
an important role in setting up the circulation pattern downstream over the low
elevation areas in the east. The strength as well as length of its interactions
with the circulation pattern over the low elevation areas controlled by land-
ocean temperature contrast would affect the occurrence of droughts or floods in
late spring/summer over the eastern part of the continents.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will run various numerical simulations using
global and regional models under different climate and weather conditions (i) to
understand the mechanisms for the downstream influences of LST/SUBT anomalies,
(ii) to compare their effects with SST anomalies, (iii) to identify and
distinguish roles of snow and soil moisture in contributing to soil memory and
preserving the LST/SUBT anomalies, and (iv) to explore characteristics of soil
layer memory and LST/SUBT anomalies and the causes of the spring LST/SUBT
anomalies. The project will also develop a new SUBT initialization methodology
for operational models to better utilize SUBT information for sub-
seasonal/seasonal forecasts in spring/summer seasons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.