* 1849664
* RUI:Collaborative Research: Fluid flow metamorphism and strain localization in mid-crustal shear zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Gabriele Casale, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2024
* USD 73,748.00

This project investigates the relationship between fluids, metamorphism, and
localization of deformation on the composition and strength of fault zones in
middle regions of the crust (depths greater than 12 kilometers). The project
focuses on the ductile fault zone associated with the Raft River metamorphic
core complex in Utah, in order to constrain both the source and the amount of
fluid during faulting. The study incorporates geologic mapping in the field,
analyses of mineral structures, chemical analyses, and analyses to determine the
timing of movement along the fault. The project has the potential to tie
analytic data to specific fluid sources and better constrain fluid flow at a
crustal-scale. This project is led by an early career faculty member and
includes Masters-level graduate and undergraduate students. First-generation and
minority college students at the University of Louisiana at Lafayette are also
involved. The project incorporates an outreach effort to support K-12 education
in rural western North Carolina that includes geologic time resources developed
by undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
improve the understanding of fluid-rock interaction in detachment shear zones
associated with metamorphic core complexes. Hydrous metamorphic minerals record
the presence of meteoric fluids at great depths within the crust. Despite the
clear record of meteoric fluids down to mid- to lower-crustal depths, many
chemical and petrologic inconsistencies remain. During orogenic collapse, the
upper crust thins by brittle normal faulting while the ductile lower crust flows
laterally. Localization of extension eventually leads to the formation of a
detachment shear zone and metamorphic core complex. Ductile extension in the
lower crust is characterized by high heat fluxes, granitic intrusion, and
migmatitic gneiss domes, associated with metamorphic/magmatic fluids. During
exhumation, there is competition between two fluid reservoirs
(magmatic/metamorphic and meteoric water from surface sources). This project
uses hydrogen and oxygen stable isotope data as tracers of fluid source and
fluid-rock exchange to provide constraints on fluid-rock interaction during
continental extension. Isotopic data is linked to specific fluid sources to
better constrain the hydrology of crustal-scale fluid flow, in order to bridge
the gap between experimentally-derived rock strengths, and field
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.