* 1849822
* CRII: CHS: Novel technology for improving access to trainer-led aerobic exercise for people who are blind
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Kyle Rector, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 05/31/2022
* USD 101,295.00

People who are blind or have low vision are more likely to be obese than people
with normal vision. One effective way to prevent obesity is by exercising
regularly, but exercise instructors typically give verbal directions and
feedback based on the premise that the trainee is sighted. To address this
problem, this research will create a system that uses a sensing mat to track a
trainee's feet during step aerobics and provide reorienting feedback if s/he
falls out of sync with the class. Studies with people who are visually impaired
will be used to determine how best to design verbal feedback to the trainee and
when the verbal feedback should be provided. System accuracy will also be
measured. This research will create knowledge that will help designers of future
assistive technologies. The research will also help enhance the quality of life
for people who are visually impaired, providing them with an opportunity to have
an accessible experience in group-based aerobic exercise classes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the project's goals, an empirical user study
will first be conducted where people with visual impairments perform aerobic
exercises with video and audio workouts. Participants will be video recorded
during exercise, and the research team will analyze the recordings to determine
which verbal phrases help or confuse participants. Second, sensor mat technology
and associated algorithms will be developed to track the trainee's feet with
template matching to determine when the trainee falls out of sync during step
aerobics. Two kinds of verbal feedback will be developed: proactive feedback if
the system detects unhelpful verbal phrases, and reactive feedback if the person
performs three missteps in a row. User studies will be conducted to determine
the effectiveness of this feedback, as well as participant preferences with
respect to type of verbal feedback.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.