* 1849257
* Pilot Study to Accelerate Engineering Research Center Preparedness
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2019
* Margaret Palmer, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 08/31/2019
* USD 184,175.00

The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) has challenged the engineering research
community to embrace and advance new approaches that not only enable
technological innovation but result in broad benefits to human well-being and
social prosperity. Collaborative, transdisciplinary, and convergence research
within the context of Engineering Research Centers (ERCs) is thought to provide
a particularly promising opportunity for research engineers to meet this
challenge. This pilot project hypothesizes that the engineering research
community will benefit from activities to better position and prepare them to
meet the NAS challenge and propose innovative transdisciplinary ERCs that are
likely to have major societal benefits. With a focus on a wide array of best
practices in transdisciplinary and convergence research, this project will
prepare research engineers to better identify and solve difficult issues, while
also helping NSF fulfill its new vision for the next generation of ERCs. This
project will similarly encourage ERCs to integrate diverse stakeholder
perspectives and needs into research, and thus facilitate improved problem-
solving and increased involvement of traditionally underrepresented groups in
science. Therefore, the pilot project has the potential to produce benefits
within the engineering research community and for society at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing on lessons learned by leaders at the
National Socio-Environmental Synthesis Center and those learned from other
complex transdisciplinary efforts, this pilot project will: (1) conduct an
interactive workshop with leading members of the engineering research community;
(2) determine if participating in the workshop is associated with enhanced
understandings of four key topics identified as engineering priorities. The
topics include effective methods for stakeholder engagement; convergence as a
driving approach for innovative engineering research to solve societal problems;
effective transdisciplinary team-based research processes; and, reflective and
adaptive center designs that foster convergent research and societal impact. To
asses understanding, participant surveys will be administered prior to and
following the workshop. The results will be considered preliminary and will be
used to inform potential future studies on how to build capacities in research
communities to conduct transdisciplinary, convergence
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.