* 1849990
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: Properties and Mechanisms of the Multiscale Eddy-Induced Diffusion
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2023
* Igor Kamenkovich, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2023
* USD 453,137.00

Ocean eddies are fundamental to the distribution of properties such as heat,
nutrients, carbon, and pollutants. This project will examine the effects of
ocean eddies in distributing properties over time and space. The project uses
established theory in geophysical fluid dynamics, a suite of state of the art
numerical models, and ocean observations to examine how eddies distribute
properties over space and time. The results will be a set of data that can be
used to improve representations of the effects of eddies in numerical models of
the ocean circulation and climate. The project is a collaboration between the US
and the United Kingdom (UK) with the UK component being supported by the UK
National Environmental Research Council (NERC) through an agreement with
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore properties of the
inhomogeneous and anisotropic eddy-induced transport at mid-latitudes and
examine their importance for tracer distribution. The eddy-induced transport
will be quantified by a spatio-temporal map of the eddy diffusivity tensor which
will be analyzed to explore the dependence of the results on the spatial and
temporal scales used to define the eddies. This diffusivity map will then be
used to produce tracer distributions in flows that do not fully resolve the
eddy-driven tracer advection, and the resulting skill will be quantified. A
hierarchy of eddy-resolving numerical simulations and observations from drifting
buoys will be used. The study will advance fundamental understanding of how,
where, and why different processes and scales contribute to the material
transport and will develop novel methods for estimating scale-aware eddy
diffusivity tensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.