* 1849927
* I-Corps: Wearable Medical Device for Menopause Management
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Jeffrey Garanich, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project (NSF Lineage:
Award Number 1644664) is borne from the development of a customizable symptom
management tool to support women experiencing menopause. The negative perception
of menopause causes symptom embarrassment which leads to deficiencies in health
literacy and inefficient symptom management. This project's technology, a
wearable-app system, addresses this inefficiency by providing the means to
inform and support women throughout menopause. The proposed I-Corps program
explores commercialization opportunities within the project's initial
application focus of menopause symptom management and also investigates the
potential of applications in the cancer symptom management and data sales
markets. With respect to the latter, the prospective technology will gather an
abundance of data that may be used to streamline biotechnology and
pharmaceutical product development. Through adoption of this technology, women
will be able to better communicate their symptoms to a more aware and
understanding society. This opens the door to future innovations in additional
areas of healthcare that are traditionally not openly
discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the premise
that leveraging personal mobile devices and user data may create disruptive
innovation in the healthcare space. The project's technology utilizes multiple
sensors to collect personalized data which is used to provide the user with
multiple ways to optimize management of her menopause symptoms, with the goal of
minimizing their negative impact on her daily routine. Progress on the project
to date includes development of an alpha prototype that has been used to test
the feasibility of both hardware and software components. Current areas of focus
include optimization of the physical design and data acquisition capability. The
I-Corps process will allow us to improve our understanding of our customers?
unmet needs and the ability of our technology to address them. This will guide
the development of our technology, including optimization for manufacturing and
feature enhancement, to address needs found in customer discovery and accelerate
introduction of a useful product to market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.