* 1849931
* CRII: CHS: Harnessing Machine Learning to Improve Human Decision Making: A Case Study on Deceptive Detection
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2019,05/31/2021
* Chenhao Tan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 05/31/2021
* USD 174,977.00

Humans are the final decision-makers in a wide variety of critical tasks that
involve ethical and legal concerns, ranging from predicting criminal recidivism
by the courts, to medical diagnosis, to identifying misleading information.
These are challenging tasks for humans and for machines. However, for some
closely-constrained tasks where vast amounts of training data are available,
machine learning algorithms can outperform humans. If the knowledge encoded in
the machine learning models can be elucidated to humans, these implementations
can support human decision making and even tutor humans to achieve better
performance. Those are the goals of this project.

This project investigates human decision making with assistance from machine
learning models for the task of detecting deception. It explores two domains
routinely encountered on the Internet, online reviews and news articles. It
develops two forms of assistance from machine learning models to improve human
decision making while retaining human agency: 1) providing information based on
machine learning models for real-time support of human decisions, and 2)
automatically generating tutorials to help humans understand the nature of this
task from the perspective of machine learning models (offline training). This
project develops novel algorithms that incorporate educational psychology to
help teach humans the knowledge encoded in machine learning algorithms. The
project evaluates the two forms of assistance by tracking human performance
improvement in user studies. The project explores additional indicators, such as
trust and time to complete tasks, to further understand collaboration between
humans and machine learning algorithms. The knowledge gained in the project will
inform design principles for effective integration of artificial intelligence
into human decision making.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.