* 1849209
* Macro-Level Sources of Illegal Drug Overdose Deaths across U.S. Communities
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2022
* Ben Feldmeyer, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 01/31/2022
* USD 215,445.00

Between 1999 and 2016, the United States experienced a three-fold increase in
illegal drug overdose deaths, with many communities facing epidemic levels of
overdoses. As a result, overdose deaths now claim three to four times more
American lives each year than homicide and more deaths annually than the AIDS
epidemic did at its peak. Although the drug overdose crisis has affected people
across all locations and walks of life, research shows that this illegal drug
epidemic is concentrated in some communities and demographic groups but not
others. Little research has been conducted, however, on why some places and
populations are more vulnerable to experiencing drug overdoses. In addition,
little is known about whether the community sources of fatal drug overdoses are
the same as those that shape homicide and suicide rates. This project will
address these questions by identifying the community characteristics that
contribute to drug overdose death concentrations across locales, time, and
demographic groups, both alone and compared to the community sources of homicide
and suicide. In so doing, this project provides one of the most comprehensive,
nationwide analyses examining the community-level sources of drug overdose
deaths to date. It also will equip researchers and policy makers with
information that can be used to combat the drug overdose epidemic by targeting
community-level conditions for intervention and assisting those places and
groups that are most susceptible to drug overdose concentrations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will compile a unique
database using approximately 25 years of nationally-representative mortality
data on overdose deaths, homicides, and suicides drawn from the Center for
Disease Control Restricted-Access Multiple Cause of Death Mortality data from
1990 to 2016. These data will be aggregated and combined with measures of
community social, economic, and health indicators drawn from multiple databases
including: the U.S. Census Bureau, Center for Disease Control prescription data,
and Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation community health data. Using
fixed effects change-score models, these combined data will be used to identify
the community sources of overdose death rates across: (1) aggregate study units
(e.g., county, metropolitan areas); (2) time (1990-2016); (3) substance type
(heroin, natural and semi-synthetic opioids, synthetic opioids, cocaine,
psychostimulants); and (4) demographic groups (race/ethnicity, age, gender).
These analyses will be replicated for both homicide and suicide to identify
whether the community-level determinants of death are unique for each form of
mortality, or whether there are common factors that similarly predict overdose,
homicide, and suicide death rates. Hybrid time series models will also be used
to address limitations of fixed effects modeling. Findings from this project
will contribute to greater understanding of ecological theories of crime by
testing relevant hypotheses using dependent variables reflecting drug overdose,
homicide, and suicide rates, which include outcomes previously understudied
within this theoretical framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.