* 1849625
* Toward a common digital continuum platform for big data and extreme-scale computing (BDEC2)
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Jack Dongarra, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Alan Sussman
* 09/30/2020
* USD 203,406.00

By the end of this decade, the world's store of digital data is projected to
reach 40 zetabytes (10 to the power 21 bytes), while the number of network-
connected devices (sensors, actuators, instruments, computers, and data stores)
is expected to reach 20 billion. While these devices vary dramatically in their
capabilities and number, taken collectively they represent a vast "digital
continuum" of computing power and prolific data generators that scientific,
economic, social, governmental and military concerns of all kinds will want and
need to utilize. The diverse set of powerful forces propelling the growth of
this digital continuum are prompting calls from various quarters for a next
generation network computing platform - a digital continuum platform (DCP) - for
creating distributed services in a world permeated by devices and saturated by
digital data. But experience shows how challenging the creation of such a
future-defining platform is likely to be, especially if the goal is to maximize
its acceptance and use, and thereby the size of the community of
interoperability it supports. Focusing on the strategically important realm of
scientific research, broadly conceived, this project is staging six
international workshops (two each in the United States, Europe, and Asia over a
two-year period) to enable transnational research communities in a wide range of
disciplines to converge on a common DCP to meet this challenge. Building on a
decade of leadership in cyberinfrastructure planning, the Big Data and Extreme-
scale Computing (BDEC2) community is attacking this problem by pursuing three
complementary objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1. Draft a design for a "digital continuum
platform" (DCP) to serve as shared software infrastructure for the growing
continuum of computing devices and data sources on which future science will
rely; &lt;br/&gt;2. Organize and plan an international demonstration of the
feasibility and potential of the DCP; and&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop a corresponding
"shaping strategy" that addresses all relevant stakeholders and moves the
community toward convergence on a standard DCP specification. &lt;br/&gt;Thus,
the project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to promote
the progress of science and to secure the national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Creating a common digital continuum platform
represents a grand challenge problem for the global cyberinfrastructure
community. To address this monumental challenge and achieve its objectives, the
BDEC2 community is organizing around four distinct but complementary
activities:&lt;br/&gt;1. Surveying and analyzing the spectrum of
application/workflow needs across diverse research and engineering communities
who will use the digital continuum; &lt;br/&gt;2. Developing a reference design
for a DCP system architecture that is able to manage the trade offs involved in
using a widely shared infrastructure to satisfy diverse application community
requirements; &lt;br/&gt;3. Strengthening cooperative and crosscutting efforts
among stakeholders (e.g., research communities, commercial vendors, software
developers, resource providers) in the "cyber ecosystem" of science and
engineering; and &lt;br/&gt;4. Formulating a strategy for building community
consensus on a common digital continuum within this same collection of
stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;To help researchers converge on critical problems for
important user communities, foster and focus collaboration to solve those
problems, and better coordinate software research and data sharing, the BDEC2
community process engages both international software research and data science
communities. The process also includes inter-meeting working groups (e.g., for
application/workflow analysis and DCP architecture). Combined with the work of
the international meetings themselves, these working groups are intended to
accelerate community-wide discussion and collaborative activities needed to
address the multi-dimensional challenges of the emerging digital continuum. By
achieving its goals, this project intends to supply the different stakeholder
communities with the kind of well-defined vision and consensus building strategy
necessary to realize a common, open, and interoperable DCP for digital continuum
era. The project actively promotes participation by talented young scientists
(up to 15 across the series) drawn from the academic community and with special
attention to women and minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.