* 1849085
* S&amp;AS: INT: Autonomous Experimentation Platform for Accelerating Manufacturing of Advanced Materials
* CSE,IIS
* 02/15/2019,01/31/2024
* Satish Bukkapatnam, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 01/31/2024
* USD 999,113.00

Discovering and manufacturing new materials is a laborious and time-consuming
process. Historically this process takes significant effort from material
scientists and manufacturing engineers as they explore many different ingredient
compositions and process conditions to find the right combination leading to a
material with the desired properties. This project is developing an autonomous
experimentation platform to replace a significant amount of this human effort in
experimentation and thus accelerate the discovery and manufacturing of advanced
materials. Such an autonomous experimental testbed could have significant
impacts on engineering practice and revolutionize the material discovery and
advanced manufacturing landscape. This would in turn accelerate discovery in
materials for a great number of industries and applications. Students to be
involved in the project will receive training with a blend of data science and
material/manufacturing science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project introduces
artificial intelligence and autonomy modules into an autonomous experimentation
platform to mimic a human scientist's ability to handle surprising observations,
synthesize diverse bodies of knowledge, and explore a complex and large design
space. The key research components in this platform are organized around three
capabilities themes: (1) exploitation to efficiently determine the most
promising regions of a design space, (2) exploration to recognize and reason
about surprises arising from unusual designs, and (3) expansion of newly-
discovered design space based on mining new knowledge from literature and
databases, preferentially gaining knowledge in regions likely to contain
superior material design solutions. The proposed system is cognizant, adaptive,
knowledge-rich and taskable, interacting with human scientists by way of simple
commands and executing an autonomous discovery process with a minimal and
appropriate degree of human intervention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.