* 1849411
* Collaborative Research: Video-Recording Eyewitness Identification Lineups: Testing for Unanticipated Costs and Undiscovered Benefits
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Amy Douglass, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 02/28/2022
* USD 130,722.00

One of the primary recommendations regarding eyewitness evidence is to video
record witnesses' lineup identifications. The underlying rationale for this
recommendation is intuitive: a video-record provides information about
deviations from best practices and may promote lineup administrator compliance
with established guidelines. As much as these benefits resonate with
psychological researchers, there is no research on any potential costs to video-
recording. For example, it is unknown whether the act of video-recording
negatively impacts witnesses' decision-making process. Furthermore, the
intuitive benefits described above are likely a small subset of the potential
advantages of video-recording identification procedures. The purpose of the
proposed studies is, therefore, to test for possible additional benefits to
video-recording that might accrue across the spectrum of an eyewitness's
interaction with the justice system and to identify potential costs of the
recommendation. The results from the proposed research will either provide
additional support for this recommendation, thereby encouraging reluctant police
departments to adopt the practice, or will highlight concerns regarding its
implementation. As responsible advocates of science-based recommendations,
psychological scientists must find answers to these questions in order to
determine how to implement this recommendation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
research will be conducted in three phases. In the first phase, an experiment
tests whether video-recordings of eyewitness lineup identifications reveal
different non-verbal behaviors between accurate and inaccurate witnesses,
information which could be used by the legal system to assess witness
reliability. In addition, the experiment tests whether witnesses make different
identification decisions as a function of being recorded, as predicted by
theoretical models of eyewitness decision-making. The second phase tests whether
showing witnesses a video of their own identification inoculates witnesses from
harmful confidence inflation produced by post-identification feedback, a
potentially beneficial effect predicted by theoretical models of eyewitness
confidence assessment. One experiment in this phase tests whether this effect is
moderated by camera perspective; a second experiment tests whether this effect
is moderated by the difficulty of the lineup task. The final phase tests whether
showing fact-finders a video of an eyewitness identification procedure assists
them in discriminating accurate from inaccurate witnesses. One experiment in
this phase tests whether this benefit depends on fact-finders' prior beliefs
about the guilt of the identified person. A second experiment tests whether an
empirically-validated checklist containing information about witnesses' non-
verbal cues to accuracy improves the ability to discriminate accurate from
inaccurate witnesses. As a whole, the proposed experiments test heretofore
unexamined benefits and costs of video-recording eyewitnesses' identifications.
From a practical perspective, data from these experiments can be used to develop
recommendations regarding how to implement the video-recording recommendation as
well as how to use those video-recordings to improve fact-finder decision-
making. From a theoretical perspective, data obtained from these experiments
might suggest essential refinements to models of witness decision-making and
retrospective confidence reports.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.