* 1849892
* Rigidity, Volume, and Combinatorics in Hyperbolic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jeffrey Brock, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2022
* USD 162,231.00

For much of the twentieth century, the challenge to describe the shape of three
dimensional spaces was viewed as an algebraic problem: indeed it is through
algebra that we first distinguish the (topological) structure of a sphere from
that of a doughnut. Work of William Thurston brought the geometry of such spaces
more clearly into view as a central feature to explore. The triumph of this
approach was Perelman's proof of Thurston's geometrization conjecture, that each
three-dimensional manifold could be naturally broken up into pieces, each with a
uniform geometry. The study of these geometries is frequently reduced, via a
notion of rigidity, to considering simple combinatorial structures arising from
loops on surfaces. The proposed research will explore how these structures
predict volume, diameter, length and other aspects of the geometry, relating to
notions from quantum physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A longstanding connection
between volume of hyperbolic three-manifolds and Weil-Petersson distance relied
on a combinatorial comparison via the pants graph which organizes maximal
multicurves on a surface, yet other connections were known to arise from work of
Witten via renormalized volume. Recent work of Schlenker made this connection
explicit in the context of quasi-Fuchsian manifolds, and PI's proposed work will
develop this idea further to explicitly relate fibered 3-manifolds and
translation distiance. More generally, a primary project in the proposed
research is to solidify and extend the connection between combinatorics and
geometry in closed manifolds, and to continue to investigate the structure of
deformation spaces of Kleinian groups with these tools. As an example of the
power of these techniques, bi-Lipschitz models for 'random' Heegaard splittings
provide a full solution (with Rivin and Souto) to the conjecture of Dunfield and
Thurston that random Heegaard splittings are almost surely hyperbolic and their
volume grows linearly. Finally, the PI will pursue projects with Minsky, and
with Modami, Leininger and Rafi on the role of combinatorics in the geometry of
geodesics in the Weil-Petersson metric, investigating disparities between
Teichmuller and Weil-Petersson geodesics in terms of unique ergodicity.