* 1849970
* CRII: OAC: RUI: Improving Software Deployments to Serverless Computing Environments
* CSE,OAC
* 03/15/2019,02/28/2023
* Wes Lloyd, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 02/28/2023
* USD 229,739.00

A form of cloud computing, called serverless computing, has recently emerged as
a new approach to abstract the management and configuration of cloud computing
servers to deliver compute resources to end users, while promising performance
improvements, around-the-clock availability, and energy savings to enable a
better return on investment from computer hardware. The benefits of serverless
computing are offset, however, by new software development challenges arising
from mitigation of resource constraints employed by cloud providers to share
physical servers among many users, and by the complexity of understanding
performance and cost implications of software designed for serverless platforms.
This project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission: to
promote the progress of science, and to promote national prosperity and welfare
by developing a reusable framework enabling new data driven analytics and
evaluation techniques that characterize the quality of software designed for
serverless computing platforms. These advancements serve to extend the
applicability of serverless computing to a broader range of use cases enabling
the next generation of cloud software to realize performance improvements and
cost savings. This project additionally leverages the simplicity of serverless
computing to develop an online hour-of-code tutorial to introduce cloud
computing, client/server, and distributed systems concepts to high school
students for dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops the
Serverless Application Analytics Framework (SAAF), a novel framework that
supports the characterization of software deployed to serverless computing
platforms enabling the collection of resource utilization (CPU, memory,
disk/network I/O), infrastructure (type, state, and distribution), load
balancing, and performance metrics. SAAF enables an improved understanding of
several factors that impact performance. This research develops predictive
models using statistical and machine learning approaches to automate the
characterization of performance and hosting cost of serverless software
leveraging metrics from SAAF, and software quality metrics from static analysis
tools as features. SAAF enables identification of best practices over serverless
architectures (monolithic, composable, and RESTful APIs), software composition
patterns (monolithic, fine grained, library composition, and switchboard), and
workflow instrumentation (remote client, vendor service, microservice
controller, and asynchronous call chains).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.