* 1849971
* CRII: III: Scalable Noise-filtering and Community Queries on User-generated Data
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2019,07/31/2022
* Amr Magdy, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2022
* USD 174,854.00

This project investigates novel indexing and querying techniques that enable
scientists to analyze and extract meaningful data from large repositories of
user-generated data. The need for such techniques is significant, especially for
user-generated social media data, which is the major repository of user-
generated data and the largest archived and real-time source of human behavior
and information. Thus, scientists are widely using this data in disciplines as
disparate as sociology, behavioral sciences, education, spatial sciences, food
sciences, medical studies, and political sciences. This project focuses on
innovative indexing and querying techniques to enable scientists to effectively
exploit user-generated data at a large scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The planned
research adds new data management infrastructure modules to support: (1)
Scalable noise filtering queries, a subset of selection queries that are needed
repeatedly and are expressed in SQL-based systems as multiple nested queries,
which is not efficient for large datasets. To support this, the project
investigates techniques for: (a) Advanced query conjunctions, e.g., BUT-NOT and
EITHER-XOR, to scale up complex-predicate queries beyond basic search queries
that are currently supported in data management systems. (b) Scalable contextual
scoring of data records, e.g., based on sentiment or semantics, so irrelevant
records are pruned early and the search space is downsized significantly. (2)
Scalable community-centric queries that enables scientists to ask queries about
communities with large numbers of users while having real-time query response
beyond what is currently supported by graph data management technology. The
project investigates indexing, query processing, and storage optimization
techniques that scale up such queries at a system-
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.