* 1849169
* SBE-UKRI: Integrating vision and action through selection history
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* Joo-Hyun Song, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2024
* USD 556,670.00

Most real-world visual scenes are complex and crowded, where multiple objects
compete for attention and goal-directed action. In daily life, for example, a
person easily picks up a red apple from a grocery display containing many kinds
of fruit. Successful interactions with such complex environments require
seamless coordination among multiple mechanisms. In particular, mechanisms of
attentional selection that help us make sense of the world work in unity with
those that underlie action selection, allowing us to generate adaptive
movements. This attention-action synergy is at the root of all complex behavior.
However, researchers typically study these two mechanisms separately, without
investigating interactions between them. This practice makes direct comparisons
between the findings in attentional selection and action selection impossible.
To overcome this gap, the goal of this proposal is to determine the interplay
between mechanisms controlling attentional selection and action selection,
particularly when recent selection history biases subsequent behavior. It will
provide a basis for unifying theories of behavioral mechanisms involved in the
selection of attention and action in a global frame.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the proposed project will focus on three
understudied aspects of action selection: variation in action execution,
effectors, and biomechanical costs, to determine their novel relations with the
wealth of research on selection history of perceptual features. To ensure
successful outcomes, an international collaboration between the two research
teams, who will play complementary and synergistic roles, will be formed between
experts in attention and motor control and computational modeling. This joint
endeavor will advance our understanding of the interdependence between attention
and action-driven mechanisms to eventually explain adaptive, real-world
selection behavior. By including talented undergraduates including nationally
selected underrepresented minorities, this proposal also intends to foster the
integration of research, STEM and a broad education. Furthermore, outcomes can
also contribute to significant technological innovations, including foundation
for novel control architecture for robot arms and teleoperators, improving
human-computer-interface such as cognitive neural prosthetics and the widely
used touch-user-interfaces (e.g. smart phones).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded with the UK's Economic and Social Research Council
(ESRC) under the SBE-UKRI Lead Agency collaborative research
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.