* 1849500
* CRII: CPS: Hierarchical Control for Constrained Multi-timescale Energy Management
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2022
* Justin Koeln, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 180,941.00

Modern control systems, small and large, attempt to optimize resources based on
information from more and different kinds of sensors, sensing modalities,
environments, and circumstances. This is especially the case for commercial and
defense aircraft, vehicles, and ships, that optimize for fuel efficiency,
performance, and safety. This research project develops a general control
methodology for maximizing overall performance and efficiency, even when
operating close to the physical limits of the system, all while ensuring safety
and meeting overall objectives.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project
develops a novel "set-based approach" to construct effective hierarchical model
predictive control (MPC) with provable guarantees for cyber-physical systems
(CPS), where coordination among controllers provides guaranteed satisfaction of
actuator and state constraints. The research of this project describes how CPS
system constraints can be used to construct specific set-based coordination
mechanisms for each controller within the hierarchy that provide provable
closed-loop behavior for the entire system, how the underlying topology and
dynamic timescales of the system is leveraged to develop system-specific
hierarchical control architectures that minimize uncertainty and maximize
performance, and how hierarchical control can be used for energy management and,
e.g., provide greater capability, efficiency, and reliability for electrified
vehicle systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.