* 1849213
* RII Track-1: Kentucky Advanced Manufacturing Partnership for Enhanced Robotics and Structures
* O/D,OIA
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2024
* John Anthony, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 20,000,000.00

The manufacturing industry is being redefined in recent years due to advances in
3D printing technologies and their wide use in implementing custom designs
economically and producing smart devices that can provide useful data feedback
to improve performance across numerous applications. The Kentucky Advanced
Manufacturing Partnership for Enhanced Robotics and Structures (KAMPERS) project
aims to develop new materials for use in 3D printing, embed built-in electronic
functions and sensors, including power sources and displays in 3D printed
objects, and study human-machine interactions to improve machine learning
paradigms. The project will produce compact, light-weight components that will
be embedded in robots, prosthetics, and other consumer products. The project
team will use the data from user feedback to improve performance of the machines
used in advanced manufacturing, human-assistive robotic systems, and digital
health monitoring products. During the five years of this project, a diverse
group of researchers and students from eight academic institutions in Kentucky,
including an Historically Black College or University (HBCU) and a community
college, will participate in the research and educational activities. This
project will forge partnerships with industries and other stakeholders and
prepare a well-trained workforce capable of meeting the needs of advanced
manufacturing sectors in Kentucky and beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kentucky
EPSCoR Research Infrastructure Improvement Track-1 project, KAMPERS, will
develop materials for flexible electronics, produce 3D printed structures, and
integrate sensing and other electronic functions into these structural elements
to advance human-machine interfaces. A multidisciplinary team of engineers,
materials chemists and physicists, and synthetic biologists from eight academic
institutions in Kentucky will work together in developing new materials for 3D
printing, power storage technologies, sophisticated sensing methods, and high-
throughput manufacturing tools. By embedding power storage, logic, and displays
and sensing capabilities in the fabricated objects, the team will develop
structurally enhanced robots and other products with potential applications.
KAMPERS researchers will gather data from user feedback to explore human-machine
interfaces, generate adaptive software that learns from user input, and, hence,
improve performance in an iterative manner. KAMPERS will engage a diverse group
of about 40 researchers at the faculty level including eight new faculty hires
and an average of five postdocs and 28 graduate students per year and reach up
to 850 undergraduates over five years through research experiences, internships,
courses, and mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.