* 1849297
* Immigration, Legal Status, and Criminal Adjudication in State Courts
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Michael Light, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 01/31/2023
* USD 315,558.00

Immigration enforcement has fundamentally altered the criminal justice system in
the United States, yet we still lack information on basic questions regarding
noncitizens in the legal system, particularly in state and local jurisdictions.
For instance, what proportion of arrested noncitizens are prosecuted? For what
charges? What proportion are sentenced to jail or prison? Our lack of knowledge
on these questions is consequential given that the majority of incarcerated
non-U.S. citizens are in state prisons and immigration enforcement increasingly
takes place in partnership with local criminal justice authorities. As a result,
the decisions made by local police, prosecutors, and judges often determine both
the criminal justice outcome and the immigration case outcome. Thus,
understanding how local criminal justice actors use this discretion is
fundamentally important for understanding current criminal justice practices and
contemporary immigration enforcement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lack of
knowledge on the local criminal processing of immigrants is largely due to data
constraints, in that information on foreign-born or legal status is rarely
available in most state court databases. This project addresses this limitation
by leveraging unique criminal history data from California and Texas - the two
largest immigrant destinations in the U.S. - which tracks criminal cases from
arrest through sentencing. Specifically, this project uses detailed case
information on all arrests in California and Texas between 2006 and 2016 (~26
million) from the California Criminal Offender Record Information (CORI) program
and the Texas Computerized Criminal History System (CCH). Because both the CORI
and CCH datasets include information on foreign-born status for arrestees, this
project will be the first to provide even descriptive information on the case
processing of immigrants in the contemporary United States. This inquiry is
motivated by a central research question: Do otherwise similar citizen and
noncitizen arrestees caught engaging in the same criminal conduct receive
different case outcomes? Using the CORI and CCH data, this project investigates
this question at multiple key stages in case processing, such as the decision to
charge, the type of charging offense, and incarceration outcomes (e.g. prison,
jail, or no imprisonment).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.