* 1849932
* REU Site: Observing the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2019,09/30/2023
* Lisa Campbell, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 418,547.00

Texas A&amp;M University's Department of Oceanography in College Station TX will
host a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site program from 2019-2021.
The program will focus on "Observing the Ocean" and will bring ten
undergraduates to TAMU for a 10-week internship each summer. Mentors will be
selected from the Departments of Oceanography, Geography and Civil Engineering
and the Geochemical and Environmental Research Group (GERG), and students will
have access to a variety of ocean observing instrumentation and data. They will
participate in a cruise aboard the R/V Pelican to collect samples and data from
the nearshore and offshore environments. Seminars and training modules will
focus on data analysis, graphical representation of oceanographic data, data
management, science writing and professional development. Students will present
at weekly REU seminars and at the final REU Student Research Symposium, and they
will complete a research proposal and either a final poster or written report.
Student recruitment will focus on rising Sophomores and Juniors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The TAMU REU Site will provide a total of thirty
undergraduates with internships over the three-year period. The program conducts
a national search for applicants and seeks to engage students who are from
schools with limited research opportunities. Most of the funding provided
supports student stipends, housing and travel to attend the program. The focus
of potential research projects for REU students at TAMU includes ocean observing
technologies and analytical skills used to understand ocean issues such as
hypoxia, early warning of harmful algal blooms, effects of oil spills and other
pollutants, climate-induced variability in hydrography, and effects of ocean
acidification. This project supports national goals of developing the next
generation of scientists and the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.