* 1849592
* STANDARD GRANT: Indexing Energy Performance in Housing Servicescapes: A Multiscale Study in the U.S. Mid-Atlantic Region
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Ali Kenner, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 03/31/2023
* USD 352,979.00

This project explores energy vulnerability as a social and technical problem.
Energy vulnerability occurs when a household cannot afford to maintain
temperature levels suitable for health and wellbeing. Existing research shows
that factors such as the amount of available housing, energy markets, and
government policies all contribute to energy vulnerability, and that energy
vulnerability disproportionally affects the elderly, the disabled, renters, and
low-income families. The investigator on this project will use a combination of
ethnographic observations, in-depth interviews, and focus group research to
understand the extent of energy vulnerability in three US counties, how energy
providers work to address it, and how energy vulnerability relates to energy
performance mechanisms. This research will provide important information for
developing new policies and insights that could help to reduce energy
vulnerability in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a multi-site
ethnographic approach incorporating participant observation, in-depth
interviews, and focus groups to explore: (1) energy vulnerability across three
different US counties; (2) the sociotechnical strategies used by energy services
organizations to address energy vulnerability; and (3) how energy performance
mechanisms shape energy efficiency at different spatial and temporal scales.
Research will be conducted through the Energy Coordinating Agency (ECA), a
multi-state nonprofit organization that works with state and federal programs to
address energy vulnerability, and at four ECA energy centers. Qualitative
analyses of media reports and internal reports and documents from the Energy
Coordinating Agency will be used to supplement other forms of data gathering.
The main goals are to advance understanding of the dynamics of energy
vulnerability in the US, to share these insights to find ways to help reduce
energy vulnerability, and to show how energy performance can be used as an
analytic framework for theorizing how humans interact with
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.