* 1849307
* Standard Grant: A Case Study of How Re-Situation of Scientific Knowledge from Human Population Genomics Works
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2024
* James Griesemer, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 314,792.00

This award supports a research project to generate knowledge of the actual use
of the products of scientific research by others; it will provide insights
concerning how objects of scientific knowledge, such as data and models, travel
to other contexts and become re-situated. Remarkably little is known about the
general and specific processes by which scientific findings from one field are
actually used by researchers in other fields, and by others more generally. The
project focuses on knowledge from the field of human population genomics. The
researchers will develop a case study of resituating knowledge from human
population genomics that focuses on two research university laboratories. The
project will offer insight and recommendations from both STS and life-sciences
perspectives on how to foster collaboration between life scientists and the
individuals and communities they study, and between these and other stakeholders
concerned with issues of race, ethnicity, identity, and health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this research project is to advance
understanding how various objects of knowledge (models, datasets, findings, and
software) in one field, human population genomics, are engaged by other
audiences including scientists in other fields, the populations represented in
the studies, and through various media. The researchers will use a combination
of ethnographic fieldwork, archival study, concept tracking, citation analysis,
and topic modeling methods to develop a detailed mechanistic account of how
scientists produce, use and reuse in their workflows a variety of objects of
scientific knowledge. This is a timely and important case study; the field of
human population genomics is being reshaped by its enhanced use of hypothesis-
driven and big data approaches, and its results influence global comparative
biomedical research, policies of inclusion and access to health services, and
collective and individual identity processes as patients and genomic data
consumers appropriate or contest findings about
themselves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.