* 1849603
* I-Corps: Visible-light-responsive Graphitic Carbon Nitride for Air and Water Purification and Antimicrobial Applications
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Danmeng Shuai, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 02/29/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to provide
consumers a promising solution to purify indoor air, decontaminate water, and
inactivate environmental pathogens to prevent infectious disease outbreaks.
Conventional strategies for pollution and pathogen control face great challenges
of a high cost in operation, intensive energy consumption, and complicated and
frequent maintenance. The project aims to advance a new technology and material,
graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4), for pollution and pathogen control with
reduced cost, energy footprint, and maintenance, and promote commercialization
for diverse applications in both U.S. and abroad. g-C3N4 is a visible-light-
responsive photocatalyst that can be synthesized from inexpensive earth abundant
chemicals, and the material holds promise for a broad range of applications,
including indoor air purifiers, point-of-use or point-of-entry water treatment
reactors, self-cleaning and antimicrobial paintings/coatings by utilizing
sunlight (a type of renewable energy) or indoor light. Moreover, the project
will be the first to explore the potential market of g-C3N4 as a promising
advancement for current commercial photocatalysts (e.g., titanium dioxide),
accelerate the implementation of innovative materials for industrial, civil, and
military applications, and enable a new sustainable strategy of pollution and
pathogen control that will be beneficial for our societal development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will advance the commercial
application of visible-light-responsive g-C3N4 for indoor air purification,
water decontamination, and antimicrobial applications in different environments
(e.g., healthcare, food). The team has developed g-C3N4 with enhanced
photocatalytic performance under visible light irradiation and with excellent
stability, robustness, and biocompatibility. The team has demonstrated g-C3N4
effectively degraded organic contaminants in water and inactivated pathogens in
the form of planktonic bacterial cells and biofilms, under the irradiation of
both simulated visible sunlight and white light emitting diodes. Reactive
species for contaminant degradation and pathogen inactivation have been
identified, and the mechanisms have been elucidated. The team has also initiated
the collaboration with an industrial partner to fabricate antimicrobial coatings
with g-C3N4 for both healthcare and food applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.