* 1849113
* FCTaaS: Federated Cybersecurity Testbed as a Service
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2019,12/31/2021
* Salim Hariri, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

With the advent of smart infrastructures, smart buildings, smart grids, smart
industry and manufacturing, and smart cities and governments have created more
new vulnerabilities than would exist if they were isolated from one another.
Sophisticated cyberattacks can exploit these vulnerabilities to disrupt or even
completely disable the operations of these infrastructures and consequently can
severely impact our national security and all aspects of our life and economy.
To overcome the cybersecurity challenges introduced by smart infrastructures,
researchers and educators need to better understand the interdependencies among
these infrastructures, their implications on cybersecurity issues and how to
develop effective defense and protective protection
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to explore
innovative algorithms to allow the investigators and students to access
resources across multiple and heterogeneous testbeds. This approach has the
potential to provide new capabilities to conduct important research such
as:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. How to model, and predict operations and
interactions among complex, large, heterogeneous, and dynamic federation of
cybersecurity and cyberphysical testbeds; &lt;br/&gt;2. How to secure and
protect smart infrastructure resources and services and their interactions under
normal and abnormal situations that may be caused by nature, accident, or
malicious actions; and &lt;br/&gt;3. How to develop an innovative teaching and
training experiments to provide hands-on experiences on how to discover existing
or newly created vulnerabilities within an infrastructure or caused by the
interactions with other infrastructures, detect and protect their operations
against malicious attacks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Service Oriented Architecture
(SOA) are adopted to develop the federated smart infrastructure testbed in order
to enable researchers and educators to publish/discover testbeds that are needed
for their research and educational programs. Initially, the Ford Breadboard
Smart Car testbed available at the University of Detroit-Mercy, and UA testbeds
including IoT Testbed, Virtual Cybersecurity Testbed that is currently hosted on
Amazon public cloud, and Wireless Security Testbed are used for federation,
experimentation and evaluation. Open communication standards and security tools
that are developed at the NSF Center for Cloud and Autonomic Computing are used
to maintain the security and privacy of the federated security testbed. These
services allow heterogeneous testbeds to communicate their data syntactically
and semantically, enabling accurate interpretation of the semantics of data
received and the dependencies among these testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.