* 1849876
* CRII: CIF:  New Directions in Learning from Data with Faulty Correspondence
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2019,12/31/2022
* Martin Slawski, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2022
* USD 174,942.00

Contemporary data acquisition and analysis frequently involves the integration
of multiple pieces of information about a common set of entities into a single
comprehensive data set. In the absence of unique identifiers, merging
corresponding fragments of data can be demanding and error-prone. This challenge
is encountered in various settings covering applications in engineering such as
sensor networks as well as in the work of government data analytics. In this
project, it is explored to what extent functional relationships between
different data sets can be leveraged to resolve potential ambiguities in the
process of data integration. This question is also relevant to data
confidentiality in situations in which an adversary tries to disclose sensitive
information from anonymized data by using auxiliary data
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is the development
and statistical analysis of computationally feasible methods to safeguard
downstream statistical analysis against errors in data linkage and to restore
missing or faulty correspondences. In this context, linear regression in the
presence of an unknown permutation is of central interest. One specific
direction of research is the use of prior knowledge about the underlying
permutation as commonly available in applications with the goal to sidestep
computational barriers and to reduce the occurrent of ill-posed problems in
statistical estimation. Emphasis will be placed on the characterization of the
fundamental limits of recovery. Making advances in this regard will entail the
use of tools from various areas including the theory of assignment problems,
nonlinear optimization, high-dimensional and robust statistical inference, and
random matrix theory. Results of the conducted research can potentially impact
related problems such as regression under unknown linear transform, including
blind deconvolution, and inference for permutations, as found in ranking,
seriation, or graph matching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.