* 1849599
* CSR: Small: Collaborative Research: Improving Latency in Geo-Replicated Storage by Relaxing Consistency Requirements
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Nitin Vaidya, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2022
* USD 249,797.00

Recent years have seen a tremendous growth in the popularity of cloud services.
Distributed storage systems are a key component of the cloud computing
revolution. Distributed storage systems are designed to achieve a suitable
tradeoff between latency, data consistency and dependability. This project
addresses development of new consistency models that take into account
application characteristics and hybrid fault models. The ultimate goal is to
improve our understanding of the trade-offs between consistency, latency, and
dependability in distributed storage systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
includes two synergistic thrusts. First, the project explores consistency models
that consider graph-based application characteristics. For example, social and
trust graphs model user relation and interaction for many applications. The
first thrust explores graph-based consistency models that are acceptable for the
applications, and yet improve latency of client operations. Second, prior
storage systems typically either only tolerate benign failures, or tolerate
worst-case faults with high overhead. This project considers non-colluding
faults as well as Byzantine faults, and investigates approaches to reduce
overhead by relaxing some of the requirements imposed by prior
systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Proposed research is expected to improve the
understanding of the impact of application characteristics and different types
of faults on consistency-latency trade-off in distributed storage systems.
Tolerance of more severe faults is likely to become important for future
critical web-based services and applications. Additionally, with the tremendous
growth in social and trust networks, mechanisms to improve their performance are
of interest. This project helps achieve such improvements through the
development of new consistency models. Additionally, the project provides
research opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students, and a post-
doctoral researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data from the project is to be
retained for at least two years after the completion of this project, and stored
in local computers and online shared storage. The URL for the repository of the
data, publications and software resulting from the project is
https://sites.google.com/site/nsfgeoconsistency/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.