* 1849757
* CRII: CIF: Distributed Computing with Privacy and Security Considerations
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2019,05/31/2022
* Martina Cardone, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2022
* USD 175,000.00

Modern datasets have reached such sizes and complexities as to make them
difficult to analyze and process using traditional centralized approaches.
Distributed computing enables large-scale data processing, by distributing the
effort of a computing task over such datasets across a network of machines that
operate in parallel. With the proliferation of sensitive data that needs to be
processed, and the ever-growing computational power of adversarial parties,
ensuring data privacy and security of the computing process represents a
critical aspect for the design of modern distributed computing systems. This
project aims at developing a theoretical foundation to investigate the
performance of distributed computing in the presence of machines that are not
trusted or well-protected. This project will promote undergraduate and graduate
research, and the outcomes of the proposed research will be integrated into
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers two different distributed
computing scenarios and seeks their theoretical performance limits. In the first
scenario, the dataset contains sensitive information (such as clinical/genome
information) and, when distributed, has to remain confidential from the
machines. An optimization framework is used which seeks to quantify the trade-
off between the performance of the computing task and the level of data privacy
that can be guaranteed. In the second scenario, the machines may have been
compromised and hence may introduce false information to the system. The main
focus is on the design of distributed computing techniques that are robust to
different message-tampering attacks and allow one to efficiently identify the
attacked machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.