* 1849620
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Historical Study of Medical, Scientific, and Cultural Perspectives on Vision
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Pamela Smith, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 15,745.00

This doctoral dissertation research project is a study of vision that traces the
development of ophthalmology in early modern Europe. The research will use
archival sources and historical analysis to investigate the ways in which the
eye was studied, eye diseases were treated, and the knowledge of the eye was
transmitted during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries in Europe. Knowledge
of the eye not only formed a critical branch of medical and technological
investigation, it was also of cultural and scientific significance. The project
will capture a distinctive moment in European history, when the emergence of the
strong interest in the anatomy, physiology and pathology of the eye corresponded
to an intensified reflection on vision as the foundation of knowledge. The
results of this project will be communicated through publications and
pedagogical initiatives. The research products will be published as scholarly
articles and as part of a dissertation; the researcher also has plans to write a
book in an accessible style for both academic and general audiences alike. The
results of this study will also be used to develop undergraduate curriculum and
incorporated into learning activities for high school students that will bridge
gaps between the sciences and the humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overarching goal of this research project us to reveal interconnections between
medical, scientific and artistic practices in early modern Europe. The
researcher will examine a variety of sources, including texts, images and
material artifacts, such as illustrations representing surgical tools and
procedures, anatomical models, and optical instruments. By bringing these
materials together, the project will chart a variety of "ways of knowing," from
theoretical construction to practical making and doing, in the development of
early modern science and medicine. The results of this project will bring to
light perspectives that have been long overlooked in traditional scholarship,
and it will challenge the existing historiography of vision. It will build on
while departing from scholarship in history of medicine by offering fresh
insights in visual and material culture of science and medicine. By locating and
connecting a diverse group of people, such as artisans and barber surgeons in
addition to princely rulers and natural philosophers, the project will expand
our knowledge of the variety of practitioners of early modern science across
social classes and professions. It will broaden our perspective on how knowledge
was produced, communicated and circulated; and it will contribute to a deeper
understanding of the wider culture of seeing and knowing in early modern
Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.