* 1849063
* Nanoparticle Probes for Super-Resolution Imaging of Transferrin Receptors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2019,08/31/2023
* Dimitri Pappas, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2023
* USD 389,963.00

Nanoparticles are materials that are 100 nanometers or smaller. The behavior of
nanoparticles differs from larger particles made of the same materials. The
ability to study nanoparticle interactions with biological materials, such as
living cells, is limited by the inability to see them using standard microscopic
methods. A new class of nanoparticles, which emit blinking light, can be used to
observe nanomaterials through a technique called super-resolution microscopy.
These nanoparticles will enable researchers to achieve super-resolution
measurements without complex instruments, under experimental conditions that are
compatible with living cells and tissues. These nanoparticles will be used to
investigate the distribution of transferrin receptors on living cell membranes.
Transferrin receptors are proteins that allow iron ions to be transported into
cells to promote grown and normal function. Understanding the distribution of
transferrin receptors using nanoparticles will shed light on normal and abnormal
cell growth, which has implications in tissue development in many species.
Results from this research will have broad impact in the fields of biomedical
engineering, chemistry, and biology. Several doctoral and undergraduate students
will be trained through this project, including students from underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticle interactions with cells and tissues
remain a fundamental question in bioengineering. One of the most important types
of interactions between nanoparticles and biological interfaces is in receptor
labeling. The human transferrin receptor is a key receptor implicated in cell
growth and proliferation. Understanding the spatiotemporal expression of this
protein on cell surfaces has been limited by the diffraction limit of light and
poor choices of luminescent probes. This project seeks to broaden understanding
of interactions between fluorescence nanoparticle probes and transferrin
receptor expression on tissues and cells using super-resolution microscopy. To
reach these goals, a new nanoparticle probe will be developed for super-
resolution microscopy on standard microscopy instruments. These nanoparticles
will be highly fluorescent and produce self-blinking behavior. No
photoswitching, complex optics, or buffers that preclude in vitro use are
needed. Eradicating the formidable technical barriers to super-resolution will
bring this approach to any research lab, thus having a transformative impact on
any field where chemical information and high spatial resolution are needed.
Blinking nanoparticles, coupled to transferrin receptor ligands, will be used to
label live cell monolayers to demonstrate super-resolution imaging with standard
microscopy methods. Imaging the spatial distribution of transferrin receptors
over time will shed new light on tissue growth and a host of cross-cutting
biological processes. In addition, the transport and binding of ligand-
conjugated nanoparticles with a biological interface will be studied, increasing
knowledge in nanomaterial interactions with living materials. Results from this
research will have broad impact in the fields of biomedical engineering,
chemistry, and biology. Several doctoral and undergraduate students will be
trained through this project, including students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.