* 1849948
* Alabama Mathematics Master Teaching Fellowship: Preparing Leaders for Underserved Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2019,03/31/2025
* James Gleason, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 03/31/2025
* USD 2,334,919.00

With support from the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program, this Track 3:
Master Teaching Fellowships project aims to serve the national need of improving
the development of highly effective mathematics teacher leaders. The project
involves a partnership between the University of Alabama-Tuscaloosa, the
Tuscaloosa City Schools, the Tuscaloosa County School System, and the Alabama
Council of Teachers of Mathematics. The project will provide fellowships to 24
mathematics teachers and support their development into mathematics teacher
leader specialists. Through a sequence of professional development and
leadership experiences, Fellows will work toward earning National Board
Certification to become leaders in their schools and districts, as well as in
the state of Alabama. The project aims to contribute to the success of
mathematics teachers' professional development in high-need schools within a
50-mile radius of the University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus
on preparing experienced and exemplary teachers to: (1) become instructional
experts in their school/district ; (2) provide professional development to other
teachers in their school or district; (3) become school or district leaders who,
while remaining as classroom teachers, serve as mathematics department chairs,
instructional coaches, action-researchers, and/or mentors of early-career
teachers; (4) assist in building a high-capacity network for exceptional quality
clinical experiences for preservice mathematics teachers; and (5) take on state
and national leadership roles in professional meetings and conferences,
specifically the Alabama Council of Teachers of Mathematics' annual fall forum.
By mentoring inservice and preservice teachers in schools in and around
Tuscaloosa, the Master Teaching Fellows supported by this award have the
potential to broaden the STEM pipeline by improving the mathematics learning of
thousands of students, many of whom are in rural and/or high-need schools. The
project research plan will examine the effectiveness of a training model that
includes graduate coursework for teachers, professional development for
administrators, and collaborations with stakeholders. Results of this research
can contribute to understanding how to support leadership, practice, and
learning to improve mathematics education and student engagement. The Noyce
program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts and experienced and
exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM master teachers. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 teachers in
high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.