* 1849708
* RESEARCH-PGR:  Elucidating the role of epitranscriptome on adaptation to abiotic stresses in cereals
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/2019,06/30/2024
* Jai Rohila, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Diane Jofuku Okamuro
* 06/30/2024
* USD 2,876,925.00

The stationary nature of plants leaves them vulnerable to environmental stresses
such as heat and drought. Thus, plants have evolved many mechanisms to recognize
and respond to such stresses by turning on and off specific sets of genes in
response to certain conditions. Part of this control includes regulating RNA
levels, which are intermediary molecules made from reading the DNA of genes.
Traditionally, scientists believed that the activity of RNA was controlled only
by the sequence of the DNA, but recent discoveries have shown that the stability
of the RNA molecules is also highly controlled. Recently, it was discovered that
this control of RNA stability can be achieved through the addition or removal of
small molecules, such as methyl groups, to the individual bases that make up RNA
molecules. This new form of regulation, called epitranscriptomics, is largely
unexplored in plants and is potentially valuable for improving crops, such as
rice, to better tolerate heat and drought stress. This project aims to
characterize all these modifications to RNA and identify those that may improve
plant tolerance to environmental stresses. To accomplish this goal, the project
will leverage and pioneer advances in RNA isolation and sequencing as well as
new computational tools to analyze large amounts of sequencing data. These
methods and tools will be made available for other science groups so that they
can rapidly apply the same techniques to their research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plants have developed numerous regulatory
mechanisms to recognize and subsequently direct precise transcriptome regulation
to properly respond to abiotic stressors. However, the mechanisms responsible
for directing eukaryotic transcriptome reprogramming during stress response are
still quite unclear. Significant recent attention has revealed that post-
transcriptional processes are just as important to plant gene expression
regulation as transcriptional regulation. Covalent RNA nucleotide chemical
modifications (e.g. methylation) have been found to have significant post-
transcriptional regulatory effects that are both widespread and physiologically
relevant. However, understanding of the roles RNA covalent modifications (the
?epitranscriptome?) play in post-transcriptional regulation of the plant
transcriptome is in its infancy, especially when considering cereal crops. These
modifications are likely to have a direct impact on yield, quality, and
tolerance to various stresses. The project addresses this significant gap using
a combination of genomic, evolutionary, and bioinformatics approaches together
with new analytical software packages and web-based tools. The result will be
important, new mechanistic insights, resources for studying the functions of RNA
covalent modifications and potentially new ways to develop more stress resistant
crop plants. Finally, this team will develop a data life-cycle management,
analysis, and visualization system for epitranscriptomics data and their
analysis within the EPIC-CoGe framework. In addition to the broader impacts that
our new findings will have on the fields of RNA epitranscriptomics and cereal
crop improvement, a novel training program will be developed that will prepare
the next generation of epitranscriptomics researchers for the future of biology
as a data-driven science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.