* 1849653
* Dissertation Grant: Rhetoric of Quantification in the Context of Chronic Pain
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2019,04/30/2020
* Heidi Lawrence, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 04/30/2020
* USD 5,059.00

This award supports a doctoral dissertation research project that studies
persons with chronic pain. Specifically, the researcher proposes to interview 30
persons with chronic pain who are over 18 and have experienced pain persistently
or intermittently for at least three months prior to recruitment. She will
conduct 30-60 minute phone interviews, asking open-ended questions about the
pain experiences of participants including being in pain, living with pain, and
communicating about pain. She will then conduct a rhetorical analysis of
interview transcripts for references to quantified information, such as
quantified time, quantified medicine, and quantified expenses. The researchers
will also identify and analyze other potential trends in how persons with
chronic pain describe rhetorical tactics when communicating about their chronic
pain. Using rhetorical analysis will allow the researchers to identify
persuasive or argumentative strategies or tactics in language use about chronic
pain, as described by the people living with and experiencing chronic pain. The
researcher will work with regional and national patient advocacy groups and
national and international professional associations dedicated to pain
treatment. She will develop and disseminate a list of actionable recommendations
in a variety of forms, including an accessible one-page overview, invited
presentations, and peer-reviewed publication in medical journals. Her
overarching goal is to help both persons with chronic pain and the people who
communicate with them (including health care providers, caregivers, and loved
ones) understand the rhetorical tools and strategies available to persons with
chronic pain to articulate their experiences, so that this enhanced
understanding might mitigate instances of stigmatization.

This project is an ethnographic study of persons with chronic pain. Between 10%
and 30% of the U.S. population lives with chronic pain, and the vast majority of
this population reports suffering from undertreated pain, which is further
exacerbated by the stigmatization of using drugs and living with physical
disability. Given the prevalence, undertreatment, and stigmatization associated
with chronic pain, this project seeks to determine whether there is a rhetorical
tool or strategy available to persons with chronic pain to help articulate and
legitimize their pain experiences for different audiences and stakeholders
(health care providers, caregivers, etc.). Anthropologists, philosophers, and
bioethicists argue that this stigmatization exists, in part, because pain
experience is inherently subjective and cannot be quantitatively measured. Yet,
both patients and physicians are accustomed to associating medical practice with
objectivity, which is in turn associated with numerical quantification. Although
quantifiable information is subject to interpretation, it is because of the
overwhelming persuasiveness of quantification in medical and scientific contexts
in the United States that the researchers propose to investigate whether a
rhetoric of quantification can benefit chronic pain patients seeking
legitimization and trust in their articulations of their pain experiences. The
findings of this research can advance knowledge about the persuasiveness of
quantification as a rhetorical device and further enhance understanding of how
objective and subjective knowledge is created, valued, and communicated in U.S.
culture, particularly in the context of human health and medicine.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.