* 1849773
* Augmented Reality Experiences in 21st Century STEM Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2019,11/30/2023
* Karen Wosczyna-Birch, Education Connection
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 11/30/2023
* USD 1,200,000.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program to better understand and promote practices
that increase student motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (STEM). The project will
develop and research a series of next generation augmented reality (AR) digital
learning labs and incorporate the labs into an existing curriculum, STEM 21. AR
has been proposed as an effective means of motivating previously disengaged
students through authentic experiences. By focusing the intervention in high
schools with a large proportion of underrepresented students1, the project
addresses the lack of opportunities for underrepresented youth to be engaged in
rigorous STEM learning that incorporates emerging technologies, aligned with
21st century workforce skills. AR is an emerging technology that brings digital
information into the physical world, overlaying digital artifacts onto the
physical environment that can then be accessed via a mobile phone, a tablet, or
wearable technology. STEM21 is a project-based learning model which has been
successfully replicated in high schools with diverse study bodies and has
resulted in improvement in student self-reported interest in STEM and STEM-
related postsecondary study; science achievement; soft skills; and sense of
belonging and self-regulation. The STEM21 curriculum includes six existing
project-based high school biology, chemistry, engineering, earth and energy, and
manufacturing courses. The AR learning labs will be specifically designed to
heighten student motivation for STEM learning, increase interest in STEM-related
education and careers, and deepen collaboration skills. AR facilitates many of
the components of project-based learning: it offers students multiple types and
sources of information to synthesize and evaluate, grounds the learning process
in authentic real-world experiences, and provides virtual and face-to-face
communication for collaborative problem solving. The AR learning labs will be
hosted on the project?s web-based learning platform and will be able to be
accessed by students and teachers on any mobile device with an Internet
connection. The project will support teacher professional development thru
includes a summer Institute, onsite and virtual coaching, and professional
learning communities. At project end, the project AR learning lab series and
curricular resources will be published under an Open Education Resource (OER)
license and disseminated statewide with the support of the CT State Department
of Education (CSDE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's research will
investigate the contexts and conditions that support the integration of new
technologies, such as AR, into core STEM content and will contribute to the
limited research on effective pedagogy and pedagogical environments to achieve
equitable STEM learning in high school settings. The AR learning labs will be
tested, iterated, and implemented in ten diverse high school settings (30
Classes with a total of approximately 900 students) over the three-year project
to assess their effectiveness. The research will contribute to the limited
literature on the integration of AR with STEM instructional methods to
concurrently enhance STEM-related non-cognitive skills and technical AR skills
among secondary students. Researchers will assess student outcomes in STEM
motivation and interest, and in collaboration skills associated with
participation in the project model. In addition, researchers will examine
differences in student experiences in diverse secondary school settings and
among underrepresented students, thereby providing information relevant to
future scaling. Additional areas of study include how student experiences and
outcomes vary in relation to a range of STEM subjects and AR applications
present in the learning labs, and how engagement in AR lab activities relates to
STEM motivation and interest. Formative assessment results, feasibility and
usability data, and yearly analyses of the outcomes and fidelity of
implementation will be used to design, develop, and test the AR learning Lab
series and curricular resources iteratively. Researchers will use measures that
have demonstrated reliability and validity with similar student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.