* 1849014
* Resolving Long-Standing E-region Data/Model Discrepancies
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2019,09/30/2023
* Joseph Evans, Computational Physics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Shikha Raizada
* 09/30/2023
* USD 631,365.00

This award addresses a long-standing problem of systematic discrepancies between
modeled and observed plasma densities in the ionized portion of the upper
atmospheric layer near 110 km in altitude (ionospheric E region). It is
hypothesized that a key reason for these discrepancies is low-resolution model
parameters related to ionization reactions of O, O2, and N2 with solar photons
(photoionization). Insufficient resolution employed by the current models means
that narrow "windows" of photoionization are not being properly accounted for.
This work will improve the understanding of these windows of ionization for the
three most important species in the E region (O, O2, and N2) and the effects on
E-region ionization rates and densities. New parameters describing ionization
reactions (ionization cross sections) will be calculated for all three species
using modern quantum-mechanical methods. These parameters are important since
they determine the probability that an ionization process will occur. The new
cross sections will be provided to the atomic and molecular physics community.
This will be also important to astrophysics and planetary sciences, which will
improve synergies between different fields. In addition, the project will expand
student opportunities to engage in research by offering research projects to
students at one of the partner institutions with a diverse student population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work supported by this award will (1) calculate new
cross sections for all three major species using modern quantum-mechanical
methods for both photo- and photoelectron-impact ionization, (2) develop further
the atmospheric photoionization code and the Atmospheric Ultraviolet Radiance
Integrated Code (AURIC) to properly incorporate the improved ionization rates,
photoelectron fluxes, and electron densities, (3) validate the new model outputs
by comparing with E-region photoelectron fluxes measured by the low-Earth-orbit
satellites and E-region electron densities measured by the Constellation
Observing System for Meteorology, Ionosphere, and Climate (COSMIC) satellites
and the Arecibo incoherent scatter radar, and (4) provide the developed models
to the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.