* 1849762
* Spray generation by collective bubble bursting
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2019,02/28/2023
* Luc Deike, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2023
* USD 724,442.00

Bubbles in the ocean are formed after a breaking wave has entrained air below
the sea surface. Sea spray drops created by bubble bursting affect the exchange
between the ocean and atmosphere by transporting water, heat, dissolved gases,
salts, surfactants, and biological materials, and are major players in weather
prediction and hurricane intensification. Large uncertainties in sea spray
production predictions remain despite long standing efforts; this is attributed
to the lack of knowledge in the original distribution of sea spray drop sizes
and velocities. The research will span all scales relevant to the problem, from
individual bubbles to wave statistics at the ocean surface; it will include
detailed studies of the impact of key variables such as the concentration of
surfactants, temperature, turbulence within a single experimental and numerical
framework. A better understanding and improved parameterizations of sea spray
production are necessary to improve the exchange between ocean-atmosphere of
heat, moisture and aerosols, key elements of climate and weather models and
forecast. Sea spray aerosols serve as cloud condensation nuclei and a better
understanding of clouds generation and growth is seen by many as one of the
biggest challenges in climate sciences. Sea spray is also related to health
issues in coastal environments. When red tides are present, such as the Gulf of
Mexico, blooms of harmful algae release toxins that can be transported as
aerosols up to urban communities. The upscaling approach used in this study to
connect the small scale, detailed processes to the larger scales of the ocean is
general and could be used to improve the modeling of other ocean-atmosphere
interactions as well. Through this project, undergraduate and graduate students
at Princeton will be exposed to critical environmental challenges that require
research on fundamental multi-phase flows. The project will also promote the use
of open source methods through workshops and teaching
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complex droplet formation process by
collective bursting depends on multiple variables: the size and density of the
bubbles rising in the turbulent upper ocean, the coalescence and foam formation
at the surface and the physical-chemical properties of water. This project will
fill gaps in our knowledge by conducting a comprehensive study that integrates
high quality laboratory and numerical data to build models for the distribution
of sizes and velocities of sea spray drops. Single bubble bursting will be
studied with state of the art numerical simulations, developing a fundamental
understanding at the bubble scale. The role physical and chemical variables,
such as salinity, temperature and surfactant on the collective bubble bursting,
foam aging and droplet formation will be investigated with laboratory
experiments. Finally, an upscaling approach will be employed, going from one
bubble plume entrained by a single breaking wave to the ocean scale by
integrating the results over the breaking statistics, leading to a better
parameterization of sea spray fluxes for numerical
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.