* 1849023
* I-Corps: Data Quality Assurance and Inventory Tool (One-Voice) for Sewer Inspection Data
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Yongwei Shan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Behrooz Shirazi
* 03/31/2020
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the ability
to provide an easily accessible and reliable national sewer data inventory that
will assist municipal utility districts in developing effective and proactive
maintenance and rehabilitation plans, hence reducing the overall maintenance
costs of sewer systems as well as avoiding costly repairs due to pipe failures.
Moreover, if the technology is successfully commercialized, sewer officials such
as National Association of Sewer Service Companies (NASSCO) will better
understand the current and trend of sewer systems condition nation-wide; as
such, they will have proven justification to secure adequate federal funding for
sewer system improvements. This technology will support the nation's agenda of
improving the condition of the aging and deteriorating sewer infrastructure,
which will promote societal wellbeing and support the sustainable development of
the society. In addition, it has been expected that the availability of national
sewer inventory will help the industry to find new uses of sewer data and new
collaborations. The participation in the NSF I-Corps program affords graduate
students a great opportunity to cultivate their skills in innovation and
entrepreneurship, which may lead to the creation of start-up companies and more
job opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project addresses common
concerns -- data availability and data quality -- raised by sewer industry
stakeholders. Understanding the current condition and deterioration mechanism of
sewer pipe networks is a critical step in improving national wastewater systems,
which requires easily accessible and reliable data. Although sewer inspection
data have been collected by various utility districts across the country for
many years, the data is not in a usable and uniform format for asset management
purposes. This technology provides a visual tool to evaluate and report data
quality issues and an innovative algorithm to resolve these issues. The
preliminary results show that, by applying the proposed quality assurance
algorithm to six datasets obtained by the team, the percentage of good quality
inspection data increased from 50%-75% (pre-process) to 95% (post-process). More
importantly, the proposed technology includes a comprehensive, uniform, and
quality-assured national sewer inventory that documents the historical and
current conditions of sewer pipelines. Through the regional NSF I-Corps site
program, it was concluded that there is a tremendous need for the proposed
technology among utilities and contractors because of the time and cost savings
that can be realized in inspection processes and rehabilitation
plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.