* 1849924
* CRII: CHS: Understanding and Supporting the Use of Self-Driving Vehicles by Persons with Visual Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2019,03/31/2023
* Julian Brinkley, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2023
* USD 175,000.00

The emergence of fully autonomous or "self-driving" vehicles may prove to be the
most significant evolution in personal mobility of the past century. It is
envisioned that the most advanced of such vehicles will operate with minimal
human interaction and no direct human driving. By minimizing the role of often
error-prone human beings in the driving process, vehicle crashes may be reduced
significantly, thus saving tens of thousands of lives annually and untold
millions of dollars in property. While this technology is potentially ground
breaking for society broadly, self-driving vehicles may prove especially
beneficial for those who are blind or who cannot otherwise operate conventional
motor vehicles due to their disability. Despite the tremendous promise of self-
driving technology in this regard, advocates of the many blind and visually
impaired persons in the United States argue that the needs of visually impaired
persons are not being adequately considered in the design of the technology,
resulting in what may become accessibility barriers to its use. The PI seeks to
address this issue through research that will explore the potential
accessibility barriers encountered by visually impaired persons in their
practical use of a self-driving vehicle, and through fundamental research that
will derive solutions to these problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to produce a model of interaction that will support the use of self-
driving vehicle technology by visually impaired persons. Following a user-
centered inclusive design process the research will specifically seek to
understand: (a) how self-driving vehicle human-machine interfaces are presently
implemented in experimental vehicles; (b) how visually impaired persons envision
their interactions with self-driving vehicles; (c) what accessibility challenges
are faced by visually impaired persons in related Transportation-as-a-Service
technologies; and (d) what types of novel self-driving vehicle user interfaces,
interaction modalities and tools can be developed to support optimal usability
and accessibility for visually impaired persons. The project will culminate with
evaluation of accessible self-driving vehicle interface prototypes developed in
participatory design sessions. Project outcomes will further the understanding
of auditory, kinesthetic, tangible and affective interfaces through the
development of techniques and tools to support human-machine interaction that is
primarily non-visual in nature. The project will also further science regarding
underlying processes that support accessible and universal
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.