* 1849735
* Engaging Women in Engineering: Training Mentors to Make a Difference
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2019,10/31/2023
* Nancy Peter, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,199,104.00

This project will advance efforts of the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program by preparing high-achieving high school
students for advanced science and math courses and eventually courses in
engineering. ITEST seeks to better understand and promote practices that
increase students' motivations and capacities to pursue careers in fields of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM). To be globally
competitive, the US must optimize the available workforce to include women in
STEM. There are two fundamental issues that need to be addressed in engaging
women in engineering: motivation and preparedness to pursue STEM careers. The
Academy of Natural Sciences will partner with Drexel University: College of
Engineering and School of Education, and local engineering professionals,
through the Engineering WINS (EngWINS) program. EngWINS will develop the
capabilities of working engineers and faculty to serve as mentors in a new
initiative to develop interest, self-efficacy, and persistence in engineering
careers among urban high school women. The project's immediate impacts extend
from an out-of-school learning environment and into urban academic and
industrial research centers. The workforce development would be fueled by: 1)
diversifying the STEM pipeline, 2) supporting the advancement of all women in
STEM fields, and 3) studying the impacts of EngWINS training among adult
mentors. The project findings will have relevance for human resource practices
in higher education and industry and will be disseminated among educators in
engineering in both academic and out of school settings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project research will investigate how and to what extent a
largely homogeneous group of working engineers can enter mentoring relationships
that increase participation in their field by underrepresented populations. The
project goals, scope, methods, and approaches will address the following
questions: To what extent does training in culturally responsive pedagogies and
anti-discriminatory frameworks shift adult mentors, mindsets, and dispositions
toward their work with EngWINS students, as well as in other teaching contexts
or workplace interactions with women and minorities? To what extent do pairings
of mentors and mentees from different backgrounds influence students' interest,
self-efficacy, and persistence in engineering education and careers? To what
extent does interest, self-efficacy, and persistence in engineering differ
between EngWINS students who have a mentor versus. those who only experience the
regular EngWINS curriculum? The projects will use mixed-methods and quasi-
experimental design. There will be multiple data sources such as classroom
observations, interviews, and surveys/assessments to measure student and mentor
outcomes. The project will enroll adult mentor candidates into a full year of
professional development training in culturally relevant pedagogies, ways to
combat stereotype barriers, and implicit biases, prior to entering mentoring
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.