* 1849379
* Intergenerational impact of violence exposure during pregnancy on epigenetic change
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* Catherine Panter-Brick, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 07/31/2024
* USD 348,333.00

Trauma that is experienced by a pregnant woman can affect the physiology of her
offspring, sometimes decades into the future. The impact of trauma may be caused
by changes to our genome that alter the way in which genes are expressed and
proteins are produced. This project will test the hypothesis that violence
experienced by a pregnant woman may produce changes in the genomes of the
mother, her child, and her grandchild. This study is a global,
interdiscriplinary collaboration that will provide a better understanding of how
humans adapt to adversity, and how these adaptations may persist far into the
future, long after the adverse conditions have ended. The results of this
research will be communicated to the public and scientific community through
presentations and publications, student exchanges, and outreach activities to
local communities and policymakers. This project will train one postdoctoral
assistant and 3-4 undergraduate students, many of whom are from groups
underrepresented in STEM research fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, a
unique set of biological samples have been collected and will be assayed for
changes to the genome, specifically the addition of DNA methyl groups that can
change the expression of a gene. Three generation families have been recruited
who have been exposed to violence in different generations; specifically,
grandmothers in group 1 were exposed while pregnant, mothers in group 2 were
exposed while pregnant, and group 3 are control familes who were not exposed.
Biological samples from the mothers and two children (one child was exposed in
utero and one child will serve as a control) will be analyzed using cutting-edge
methods to assay for DNA methylation changes. Associations between changes to
DNA methylation and exposure to violence in each generation will be tested,
while controlling for age at time of exposure, age at sample collection, sex,
and additional adverse exposures, such as lack of food or water or medical
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.