* 1849904
* CRII: SaTC: Searchable Encryption for Biometric Data
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2019,08/31/2021
* Benjamin Fuller, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 08/31/2021
* USD 174,671.00

Biometrics are part of modern citizens' identity. Individuals' mobile devices
collect facial, iris, fingerprint, and electrocardiogram data. Border
checkpoints collect travelers' biometrics. National identity cards use
biometrics to identify individuals. In many applications, a large group of
users' biometrics are stored together in a centralized database. This type of
widespread and expanding use of biometrics creates privacy concerns as
biometrics are correlated to sensitive attributes such as race, gender, and
disease risk factors. Protecting this data balances needs and citizens' privacy.
This project designs a new system that allows identification while retaining
privacy of non-relevant individuals when querying centralized biometric
databases. The system design uses cryptography to provide rigorous security
claims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Searchable encryption allows a database to process
queries without knowing the underlying data. Current biometrics are
characterized by noise between repeated readings. This project designs two
systems which both build on searchable encryption and noise tolerant
cryptography. The first system combines selective locality sensitive hashes and
searchable encryption to retrieve records that match many locality sensitive
hash outputs. The second system builds a variant of inner-product encryption
that retrieves only the set of close records. The superior of the two designs
will be implemented and benchmarked. An important aspect of any searchable
encryption design is its leakage profile. As such, the implemented scheme's
leakage is evaluated with respect to the known statistical properties of an
identified biometric.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.