* 1849236
* Using Language Production as a Learning Intervention
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2024
* Maryellen MacDonald, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 02/29/2024
* USD 724,149.00

This project tests a new method for improving reading skill in poor readers,
including those with dyslexia, and improving second language learning. Second
language learning requires significant time to learn material that has not
occurred in the individual's prior experience. While this is obvious for foreign
language learning, it is less obvious but also true for learning to read.
Written and spoken language differ greatly in both their vocabulary and sentence
structure, so becoming a fluent reader requires significant reading experience
to learn how written language differs from speech. Because poor readers do not
engage in this extensive practice, they fall further behind peers who have
higher skill. Current instruction methods in both reading and second language
learning are inadequate and intervention in both of these areas is in the
national interest. Poor literacy is widespread in the US population and is
associated with low employment, poor health outcomes, limited participation in
society, and higher rates of incarceration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
combines memory and learning research to investigate how and why speaking during
language learning yields not just better speaking skills but also better written
and spoken language comprehension than more traditional reading- and listening-
focused curricula. The studies rigorously compare second language learning via
speaking vs. listening practice, including whether the learning method
influences students' motivation to pay attention, practice, and learn. The
studies also examine the link between speaking and short-term or working memory,
which is the ability to hold information in mind for short durations. Working
memory abilities are thought to be an important component of longer-term
learning, including vocabulary learning in a native or foreign language. The
same methods will be applied to interventions aimed at improving reading
comprehension for poor readers with dyslexia or other sources of low literacy,
including inadequate instruction, practice, or barriers from low English skills.
The interventions will use spoken language exercises that provide practice with
the vocabulary and sentence structure patterns of written language, which are
essentially "foreign" to a reluctant reader. The aim is to provide key learning
opportunities that are crucial to developing reading fluency without always
requiring reading practice in which poor readers are reluctant to engage. Both
the second language and the reading interventions also investigate students'
response to various educational interventions, where students who begin with
more knowledge generally get greater benefit from additional instruction,
leaving behind those who most need the help. If the speaking interventions
provide essential background skills, they could help people with dyslexia and
other struggling learners learn from the novel interventions tested in this
project and position struggling learners to take advantage of existing
instruction in current school curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
co-funded by the Perception, Action, and Cognition Program, the Science of
Learning Program, and the EHR Core Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.